CODE OF THE - CITY OF SANDERSVILLE, GEORGIA 
The General Ordinances of the City 
Ordained and Published  by Order of the  Mayor and Council 
Originally published by  City-County Code Corporation 
  
Republished by: 

CITY OFFICIALS 
MAYOR  Horace A. Mathis, Jr. 
COUNCIL MEMBERS  Martha L. Riner, Mayor Pro Tem  Rogers Peeler  Willie Henry Watts  Phil E. Moye  Danny J. Brown 
CITY CLERK       CITY ATTORNEY  John D. Everett       Robert M. Wynne 
PREFACE 
The Code of Ordinances of Sandersville, Georgia, is a codification of all ordinances of the municipality of a general and permanent nature. The code has been adopted by the governing body through the enactment of a single ordinance and thus constitutes the general body of ordinances enacted by the municipality. 
The code includes several features that will facilitate its use. The various chapters and articles of the code are topically arranged and follow one another in a natural, logical order. The table of contents, with a complete outline of this order, will often provide sufficient reference points for the reader. In addition, the reader may consult the index at the end of the volume. At the beginning of each chapter there is a section-by-section listing of the provisions within the chapter. 
Nontextual provisions such as severability clauses, repealer and enacting clauses are covered in title 1 of this code and apply to the entire code. Various editorial notes, state law references and cross references have been included throughout the code to clarify its provisions. 
As of April, 1990, this Code of Ordinances is being supplemented by Book Publishing Company. The current supplement contains ordinances adopted through December 4, 1989. 
Book Publishing Company  201 Westlake Avenue North  Seattle, Washington 98109  (206) 343-5700  1-800-537-7881 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SANDERSVILLE, GEORGIA, ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR SANDERSVILLE, GEORGIA; ESTABLISHING THE SAME; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN, EXCEPT AS HEREIN EXPRESSLY PROVIDED; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING WHEN THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE; PROVIDING CERTAIN PENALTIES; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 
The Mayor and Council of the City of Sandersville, Georgia, hereby ordains: 
Section 1. The document entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Sandersville, Georgia," a copy of which accompanies this ordinance and is incorporated herein and made a part hereof, is hereby adopted and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance. 
Section 2. All ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature of this city enacted on final passage on or before September 5, 1989, and not in the code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance; nor shall this repeal affect any ordinance or resolution of the city promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; nor shall this repeal affect any rights or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the city to any person, firm or corporation; nor shall this repeal affect any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; nor shall this repeal affect the present annual appropriation of the city; nor shall this repeal affect any ordinance or resolution levying or imposing charges, fees or taxes now due or accrued; nor shall this repeal affect any zoning ordinance of the city or amendments thereto; nor shall this repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or resolution or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as provisions of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of the effective date of this code, are intended, and shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Section 5. Any and all additions or amendments to the code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the mayor and council to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into the code so that reference to "The Code of the City of Sandersville, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 6. A copy of the code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, and preserved in loose-leaf form, or in such other form as the city clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the city clerk or someone authorized by the city clerk, to insert in their designated places all amendments, ordinances or resolutions which indicate the intention of the city governing authority to make those provisions a part of the code, when those provisions have been reprinted in page form, and to extract from the code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed. A copy of the code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine it and shall be considered the official code of the city. 
Section 7. As pages of the code are replaced because the matter contained in them shall have been repealed, amended or otherwise shall have been superseded or rendered obsolete or inoperative, the city clerk shall retain copies of the pages of the code so superseded, rendered obsolete or otherwise rendered inoperative in a file so that the former provisions of the code may be readily available and easily found. The purpose of this section is to permit anyone desiring to do so to ascertain the precise status of any section of the code as of a given date. 
Section 8. In case of the amendment of any section of the code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in the city charter or the code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case the amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in the other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless the penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 9. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the code in any manner whatsoever which may cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
Section 10. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of the conflict, hereby repealed. 
Section 11. This ordinance shall be in force and take effect on ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
Adopted this ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
____________ Mayor 
____________ City Clerk 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this City of Sandersville, Georgia Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 

 
THE CHARTER 
Editor's note— The charter of the City of Sandersville, Georgia is derived from a 1990 Act of the Georgia Legislature (H.B. No. 1839). Numbering of sections corresponds to the state law. Provisions of limited application, such as severability and repealer clauses have been omitted from this printing. Any material appearing in brackets has been added by the codifier for clarification. 
ARTICLE I - Incorporation and Powers 

Sec. 1.10 - Incorporation. 
The City of Sandersville, Georgia, in the County of Washington, and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name and style of the "City of Sandersville, Georgia." Under that name the city shall be and continue to be vested with all of the property and rights of property, real and personal, which now belong to the corporation; shall have perpetual succession; may bring and defend actions; may contract and be contracted with; and may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at will. This Act shall constitute the whole charter of the City of Sandersville, Georgia. References in this charter to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Sandersville. The city shall have perpetual existence. 
Sec. 1.11 - Corporate boundaries. 
The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time by local law or in the manner provided by general state law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk of the city and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map or Description of the Corporate Limits of the City of Sandersville, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the mayor shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
Sec. 1.12 - Municipal powers. 
(a)	This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)	The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. Said powers shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)	Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this paragraph; 
(3)	Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of this city; 
(4)	Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures not inconsistent with general law; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades except as otherwise prohibited by general law; 
(5)	Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)	Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A., or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)	Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governments and entities and with private persons, firms and corporations; 
(8)	Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)	Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations, not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)	Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business within the city and benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)	General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)	Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)	Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation within the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)	Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for the commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)	Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys and walkways of the city; 
(16)	Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)	Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)	Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)	Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)	Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers, and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations and penalties therefor; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; and to authorize the extension of water, sewerage, and electrical distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which said utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city; and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; 
(21)	Nuisances. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)	Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)	Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(24)	Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and fire-fighting agency; 
(25)	Public hazards, removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)	Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)	Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)	Public transportation. To organize and operate or contract for such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)	Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(30)	Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, inside or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)	Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)	Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right-of-way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such location and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; and to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)	Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; and to impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(34)	Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)	Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(36)	Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs of any public improvements; 
(37)	Ad valorem taxes. To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)	Other taxes. To levy collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)	Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking spaces of such vehicles; 
(40)	Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(41)	Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this Charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(42)	Telecommunications. The City shall have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, lease, sell, resell, build, maintain, operate and contract with respect to a telecommunications systems network in order to provide telecommunications services and similar other services, including cable television services (CATV), to establish and charge rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished or made available by such undertaking; to interconnect its system or services or both with the systems or services of consumers and other providers, to use telecommunications to respond to community needs, encourage the development of information based organizations in the City of Sandersville, Georgia, to finance from time to time any such telecommunications systems through the issuance of revenue bonds as then permitted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia; and to make any contract with respect to and furnish the services of any said systems to consumers within or outside the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. of 3-2-98, § 1) 
Sec. 1.13 - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the City, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II - Government Structure, Elections, and Removal 

Sec. 2.10 - City Council creation; composition; number; election. 
(a)	The legislative authority of the government of this City, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a City Council to be composed of a Mayor and five (5) Council Members. The Mayor and five (5) Council Members shall be successors to the Mayor and five (5) Aldermen provided for in the City Charter repealed by this Charter. 
(b)	The Mayor and Council Members shall serve for terms of four (4) years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as Mayor or Council Member unless he shall have been a resident of this City for twelve (12) months immediately preceding the election of Mayor or Council Members and, and in the case of candidates for council member posts 1 through 4, a resident of the post described in subsection (f) of Section 2.11 which the candidate seeks to represent immediately prior to the date of the election. Each person elected as Mayor or Council Member shall continue to reside within the City and, for Council Members posts 1 through 4, in the post described in subsection (f) of Section 2.11 which that member represents, during said period of service and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this City. No person's name shall be listed as a candidate on the ballot for election for either Mayor or Council Member unless such person shall file a written notice with the Clerk of said City that he desires his name to be placed on said ballot as a candidate either for Mayor or Council Member. No person shall be eligible for the office of Mayor or Council Member unless such person shall file above said notice within the time provided for in Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
Sec. 2.11 - Elections. 
(a)	At any election, all persons who are qualified under the Constitution and laws of Georgia to vote for members of the General Assembly of Georgia and who are bona fide residents of said City shall be eligible to qualify as voters in the election. 
(b)	All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
(c)	The mayor and alderman who are in office immediately prior to the effective date of this charter shall serve until the expiration of the terms of office to which they were elected, which shall expire December 31, 1991, and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(d)	For the purpose of electing members of the council, the City of Sandersville shall consist of five council members posts described in subsection (f) of this section. Each person seeking election as a member of the council shall designate the post for which he seeks election. The first council members elected from numbered council member posts under this charter shall succeed to those aldermen in correspondingly numbered aldermanic posts whose terms of office expire as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)	On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1991, and on that day each four years thereafter, there shall be elected a mayor and five council members. Persons so elected shall take office the first day of January following their election and serve for terms of office of four years each and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(f)	(1)	For the purposes of electing members of the City Council, the territory of the City of Sandersville is divided into four posts, which shall be and correspond to those four numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as 'Plan Name: sandersville-2013 Plan Type: Local Administrator: Sandersville User: bak'. 
(2)	When used in such attachment, the term 'VTD' (voting tabulation district) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(3)	The separate numeric designations in a district description which are underneath a VTD heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a VTD as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the City of Sandersville which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(4)	Any part of the City of Sandersville which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(5)	Except as otherwise provided in the description of any council district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(Act No. 141, Ga. L. 2015, p. 3733) 
Sec. 2.12 - Vacancies in office. 
(a)	(1) The office of mayor or council member shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2)	Upon the suspension from office of mayor or council member in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	In the event that the office of mayor or council member shall become vacant, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within six months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
(c)	In the event the office of council member from Post 5 becomes vacant, whether by death, resignation, a person's filling the unexpired term of mayor, or any other cause, the remaining council members shall elect from their membership a person meeting the requirements of office of council member from Post 5 to serve out the unexpired term and until a successor is elected and qualified. 
Sec. 2.13 - Non-partisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
Sec. 2.14 - Election by plurality. 
No person shall be elected to the office of mayor or council member from Post 5 unless that person has received a majority of the votes cast in the entire city for that office. No person shall be elected to the office of council member from Post 1, 2, 3, or 4 unless that person has received a plurality of the votes cast for that office from voters voting only in that post and not at large. 
Sec. 2.15 - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and council members shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance and in accordance with Chapter 35 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. The mayor and council members shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
Sec. 2.16 - Prohibitions. 
(a)	No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)	Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of his judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; 
(2)	Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. 
(3)	Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or others. 
(4)	Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, object, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign. 
(5)	Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government. 
(6)	Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he has a financial interest. 
(b)	Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who has any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any council member who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and he shall disqualify himself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)	No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)	Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of another party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(e)	Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any member of council shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which he was elected. No former mayor and no former council member shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which he was elected. 
(f)	No appointive officer and no employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any elective city office. 
(g)	(1) Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited his office or position. 
(2)	Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit his office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three (3) years thereafter. 
Sec. 2.17 - Removal of officers. 
(a)	The mayor, a council member, or other appointed officers provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)	incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(2)	conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)	failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law; 
(4)	knowingly violating any express prohibition of this charter; 
(5)	abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)	failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by state law. 
(b)	Removal of any officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)	By majority vote of the full council after an investigative hearing, with the officer to be removed not voting. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than 10 days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Washington County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
(2)	By an order of the Superior Court of Washington County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Sandersville. 
ARTICLE III - Organization of Government, General Authority, and Ordinances 

Sec. 3.10 - General power and authority. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I of this charter. 
(b)	In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the creation of such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations not inconsistent with this charter or the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, and protection of life, property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of this city. The council may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for the violation thereof. 
Sec. 3.11 - Organization. 
(a)	The city council shall hold an organizational meeting at the first regular meeting on the first day of January following the regular municipal election. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (council member) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
(b)	The mayor pro tempore shall be the council member elected from post 5. The mayor pro tempore shall preside at all meetings of the city council and shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during any disability or absence of the mayor. Any such disability or absence of the mayor shall be declared by a majority vote of the city council. In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor during the last six months of the mayor's term of office, the mayor pro tempore shall serve as mayor for the unexpired term and until a successor is elected and qualified. In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor except during the last six months of the mayor's term of office, the mayor pro tempore shall serve as mayor until a successor is elected at a special election as provided in subsection (b) of Section 2.12 and is qualified. The city council shall by majority vote elect a presiding officer from its number for any period in which the mayor pro tempore is disabled, absent, or acting as mayor. Such absence or disability of the mayor pro tempore shall be declared by majority vote of the city council. 
Sec. 3.12 - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 3.13 - Meetings. 
(a)	The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)	Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three (3) members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to council members shall not be required if the mayor and all council members are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a council member in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such council member's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)	All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be given as required by law. 
Sec. 3.14 - Procedures. 
(a)	The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
(b)	All committees and committee chairmen and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time within the mayor's discretion. 
Sec. 3.15 - Voting. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, three (3) council members in addition to the presiding officer shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have a right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of a majority of council members present shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. The mayor, or mayor pro tempore, if presiding, shall be entitled to vote only in the case of a tie, except that the mayor or mayor pro tempore, if presiding, shall be entitled to vote on all appointments. 
(b)	In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of councilmembers holding office, then the remaining councilmembers in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. A vote of a majority of the remaining councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Sec. 3.16 - Ordinances. 
(a)	Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Sandersville hereby ordains…" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)	An ordinance may be introduced by any council member and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except in the event a second reading of the ordinance is waived based on a vote and passage by the council and except for emergency ordinances provided for in section 3.18. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall, as soon as possible, distribute a copy to the mayor and to each council member and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 3.17 - Effect of ordinances. 
In addition to other acts required by general state law or by specific provisions of this charter to be done by ordinance, acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 3.18 - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three (3) council members and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three (3) council members shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent re-enactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency continues to exist. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 3.19 - Codes. 
(a)	The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)	the requirements of subsection (b) of section 3.16 of this charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)	a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 3.20 of this charter. 
(b)	Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 3.20 - Codification of ordinances. 
(a)	The clerk shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)	The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and shall contain such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Sandersville, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)	The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code then in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation within the code. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Sec. 3.21 - Chief executive officer; delegation of powers. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive of this city. The mayor shall possess all of the executive and administrative powers granted to the city under the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this charter, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter. 
Sec. 3.22 - Powers and duties of mayor. 
As the chief executive of this city, the mayor shall: 
(1)	see that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(2)	appoint and remove all officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided in this charter; 
(3)	exercise supervision over all executive and administrative work of the city and provide for the coordination of administrative activities; 
(4)	call special meetings of the city council as provided for in section 3.13; 
(5)	recommend to the city council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as he may deem expedient; 
(6)	approve or disapprove ordinances as provided in section 3.23; 
(7)	require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports whenever he deems it expedient; 
(8)	perform other duties as may be required by general state law, this charter, or ordinance. 
Sec. 3.23 - Submission of ordinances to the mayor; veto power. 
(a)	Every ordinance adopted by the city council shall be presented promptly by the city clerk to the mayor. 
(b)	The mayor shall within three (3) calendar days of receipt of an ordinance return it to the city clerk with or without his approval, or with his disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the city clerk; if the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law at 12:00 noon on the third calendar day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the city council through the city clerk a written statement of his reasons for his veto. The clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. 
(c)	Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the city clerk to the city council at its next regular meeting and should the city council then or at its next general meeting adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of four (4) of its members, it shall become law. 
(d)	The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the city council over the mayor's veto as provided in this section. The reduced part or parts shall be presented to city council as though disapproved and shall not become law unless overridden by the council as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
Sec. 3.24 - City administrator. 
The city council may by ordinance establish the office of city administrator and may assign to the city administrator such executive and administrative duties as prescribed by section 3.22 of this charter. Such administrator shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
ARTICLE IV - Administrative Affairs 

Sec. 4.10 - Department heads. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all non-elective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the superintendents of departments and other officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)	All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)	There shall be a superintendent of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each superintendent shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department or agency. 
(e)	All superintendent shall be appointed by the city council on an annual basis. 
Sec. 4.11 - Boards. 
(a)	The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)	All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)	The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)	Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)	Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)	No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of his office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)	Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of a majority of members of the city council. 
(h)	Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice-chairman, and may elect as its secretary one of its members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such by-laws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, an ordinance of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 4.12 - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney annually, together with such assistant city attorney as may be authorized, who shall be members of the State Bar of Georgia. The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party, may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court, shall attend the meetings of the council as directed, shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs, and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position as city attorney. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the city attorney and any assistant city attorney. 
Sec. 4.13 - City Clerk. 
The city council shall annually appoint a city clerk who shall not be a council member. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records required by this charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the city clerk. 
Sec. 4.14 - Tax collector. 
The city council may appoint a tax collector to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other monies belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the city, and the tax collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all general laws of Georgia relating to the collection, sale, or foreclosure of taxes by municipalities. 
Sec. 4.15 - Rules and regulations. 
The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: 
(1)	the method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)	the administration of a position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)	hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoff shall be effected; 
(4)	such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)	such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
Sec. 4.16 - Consolidation of functions. 
The city council may consolidate the positions of city clerk and city tax collector or any other positions or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions to the holder or holders of any other position. 
ARTICLE V - Judicial Branch 

Sec. 5.10 - Municipal court. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Sandersville. 
Sec. 5.11 - Judges. 
(a)	The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)	No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the city council annually. 
(c)	Compensation of the judge or judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)	Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of four (4) members of the city council. 
(e)	Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that he will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal. 
Sec. 5.12 - Convening of court. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 5.13 - Powers. 
(a)	The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violation as provided by law. 
(b)	The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed a fine of $100 or 10 days in jail. 
(c)	The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000 or imprisonment for 180 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)	The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of state law. 
(e)	The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety bond for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least two (2) days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)	The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)	The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a state law has been violated. 
(h)	Each judge of the municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(i)	Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(j)	The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Sec. 5.14 - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Washington County, under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 5.15 - Rules. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE VI - Finance 

Sec. 6.10 - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11 - Millage. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12 - Occupation taxes and business license fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling within the city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.13 - Licenses. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individual or corporation who transacts business in this city or who practices or offers to practice any profession or calling within the city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitates. 
Sec. 6.14 - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys, for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by him. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 6.15 - Service fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.16 - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess, charge, and collect the costs of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.17 - Other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18 - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fa's, creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19 - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20 - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21 - Loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22 - Accounting and budgeting. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government unless otherwise provided by general state or federal law. 
Sec. 6.23 - Budget ordinance. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. The city council shall comply with the provisions of chapter 81 of title 36 of the O.C.G.A. 
(Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 6.24 - Levy of taxes. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.25 - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council by majority vote may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unappropriated surplus in the fund to which it applies or on a revised estimate of revenue. 
Sec. 6.26 - Procurement and property management. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)	it is in writing; 
(2)	it is drawn or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by him to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)	it is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings. 
Sec. 6.27 - Purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.28 - Sale of city property. 
(a)	The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property, except a public utility, owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. A public utility held or owned by the city may not be sold or conveyed unless the sale or conveyance is approved by a majority of the qualified voters of the city voting in a special election which shall be called for that purpose. 
(b)	The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon request by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)	Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII - General Provisions 

Sec. 7.10 - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11 - Rules and regulations. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12 - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.13 - Definitions and construction. 
(a)	Section captions in this charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)	The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is discretionary. 
(c)	The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 7.14 - Penalties. 
The violation of any provisions of this charter, for which penalty is not specifically provided for herein, is hereby declared to be an offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment not to exceed 180 days or both such fine and imprisonment. 
TITLE 1 - General Provisions 
CHAPTER 1 - Use of the Code and Penalties 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, O.C.G.A., Sec. 1-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1-1-1 - How code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Sandersville, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-1-2 - Rules of construction. 
Unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and council, in the construction of this code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed: 
(1)	City shall mean the City of Sandersville, Georgia. 
(2)	Computation of time . When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege, or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted; and if the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having that privilege or duty, shall have through the following Monday to exercise that privilege or to discharge such duty. 
(3)	Council shall mean the Mayor and Council of the City of Sandersville, Georgia. 
(4)	County shall mean the County of Washington, Georgia unless otherwise indicated. 
(5)	Delegation of authority . Whenever a provision or section of this code appears requiring the head of a department or other appointed officer of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection, unless the terms of the provision or section expressly designate otherwise. 
(6)	Gender . A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
(7)	Interpretation . In the interpretation and application of any provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
(8)	Joint authority . All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving that authority to a majority of those persons or officers. 
(9)	May is always discretionary and not mandatory. 
(10)	Month . The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
(11)	Number . Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and words used in the plural shall include the singular number. 
(12)	Oath shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
(13)	Or, and . "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
(14)	Other officials or officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., "city clerk," "chief of police," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., of the City of Sandersville, Georgia. 
(15)	Person shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations and bodies politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
(16)	Preceding, following . The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
(17)	Shall is always mandatory and not discretionary. 
(18)	Signature and subscription shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
(19)	State shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
(20)	Street shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public streets and ways in the city and shall embrace all parts thereof constituting the designated rights-of-way. 
(21)	Time . Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
(22)	Week . The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days, unless otherwise specified. 
(23)	Written, in writing . "Written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
(24)	Year . The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, except as may pertain to fiscal year which may be different from a calendar year. 
Sec. 1-1-3 - Catchlines of sections. 
The underlined catchlines of sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of the sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so deemed when any of the sections including the catchlines are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-1-4 - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-1-5 - Severability of parts of code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code. 
Sec. 1-1-6 - Amendments to code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, the repealed portion may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made by amending the provisions by specific reference to the section of this code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sandersville, Georgia is hereby amended to read as follows: … (Set out new provisions in full)." 
(c)	When the mayor and council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the code, which the mayor and council desires to incorporate into the code, a section in substantially the following language shall be made a part of the ordinance: 
"Section ____________ . It is the intention of the mayor and council and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sandersville, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish that intention." 
(d)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this code desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(e)	When necessary, sections and subsections to the code may be renumbered by the official codifier for the city to fulfill the intent of the governing body but all such changes shall be approved in advance by the city attorney. 
Sec. 1-1-7 - Altering code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change, or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
Sec. 1-1-8 - General penalty. 
Whenever in this code or in any ordinance, rule, regulation or order of the city any act is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in the code or any ordinance, rule, regulation or order the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this code or any ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment or labor on the public works of the city for no more than 180 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Cross reference— Maximum penalty, City Charter, Sec. 83. 
State Law reference— Alternative sentencing, O.C.G.A., Sec. 36-30-8; additional authority of municipal courts to impose penalties, O.C.G.A., Sec. 36-32-5. 
TITLE 2 - General Government 
CHAPTER 1 - Governing Body 
Cross reference— Governing body, creation and composition, Charter, Sec. 2; powers of governing body, Charter, Secs. 2, 3; qualifications, Charter, Sec. 7; oath of governing body members, Charter, Sec. 6; elections, Chapter 2 of this Title; compensation, Charter, Sec. 32. 
ARTICLE A - Meetings of Governing Body 
State Law reference— Open meetings law, O.C.G.A., Sec. 50-14-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-1-1 - Time and date of meetings. 
(a)	Regular meetings of the Mayor and Council shall be held on the first and third Monday of each month at 6:00 p.m. 
(b)	Special meetings may be called by the Mayor of which due notice shall be given. 
(Ord. of 12/1/97) 
Cross reference— Regular meeting date may be changed by ordinance, Charter, Sec. 22; special meetings may be held as required and any business may be transacted, Charter, Sec. 23. 
Sec. 2-1-2 - Presiding officer; rules of order. 
(a)	The Mayor shall preside at all meetings, preserve order and decorum, and shall appoint committees unless the Council directs otherwise. 
(b)	In the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor pro tem shall preside, and in the absence of both the Mayor and Mayor pro tem, the council shall elect a new pro tem to preside during the absence of those officers. 
(c)	The Mayor or Mayor pro tem and three (3) Council Members shall constitute a quorum. 
(d)	Each member, when speaking, shall rise and address the presiding officer. A member shall not be interrupted while he is on the floor except by his consent. 
(e)	The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, but an appeal may be taken from his decision to the Council. 
(Code 1941, Secs. 322 (2), (3), (4), (10) and (11)) 
Cross reference— When the Mayor or Mayor pro tem are absent, any one (1) of the Council Members may be selected as acting Mayor, Charter, Sec. 25; except as to election of officers, the Mayor and the Mayor pro tem acting as Mayor, may vote only in the event of a tie, Charter, Sec. 24. 
Sec. 2-1-3 - Agenda. 
(a)	The following order of business shall be observed in the transaction of business, but the order may be suspended by a three-fourths (¾) vote of Council: 
(1)	reading of the minutes; 
(2)	unfinished business; 
(3)	reports of committees; 
(4)	new business; 
(5)	report of officers; and 
(6)	adjournment. 
(b)	At the commencement of each regular meeting, the clerk shall read the minutes of the last regular meeting and intervening meetings. Whenever necessary the minutes shall be corrected by the council, and after being approved, shall be signed by the Mayor. 
(c)	Before the minutes of any preceding meeting have been approved, any member may move to reconsider the action of the council at such meeting, and if such motion prevails, the subject matter of such reconsideration shall be the next business after the reading of the minutes and their approval. 
(d)	Applications or other communications to the council must be in writing, and in all cases must be referred to a committee before they are acted upon, unless the council shall otherwise determine. 
(Code 1941, Secs. 322(5), (6), (13) and (17)) 
Cross reference— Ordinances must be in written form, Sec. 2-1-21. 
Sec. 2-1-4 - Voting. 
(a)	All questions shall be put by the Mayor or Mayor pro tem, presiding. The members of council shall vote by voice vote on all questions, except that any member on any question may demand that a "yea" and "nay" vote be entered on the minutes, and a yea and nay vote shall be taken on all tax ordinances, on ordinances appropriating money, and shall be recorded on the minutes. 
(b)	All appointments shall be by ballot. 
(Code 1941, Secs. 322(7), (8)) 
State Law reference— Voting upon questions by interested council members, O.C.G.A., Sec. 36-30-6. 
Cross reference— Except for the election of officers, the Mayor or the Mayor pro tem acting as Mayor, shall vote only when a tie exists, Charter, Sec. 24; the Mayor has a veto power which may be overridden by council, Charter, Sec. 31. 
Sec. 2-1-5 - Adjournment. 
A motion to adjourn is always in order. 
Sec. 2-1-6 - Amendment of rules. 
These rules shall be considered binding on the council and may be suspended by motion and majority vote. The rules shall be permanently amended or altered only by subsequent ordinance. 
Secs. 2-1-7—2-1-20 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B - Ordinances and Resolutions[1] 
Sec. 2-1-21    Preparation. 
All ordinances and reports to council shall be in writing. 
Cross reference— Applications and communications to council must be in writing and are referred to committee, Sec. 2-1-3(d). 
Sec. 2-1-22    Introduction and approval. 
(a)	All ordinances shall be read the first time at the meeting when introduced and shall not be acted upon at that time without the unanimous consent of council. 
(b)	At the next or subsequent meeting, the ordinance will be read a second time and shall be subject to amendment or passage. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 322(14)) 
Cross reference— Pursuant to the charter, council has the power to pass an ordinance or resolution at special meetings if neither the Mayor nor the council members object to the consideration of the ordinance or resolution, Charter, Sec. 23. 
Sec. 2-1-23    Publication. 
Ordinances shall be published whenever and in such manner as the council may direct. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 322(16)) 
Secs. 2-1-24—2-1-30    Reserved. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— The city clerk shall maintain an ordinance book, Charter, Sec. 34. 

ARTICLE C - Committees [2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of Sept. 18, 2006, repealed the provisions of Title 2, ch. 1, art. C, §§ 2-1-31, 2-1-32 in its entirety. Former §§ 2-1-31 and 2-1-32 derived from Code 1941 §§ 109, 110; from an ordinance of Dec. 2, 2002 and pertained to committees. 

Secs. 2-1-33—2-1-40 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE D - General Provisions 

Sec. 2-1-41 Workers' compensation coverage. 
Elected officials who are members of the Sandersville governing authority providing services to the residents and taxpayers of the City are hereby extended coverage for workers' compensation. 
(Ord. of 3/24/86) 
CHAPTER 2 - Elections[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia municipal elections, O.C.G.A., Title 21, Ch. 3. 
Cross reference— Election of Mayor and Council Members, Charter, Sec. 4; qualifying, Charter, Sec. 5; qualifications, Charter, Sec. 7; election procedures, Charter, Secs. 8 through 18. 

Sec. 2-2-1 Election officials. 
The Mayor and Council shall by resolution annually appoint a municipal election superintendent, election managers, registrars, absentee ballot clerk, and any other officials as are necessary, all of whom shall exercise those powers and duties set forth in the applicable provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
State Law reference— Powers and duties, O.C.G.A., Secs. 21-3-8, 21-3-31, 21-3-32, 21-3-120, 21-3-227(b), 21-3-251 and 21-3-283. 
Sec. 2-2-2 Filing notice of candidacy; date. 
The date for filing notice of candidacy by candidates or their agents shall be no sooner than fifty-two (52) nor later than twenty-two (22) days prior to general elections and not later than fifteen (15) days prior to special elections. 
State Law reference— Notices of candidacy, O.C.G.A., Sec. 21-3-91. 
Sec. 2-2-3 Voter registration. 
(a)	The City shall maintain its own registration of electors. 
(b)	Any person desiring to vote in a regular election shall register to vote not later than 5:00 p.m. thirty (30) days prior to the election. Any person not previously registered may register to vote in any special election within five (5) days of the call of the special election. 
State Law reference— Registration, O.C.G.A., Sec. 21-3-126. 
Sec. 2-2-4 Qualification fees. 
The qualification fee for candidates filing a notice of candidacy in any general or special election for the office of Mayor or City Council member shall be three (3) percent of the annual compensation of the office, which fees shall be received by the City Clerk at the time of filing the notice of candidacy and paid over to the City. 
State Law reference— Qualification fees, O.C.G.A., Sec. 21-3-90. 
Sec. 2-2-5 Plurality determines posts 1 through 4. 
All candidates running for council posts 1, 2, 3, and 4 shall be elected by a plurality of the votes from that post. The Mayor and Mayor pro tem shall be elected at large. 
State Law reference— Plurality method, O.C.G.A., Sec. 21-3-407. 
Cross reference— Charter authorizes election of Council Members from posts one (1) through four (4) by plurality, Charter, Sec. 4(d). 
CHAPTER 3 - Administration 
ARTICLE A - General Provisions[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Loyalty oath required of municipal officers and employees, O.C.G.A., Sec. 45-3-11 et seq. 
Cross reference— Appointment of city officers, Charter, Sec. 27; bond of City officers, Charter, Sec. 28; duties of Mayor, Charter, Sec. 30; duties of Chief of Police, Charter, Sec. 33; duties of City Attorney, Charter, Sec. 36; duties of Tax Collector, Charter, Sec. 35. 

Sec. 2-3-1 - Departments established. 
(a)	The following departments of the City are hereby established: 
(1)	Administration 
(2)	Public Safety—Police 
(3)	Public Safety—Fire 
(4)	Electric/Telecom 
(5)	Public Works 
(b)	Each department may be headed by a superintendent who shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as provided by law or as prescribed from time to time by the Mayor and Council. Department superintendents shall report to the Mayor and Council. 
(Ord. of 12/2/02) 
Sec. 2-3-2 - City Administrator. 
(a)	Established. In accordance with the provisions of Section 3.24 of the City of Sandersville Charter, the office of City Administrator is hereby established. The powers and duties of the Mayor, as set forth in Section 3.22 of the City of Sandersville Charter, are herewith limited by the provisions of this section and, as it pertains to the respective powers and duties of the Mayor and the City Administrator, where there is a conflict between the provisions of this section and the provisions of Section 3.22 of the City of Sandersville Charter, then the provisions of this section shall apply so long as this section remains in effect. 
(b)	Appointment of a City Administrator. The City Administrator shall be appointed by majority vote of the City Council annually. The City Administrator shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office hereinafter set forth. At the time of this appointment, the appointee need not be a resident of Washington County, but during the City Administrator's tenure of office he/she shall reside within Washington County. No council member shall receive such appointment during the term for which the council member shall have been elected, nor within one (1) year after the expiration of the council member's term. 
(c)	Removal of the City Administrator. The City Council may remove the City Administrator at any time by a majority vote of its members. The City Administrator shall forfeit any applicable severance pay if he/she is terminated for criminal misconduct or moral turpitude. 
(d)	Powers and duties of the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall be the Chief Administrative Officer and Chief Financial Officer of the City, and may head one (1) or more departments if such assignment(s) are approved by the City Council, and shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the City. To that end, the City Administrator shall have the power, and shall be required to: 
(1)	With the advance approval of the City Council by formal vote, appoint and, when necessary for the good of the City, suspend or remove all officers and employees of the City except as otherwise provided by the City Charter or state law; the administrator shall also evaluate the performance of department directors and contract employees. 
(2)	Act as budget officer for the City pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq., and prepare the annual budget and submit it to the City Council together with a message describing the important features and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(3)	Prepare and submit to the council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City Council for the preceding year. 
(4)	Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City, and make recommendations as may be deemed desirable; keep current accounts showing at all times the fiscal conditions of the City, including the current and anticipated expenses, appropriations, cash on hand and anticipated revenues of all municipal funds and accounts. 
(5)	To administer the personnel policies and procedures of the City Council of the City of Sandersville and to recommend to the council a standard schedule of pay for each appointed office and position in the City service, including minimum, intermediate, and maximum rates. 
(6)	Recommend to the City Council from time to time the adoption of such measures as may be deemed necessary or expedient for the health, safety, or welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services. 
(7)	Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by the City Charter or state law. 
(8)	With the prior approval of City Council, consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments, or units under his/her jurisdiction. The City Administrator may be the head of one (1) or more departments on an interim basis in the event of a vacancy. 
(9)	With or without the assistance of an external auditor, prepare and submit to the City Council the comprehensive annual financial report and monthly financial statements. 
(10)	Implement policies and programs adopted by the City Council. 
(11)	Attend all meetings of the City Council unless excused there from and take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the council. The City Administrator shall be entitled to notice of all regular and special meetings of the council. 
(12)	Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies, and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget and City Council policies, let contracts necessary for the operation or maintenance of City services, for which authorization is provided in advance by the City budget, for amounts up to and including five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) without the approval of the City Council; and to receive bids and proposals for purchases or contracts in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and present them to the City Council for approval. As of this date November 6, 2006. 
(13)	See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced. 
(14)	With the prior approval of the City Council department designee, investigate the affairs of the City or any department or division thereof and investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the City, and in regard to service maintained by the public utilities in the City, and see that all franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the City are faithfully observed. 
(15)	Devote his/her working hours to the discharge of the official city duties. 
(16)	Perform such other duties as may be required by the council, not inconsistent with the City Charter, law, or ordinances. 
(17)	Present in a timely fashion, appeals of decisions made by the City Administrator to the City Council, regardless of whether said appeals are by employees, citizens, vendors, or other parties. 
(e)	Interference with duties. Neither the council nor any of its members shall give orders to any subordinates of the City Administrator either publicly or privately nor directly take part in the provision of municipal services; however, council members are at liberty to discuss the affairs of the City with the council designee for the department and the council designee for the department may establish with the administrator an agenda for concerns that may come to his/her attention. 
(f)	Emergencies. In case of accident, disaster, or other circumstances creating a public emergency, the City Administrator may award contracts and make purchases in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for the purpose of meeting said emergency; but the administrator shall file promptly with the City Council a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures. 
(g)	Bond. The City Administrator shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the council, said bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of all of the administrator's duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the City. 
(h)	Compensation. The City Administrator shall receive such compensation as the council shall fix from time to time by ordinance or resolution. 
(i)	Vacancy. Any vacancy in the office of the City Administrator shall be filled within thirty (30) days after the effective date of such vacancy with either a permanent or interim appointment. 
(Ord. of 6/21/04(2); Ord. of 6/11/06(1); Ord. of 1/20/09) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of June 21, 2004, repealed Section 2-3-2 in its entirety. Subsequently, an ordinance of June 21, 2004, added a new section 2-3-2 to read as herein set out. Former section 2-3-2 pertained to city clerk; duties. 
Sec. 2-3-3 - Attestation of deeds and contracts. 
All deeds, leases and written contracts, made to the City and with others, or by others to and with the City, shall be attested by the City Clerk officially. He shall be the keeper of the public seal of the City, and the custodian of all the books, papers and records of the City except where special provision is made otherwise by the charter and ordinances of the City, and he shall be responsible for their safe keeping and he shall deliver them to his successors in office. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 125) 
Secs. 2-3-4—2-3-20 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B - Public Records[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Inspection of public records, O.C.G.A., Sec. 50-28-70 et seq.; records management program for local governments, O.C.G.A., Sec. 50-18-99. 

Sec. 2-3-21 - Custodian of records. 
The city clerk is responsible for records management activities and he shall designate a person or officer to act for and in behalf of the City in directing and coordinating all records management matters. 
(Ord. of 12/5/83) 
Sec. 2-3-22 - Destroying records. 
No record shall be destroyed except in accordance with approved retention schedule. 
(Ord. of 12/5/83) 
Sec. 2-3-23 - Certificate of destruction. 
Whenever any records are destroyed, a certificate of destruction shall be prepared and forwarded to the City which shall show the type of records destroyed, the approved retention schedule number, the dates covered, and the volume destroyed. 
(Ord. of 12/5/83) 
CHAPTER 4 - Personnel 
Sec. 2-4-1    Personnel regulations. 
The personnel regulations of the City, adopted February 1, 1983, as now or hereafter amended, establishing comprehensive personnel policies for employees of the City, are hereby incorporated by reference herein. An up-to-date copy of the personnel regulations is maintained in the office of the City Clerk for inspection by the public. 
Sec. 2-4-2    Political activities limited. 
(a)	No City of Sandersville full-time employee shall offer for or hold elective office in the City, county, state or national government, or publicly endorse any candidate for any city, county, state or national office. Any employee wishing to run for elective office for any city, county, state or national governments may request a leave of absence without pay upon qualification for said office. 
(b)	A city employee is defined as anyone who receives direct compensation for services performed on a regular basis, and who is covered by the insurance provided by the City. 
(c)	Nothing in this section shall affect the right of an employee to contribute to, hold membership in, serve as an officer of, or support a political party, to vote as to choice, to support or campaign for political candidates of other governmental jurisdictions, to express privately opinions on all political subjects and candidates, to maintain political neutrality or to attend political meetings. 
(d)	No city employee shall be appointed, promoted, demoted, favored, or discriminated against with respect to employment in the personnel system, because of his political opinions or affiliations. 
(e)	Nothing in this section shall prevent an elected official from serving the City on a voluntary basis. 
(f)	Any person presently holding an elected office outside the government of the City and who is also an employee of the City shall not be affected by this section so long as that person does not seek any office other than the office he presently holds nor ever vacates the office which he now holds. 
(Ord. of 6/4/80; Ord. of 5/5/97) 
CHAPTER 5 - Municipal Court[6] 
Sec. 2-5-1    Clerk. 
The municipal judge shall appoint a clerk of the municipal court, subject to confirmation by the council. The clerk shall keep a regular docket in which he shall enter all cases before the municipal court for investigation or trial, together with the judgment in the case. 
Sec. 2-5-2    Subpoenas. 
All subpoenas for witnesses shall bear teste in the name of the municipal judge, shall be issued and signed by the clerk, and served by the Chief of Police, assistant Chief of Police or any police officer of the City. The municipal judge shall have the power to cause the Chief of Police, assistant Chief of Police, or any police officer to arrest and bring before him for punishment as prescribed in the code and charter, any person who may disregard or disobey such subpoena and may compel the attendance of any witness as authorized in the charter. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 297) 
Sec. 2-5-3    Continuances. 
The municipal judge or presiding officer may, for good cause, continue any case to such time as the ends of justice may require. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 300) 
Sec. 2-5-4    Fines; costs. 
(a)	Fines and penalties imposed on conviction in the municipal court shall be in accordance with limits established in specific ordinances or in accordance with the bond schedule as established from time to time by the municipal judge. 
(b)	Court costs, in such amount as established from time to time by the judge, shall be assessed in all cases appearing before the judge in all cases resulting in conviction and in all cases for which a plea of guilty or nolo contendere is accepted. 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Establishment of municipal court, jurisdiction of municipal court, costs in municipal court, rules of municipal court, etc., Charter, Secs. 81 through 97. 
State Law reference— Criminal jurisdiction, O.C.G.A., Sec. 15-10-50; cash bonds, O.C.G.A., Sec. 17-6-10; municipal courts, O.C.G.A., Sec. 36-32-1 et seq. 

CHAPTER 6 - Code of Ethics 
Editor's note— A Resolution of Sept. 18, 2000, arts. I—VIII, was not specifically amendatory of the Code and has been included as chapter 6, §§ 2-6-1—2-6-8, to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 2-6-1 - Purpose. 
Declaration of policy. It is the policy of the City that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a Code of Ethics for all City officials is adopted. 
This code has the following purposes: (1) to encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by City officials; (2) to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the City; (3) to require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in manners affect the City; and (4) to serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports or regulation of political campaigns or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. 
(Res. of 9/18/00, art. I) 
Sec. 2-6-2 - Scope of persons covered. 
Scope of persons covered. The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all members of the City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission all advisory commissions, and committee members. 
(Res. of 9/18/00, art. II) 
Sec. 2-6-3 - Definitions. 
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
City official or official, unless other expressly defined, means the Mayor, members of the City Council and includes individuals appointed by the Mayor and City Council to all City commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other City bodies unless specifically exempted from this ordinance by the City Council. 
Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the City Council or other City board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Discretionary authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action. 
Immediate family means spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son, or daughter of any City Official. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a City Official, who would be affected in the same way as the general public. The interest of a council member in the property tax rate, general City fees, City utility charges, or a Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance or similar decisions in incidental to the extent that the council member would be affected in common with the general public. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest and which has insignificant value. 
Substantial interest means a known interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity: (1) the interest is ownership of five (5) percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or (2) funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous twelve (12) months or the previous calendar year equaled or exceeded five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in payment for goods, products or nonprofessional services, or ten (10) percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; (3) the person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of the for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the City Council; or (4) the person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more. Substantial interest in real property means an interest in real property which is an equitable or legal ownership with a market value of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more. 
(Res. of 9/18/00, art. III) 
Sec. 2-6-4 - Standards of conduct. 
(a)	No council member or member of any board or commission shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for such person or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official responsibilities. 
(b)	No council member or member of a board or commission, in any matter before the council, board or commission in which he has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the common good for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote. 
(c)	No council member or member of a board or commission shall act as a agent or attorney for another in any matter before the City Council or any board or commission. 
(d)	No council member or commissioner shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)	No council member or member of any board or commission shall enter into any contract with the City except as specifically authorized by state statutes. Any council member or member of a board or commission who has a proprietary interest in a agency doing business with the City shall make known that interest in writing to the City Council and the City Clerk. 
(f)	All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)	Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with Georgia law. 
(h)	No City official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed or compensation to be received while still a City official or employee, if the employment or compensation could reasonable be expected to impair in judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)	If a City official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the board or commission on which he serves or to his supervisor and shall take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)	No City official shall use City facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)	No City official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(Res. of 9/18/00, art. IV) 
Sec. 2-6-5 - Conflict of interest. 
Prohibition of conflict of interest. A City official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting a person, entity, or property in which the official or employee has a substantial interest; in addition, a City official or employee who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity may not participate in a vote or decision regarding funding by or through the City of the entity. Where the interest of a City official or employee in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the City official or employee may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Res. of 9/18/00, art. V) 
Sec. 2-6-6 - Exemptions. 
Exemptions. This Code shall not be constructed to require the filing of any information relating to any person's connection with, or interest in, any professional society or any charitable, religious, social, fraternal, educational, recreational, public service, civil or political organization, or any similar organization not conducted as a business enterprise or governmental agency, and which is not engaged in the ownership or conduct of a business enterprise or governmental agency. 
(Res. of 9/18/00, art. VI) 
Sec. 2-6-7 - Miscellaneous. 
Severability. The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If any provision of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application. 
(Res. of 9/18/00, art. VII) 
Sec. 2-6-8 - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of this policy are subject to: 
(1)	Written and oral reprimand by the council, board, commission or committee of which said violator a member; 
(2)	A fine greater than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) to be imposed by the council, commission, board or committee of which the violator is a member. 
(3)	Request for resignation by the council, board, committee or commission of which the violator is a member. 
Each council, board, commission or committee shall have authority to establish rules and regulations to impose said penalties. 
(Res. of 9/18/00, art. VIII) 
TITLE 3 - Finance 
CHAPTER 1 - General Provisions 
Editor's note— By referendum and resolution the City participates in a one (1) percent local option sales tax. 
State Law reference— Local government financial management standards and procedures, O.C.G.A., Secs. 36-81-1 et seq.; budget adoption procedure, O.C.G.A., Secs. 36-81-3 through 36-81-6. 
Cross reference— Fixing fiscal year, Charter, Sec. 43; authority to issue bonds, Charter, Sec. 61; collection of tax to retire bonds, Charter, Sec. 41. 

Sec. 3-1-1 - Revenue ordinance. 
The Mayor and Council shall, as soon as practical in each year, pass an ordinance for the purpose of raising revenue for the City for the current year for the support of the City government, imposing taxes as follows: 
(1)	an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the limits of the City; 
(2)	a business occupation tax; and 
(3)	a tax on dogs. 
Sec. 3-1-2 - Supplies paid for by city. 
All books, blanks, dockets and other necessary supplies required by each and every officer of the City shall be paid for by the City. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 306) 
Sec. 3-1-3 - City depository. 
All funds belonging to the City and derived from any source shall be deposited under the direction of the finance committee of the City in a safe bank which will pay the largest amount of interest on daily balances for the funds, so that the funds or any part thereof shall be subject to be drawn out at any time as provided by the laws of the City. The finance committee shall select such depository on the first day of each year. 
Sec. 3-1-4 - Purchasing agent; City Clerk. 
The Mayor and Council shall designate a purchasing agent for the City. 
Sec. 3-1-5 - Same; duties. 
(a)	The purchasing agent shall: 
(1)	Purchase or contract for the purchase of all supplies and contractual services needed by any agency of the City, except as otherwise provided by law, or the Mayor and Council. 
(2)	Act to procure for the City the highest quality of supplies and contractual services at the least expense to the City. 
(3)	Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases and sales. 
(4)	Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions. 
(5)	Prescribe and maintain such forms as he shall find reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter. 
(6)	Exploit the possibilities of buying in bulk so as to take full advantage of discounts. 
(7)	Act to procure for the City all federal tax exemptions to which it is entitled. 
(b)	The purchasing agent shall declare vendors who default on their quotations irresponsible bidders and disqualify them from receiving any business from the city for a stated period of time. 
Sec. 3-1-6 - Unauthorized purchases. 
Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any city officer to order the purchase of any supplies or make any contract within the purview of this chapter unless the provisions of this chapter are complied with, and any purchase ordered or contract made contrary to the provisions hereof shall not be approved by the city, and the city shall not be bound thereby. 
Sec. 3-1-7 - Requisitions and estimates. 
All departments of the city, either by or with the authorization of the department head, shall file with the purchasing agent detailed requisitions or estimates of their requirements in supplies and contractual services in such manner, at such times, and for such future periods as the purchasing agent may prescribe. 
Sec. 3-1-8 - Revisory power. 
The purchasing agent, or his designated representative, shall examine each requisition or estimate and shall have the authority to revise it as to quantity, quality, or estimated cost. 
Sec. 3-1-9 - Encumbrance of funds. 
(a)	Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing agent shall not issue any order for delivery on a contract or any market purchases until he has determined, after preaudit, that there is to the credit of the using department concerned a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance, in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such order. 
(b)	Nothing in this section shall prevent the purchasing agent from issuing an order for the purchase of any goods or services where funds to cover such purchase are not immediately available, provided that the provisions of subsection (a) concerning determination of sufficient unencumbered balance have been complied with and the means of defraying the amount of such order are available. 
Sec. 3-1-10 - Discounted or competitive prices. 
The city clerk is hereby directed and authorized to engage in purchasing goods and materials needed by the city from any person, firm, partnership, or corporation who will make the goods and materials available to the city at a price which is discounted or competitive with prices being charged on the open market. The city clerk is further directed to obtain all goods and materials purchased on behalf of the city and for use by the city at the lowest price obtainable, provided, however, that the goods shall be of similar or approved quality for like merchandise available for sale throughout the city. 
Sec. 3-1-11 - Competitive bids favored. 
All purchases of, and contracts for supplies and contractual services, and all sales of personal property which has become obsolete and unusable shall, except as otherwise provided, be based wherever possible on competitive bids. 
Sec. 3-1-12 - Formal contract procedure; maximum without bids. 
(a)	All items, equipment, services and supplies, except as otherwise herein provided, when the cost thereof shall exceed $2,500, shall be purchased by formal, written contract from the lowest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting proposals. 
(b)	Professional services such as medical, architectural, legal, etc., need not be contracted by bidding and may be contracted by negotiation upon approval of the mayor and council. 
(c)	All items, equipment, services and supplies for which there is only a sole source may be contracted by negotiation upon approval of the mayor and council. 
Sec. 3-1-13 - Notice inviting bids. 
Notice inviting bids shall be published once in the official newspaper of the city and at least four (4) days preceding the last day set for the receipt of proposals. 
Sec. 3-1-14 - Scope of notice. 
The required newspaper notice shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold, and shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids. 
Sec. 3-1-15 - Bidder's list. 
The purchasing agent may also solicit bids from all responsible prospective suppliers by sending them a copy of such notice as will acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale. 
Sec. 3-1-16 - Notice on bulletin board in city hall. 
The purchasing agent may also advertise all pending purchases or sales by a notice posted on a public bulletin board in the city hall. 
Sec. 3-1-17 - Bid deposits. 
When deemed necessary by the purchasing agent, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notice inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of any deposit and/or release of any surety where the agent has required such. A successful bidder shall forfeit any deposits and/or require performance of the surety required by the purchasing agent upon failure on his part to enter a contract within 14 days after the award, or such other time as may be designated by the purchasing agent. 
Sec. 3-1-18 - Bid opening procedure. 
Bids shall be submitted sealed to the purchasing agent and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted for public inspection, and a copy furnished to the mayor and council. 
Sec. 3-1-19 - Rejection of bids. 
The purchasing agent shall have the authority to reject all bids, parts of all bids, or all bids for one (1) or more supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when the public interest will be served thereby. 
Sec. 3-1-20 - Lowest responsible bidder. 
Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining "lowest responsible bidder," in addition to price, the purchasing agent shall consider: 
(1)	the ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
(2)	whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(3)	the character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
(4)	the quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
(5)	the previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
(6)	the sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(7)	the quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies, or contractual services to the particular use required; 
(8)	the ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; and 
(9)	the number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
Sec. 3-1-21 - Award to other than low bidder. 
No award shall be given to any bidder other than the lowest bidder without the consent and approval of the mayor and council. 
Sec. 3-1-22 - Tie bids. 
If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to a local bidder. Where no local bidder is involved, the purchasing agent shall award the contract to one of the tie bidders by drawing lots in public. 
Sec. 3-1-23 - Subdividing contracts. 
No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this chapter. 
Sec. 3-1-24 - Sale of city property. 
(a)	When the mayor and council shall determine that it is in the best interest of the city to sell or otherwise dispose of any property belonging to the city, not needed for or unsuited for public use, the mayor and council shall declare such facts, and list or describe the property. All real property to be sold, and all personal property, the estimated resale value of which shall exceed $500, shall be sold at public auction or by formal written contract to the highest responsible bidder, after reasonable notice inviting proposals. 
(b)	Surplus property of the city with an estimated resale value of $500 or less may be sold at the discretion of the purchasing agent by negotiated sale without advertisement and the acceptance of bids. 
State Law reference— Sale of municipal property, O.C.G.A., Sec. 36-37-6. 
CHAPTER 2 - Alcoholic Beverage Excise Taxes 
Cross reference— Regulation of alcoholic beverages, Sec. 9-2-1 et seq.; authority of city to regulate sale of alcoholic beverages, Charter, Sec. 45. 

Sec. 3-2-1 - Malt beverages and wine; rates. 
In addition to the malt beverage and wine retail license fees, there is hereby assessed an excise tax to be imposed upon and paid by the licensed wholesale dealer in malt beverages and wine based on sales, in the following amounts: 
(1)	where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of six dollars ($6.00) on each container sold containing not more than fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons; 
(2)	where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of five cents ($0.05) per twelve (12) ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of twelve (12) ounces; 
(3)	on the first sale or use of wine by the package, a tax of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A., Sec. 3-5-80; wine, O.C.G.A, Sec. 3-6-60. 
Sec. 3-2-2 - Same; reports; remittance. 
(a)	The excise taxes provided for shall be paid by the licensee on or before the 10th day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of within the City. 
(b)	On or before the 10th day of the month, a return for the preceding calendar month shall be filed with the City in such form as the City may prescribe by every licensee liable for the payment of tax hereunder. 
(c)	All returns shall show the gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink, amount of tax collected or authorized due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the City, or his designated representative. 
(d)	The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten (10) percent of the total amount due, plus interest accrued at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum. The City shall issue an execution against the wholesale dealer, firm, or corporation so delinquent on his or its property, for the amount of the excise tax due and delinquent, plus penalty and interest accrued, and shall proceed to collect the delinquency in the same manner as is done in the case of executions issued for collection of City ad valorem property taxes. 
(e)	At any time it is found that false and fraudulent reports have been made by the wholesale dealer, his agents, officers, or employees, and upon which payment of alcoholic beverages excise tax was reported or paid to the City, and at any time the monthly report and payment called for in section 3-2-2(a) and (b) is past due over thirty (30) days, the wholesale dealer shall be given not less than three (3) nor more than ten (10) days' notice of a hearing before the Mayor and council to show cause why his state license to sell alcoholic beverages in the City should not be recommended for suspension or revocation because of such false and fraudulent reports, or non-payment of taxes past due more than thirty (30) days. 
(f)	Wholesalers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for, and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, approved February 20, 1951 (Georgia Laws, p. 360), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 3-2-3 - Distilled spirits excise tax. 
(a)	In addition to the annual retail liquor license fee required, there is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of twenty two cents ($0.22) per liter which shall be paid to the governing authority on all liquors sold, displayed or stored in the City. 
(b)	The excise tax shall be paid to the governing authority by the wholesale distributor on all liquors sold to retailers in the City, as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping, or in any way delivering liquor to any retailer, shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer on or before the 20th day of the month following. The twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter shall be pro-rated down on one-half (½) pints, pints, fifths and half gallons so that each bottle or each individual size container shall be taxed on the basis of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any wholesale distributor to sell, ship or deliver in any manner any liquor to a retailer without having collected the tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any retailer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any liquor on which such tax has not been paid. Each wholesaler shall be paid three (3) percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement of collection of the tax. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78) 
CHAPTER 3 - Property Taxes 
State Law reference— Liens for taxes, priority of liens, O.C.G.A., Sec. 48-2-56; grounds and service of summons of garnishment, entries on execution and return, O.C.G.A., Sec. 48-5-360; time, place and manner of sale of real and personal property for taxes due to municipalities, etc., O.C.G.A., Sec. 48-5-359. 
Cross reference— Interest on delinquent taxes, Charter, Sec. 56; power to fix property taxes, Charter, Sec. 40. 

Sec. 3-3-1 - Property tax rate. 
An annual ad valorem property tax is hereby set and levied upon all personal and real property within the City subject to such taxation under state law. The millage rate therefor shall be established each year by resolution of the Mayor and council. 
Sec. 3-3-2 - Assessment. 
All property subject to the City ad valorem property tax shall be assessed for value at forty (40) percent of its full market value as established by the County for County tax purposes. 
State Law reference— Determination of fair market value for county and municipal ad valorem property taxation purposes, etc., O.C.G.A., Sec. 48-5-352 et seq. 
Sec. 3-3-3 - Maintenance of tax books. 
(a)	When the tax digest is turned over to the Mayor and Council, it shall be turned over to the City Administrator or designee, as ex officio tax collector of the City, who shall make up the digest, calculating the amount of taxes due by each taxpayer. 
(b)	The City Administrator or designee shall open his books for collection of City taxes at a time to be fixed by the Mayor and council. He shall keep receipt books with stubs, and execution books as does the tax collector of the County. He shall give to each taxpayer a receipt for the amount of money paid by him, keeping a duplicate thereof. He shall also prepare and keep a report for council showing taxes collected by him not on the digest. 
(Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 3-3-4 - Date taxes due and payable; interest on delinquent taxes. 
All ad valorem taxes due the City on all property in the City subject to taxation shall be due and payable annually. Any such tax not paid by the later of December 20 or within sixty (60) days of mailing of the tax bill, shall be declared delinquent. Delinquent taxes shall accrue interest at the highest legal rate per annum authorized by state law from December 20 to the date payment is made. 
State Law reference— Rate of interest (one percent (1%) per month) on past due taxes, O.C.G.A., Sec. 48-2-40. 
Sec. 3-3-5 - Executions for unpaid taxes; sales. 
(a)	For any and all unpaid taxes during any year, executions shall be issued against the property and the owners thereof on or after the due date each year of each year for the amount of taxes due, the interest thereon and such fee for the issuance of the execution as provided by law. Such execution shall be issued by the City Administrator or designee and bear teste in the name of the Mayor and shall be levied by the Chief of Police or any other police officer of the City. Such execution shall bind all the property, real and personal, of the defendant; and the costs thereof shall be the same as on tax collector's executions by the laws of this state. 
(b)	The execution shall be levied by the Chief of Police or any other police officer of the City, upon such property as in the discretion of the levying officer may be suitable or available for such purposes, and the same shall be advertised once a week for four (4) weeks next preceding the date of sale in the official organ of Washington County or in a newspaper having general circulation in the City. Sales of such property shall be conducted on the first Tuesday of the month before the door of the City Hall, or in the council chambers, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., and the same shall be conducted by the Chief of Police, or any other police officer. All property shall be sold at public outcry to the highest bidder for cash. The proceeds arising from such sale shall first be applied to the payment of the taxes due, including the interest and costs and expenses of sale, and any surplus remaining shall be paid to the owner of such property, provided that the City may buy any property to be sold under and by virtue of such tax executions. 
(Ord. of 6/21/04) 
State Law reference— Time, place and manner of sale of property for taxes due municipality, O.C.G.A., Sec. 48-5-359; tax executions, O.C.G.A., Sec. 48-3-1 et seq.; tax sales, O.C.G.A., Sec. 48-4-1 et seq. 
Sec. 3-3-6 - Redemption of property by owner. 
Any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon any real property sold under or by virtue of an execution issued for the collection of taxes may redeem such property within one (1) year of the date of sale as provided by state law. 
State Law reference— Redemption of property, O.C.G.A., Sec. 48-4-40 et seq. 
Sec. 3-3-7 - Register of sales. 
The Chief of Police shall keep a register of all sales of real estate in a book provided by him for that purpose, in which he shall enter each tract, lot or parcel of land exposed to sale, the quantity sold, and the amount of taxes and costs for which the same was sold, and the purchaser's name, leaving at the end of each line three (3) columns in blank leaving a sufficient space to insert the name of the person who may redeem such tract, lot or parcel of land, the date of redemption, and the amount of redemption money paid, which book shall be kept in a neat and legible manner, and shall always be open for the inspection of any and all persons interested who shall apply to the Chief of Police for an examination of the same. 
CHAPTER 4 - Occupation Taxes, Administrative Fees and Regulatory Fees 
State Law reference— Liens for taxes, priority of liens, O.C.G.A., Sec. 48-2-56; grounds and service of summons of garnishment, entries on execution and return, O.C.G.A., Sec. 48-5-360; time, place and manner of sale of real and personal property for taxes due to municipalities, etc., O.C.G.A., Sec. 48-5-359. 
Cross reference— Authority of city to impose license fees, Charter, Sec. 42; power to reduce license, Charter, Sec. 46; Mayor and Council may compel registration of business, Charter, Sec. 69; specific business and occupation licenses, Sec. 9-1-1 et seq.; license for itinerant merchants, Sec. 9-4-1 et seq. 

Sec. 3-4-1 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the following meaning: 
(a)	Administrative fee is the component of the occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
(b)	City means the City of Sandersville. 
(c)	Employee is defined as any individual who works forty (40) hours per week and receives a W-2 form from an employer. Part-time employees total hours will be divided by forty (40) to determine the full-time equivalents. 
(d)	Location or office means any structure or vehicle within the City of Sandersville from which business is conducted, but shall not include a work site located in the City for less than six (6) months for the purpose of serving a single customer or project. 
(e)	Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business in the City of Sandersville. 
(f)	Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the City of Sandersville acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
(g)	Practitioners of professions and occupations are those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18), but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax. 
(h)	Regulatory fee means a fee which approximates the cost of regulatory activity by the City. 
(i)	Regulatory fee certificate means a document issued by the City of Sandersville acknowledging payment of a regulatory fee. 
(Ord. of 12/4/95) 
Sec. 3-4-2 - Administrative fee. 
A non-prorated, non-refundable administrative fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal or re-opening of such accounts. 
(Ord. of 12/4/95; Ord. of 12/7/15) 
Sec. 3-4-3 - Regulatory fee. 
(a)	Businesses and individuals engaging in the occupations or businesses set forth in Appendix A must pay a non-refundable regulatory fee in accordance with the rate set forth in Appendix A. 
(b)	Every business, individual and location subject to payment of a regulatory fee levied by this ordinance shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location with the City, the regulatory fee certificate or an unaltered duplicate of such certificate shall be shown to any police officer or City Administrator or designee upon request. 
(Ord. of 12/4/95; Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Note— Appendix A is set out in its entirety at the end of this chapter. 
Sec. 3-4-4 - Occupation tax levied; limitations. 
(a)	An occupation tax based upon number of employees in the State of Georgia is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one (1) or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the City and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-7, upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the City but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the State of Georgia in accordance with the following schedule: 

 
(b)	The City shall not require the payment of more than one (1) occupation tax for each location of a business or practitioner. 
(c)	A business or practitioner which is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this chapter shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax. 
(1)	If a business or practitioner with no location or office in Georgia provides to the City proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
(2)	A business or practitioner with no location or office in Georgia shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in Georgia where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the City satisfactory proof of as to the applicability of this subsection. 
(3)	A business or practitioner which has locations in Georgia subject to occupation tax by more than one (1) local government in Georgia shall only be subject to occupation tax by the City of Sandersville for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits of the City. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the City satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local government(s). 
(4)	If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one (1) municipal corporation or county and the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the City only if the City is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
(d)	If a business or practitioner commences business in the City on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be fifty (50) percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
(e)	If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees which are the basis of this occupation tax will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, then the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees which are the basis of this occupation tax. If such estimate is not accurate, then no later then December 31 the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the City for any reason or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the City Administrator or designee. 
(f)	Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this ordinance only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the City. 
(Ord. of 12/4/95; Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 3-4-5 - Occupation tax certificate. 
Every business, practitioner and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by this ordinance shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the City, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer upon request. 
(Ord. of 12/4/95) 
Sec. 3-4-6 - Practitioners of professions and occupations. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations as defined in this chapter shall pay the occupation tax as set forth in subsection 3-4-4(a) above or shall pay an occupation tax of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per practitioner. On the tax return for 1995 or such later time as the practitioner first commences business in the City, the practitioner shall elect a method of taxation. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the practitioner on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Ord. of 12/4/95) 
Sec. 3-4-7 - Exemptions. 
(a)	No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)	Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)	Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(3)	Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia; 
(4)	Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(5)	Non-profit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 2-10-105; 
(6)	Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 46-7-15; 
(7)	Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 48-5-355; 
(8)	Pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the City agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within ninety (90) days of the introduction of the product into the City; 
(9)	Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 48-6-93; or 
(10)	Any state or local authority or non-profit organization. 
(11)	Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(b)	The exemptions and limitations contained in this section shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 12/4/95) 
Sec. 3-4-8 - Evidence of state registration when required. 
Each person who is licensed under Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated by the Examining Boards of the Secretary of State's Office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any City occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(Ord. of 12/4/95) 
Sec. 3-4-9 - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)	Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate or a regulatory fee certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)	Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Ord. of 12/4/95) 
Sec. 3-4-10 - Filing returns; other information required or requested. 
(a)	On or before Jan. 1 of each year, an individual, business or practitioner subject to this occupation tax ordinance shall file with the City Administrator or designee on a form approved by and available from the City a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such business or practitioner during the calendar year. 
(b)	Individuals, businesses and practitioners doing business in the City shall submit to the City Administrator or designee or make available within thirty (30) days such information as may be required or requested by the City to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or regulatory fee or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax and/or regulatory fee(s). 
(Ord. of 12/4/95; Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 3-4-11 - Confidentiality. 
Information provided by a business or practitioner to the City for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or levying or collecting the occupation tax is confidential and exempt from disclosure under Article 4 of Chapter 18 of Title 50 of the Official Code of Georgia. Such information may be provided to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 12/4/95) 
Sec. 3-4-12 - Date due; penalty. 
(a)	Any occupation tax or regulatory fee due pursuant to this chapter shall be due and payable annually on January 1. In the event that any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the City after January 1 in any year, the tax and/or fee shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business and regulated activity. 
(b)	Any individual, business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this chapter which is unpaid for ninety (90) days after the date on which payment was due shall be subject to a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax or fee due. 
(Ord. of 12/4/95) 
Sec. 3-4-13 - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)	It is the duty of the City Administrator or designee to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this chapter and to summon violators of this chapter to appear before the municipal court. The City Administrator or designee may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. 
(b)	The City Administrator or designee shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. Section 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, one (1) percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax or regulatory fee became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by City Administrator or designee of the City upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the City and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the Code and Charter of the City and the laws of Georgia. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the City and the laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. 
(c)	When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charged whatever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
(d)	Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax or regulatory fee charged pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or six (6) months in jail. 
(e)	Individuals, business and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the City requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax or regulatory fee, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be subject to suspension of the right to conduct business. 
(f)	All persons subject to the occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this chapter shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining such person business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain make a return for or pay the applicable occupation tax or regulatory fee. 
(Ord. of 12/4/95; Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 3-4-14 - Public hearing. 
After January 1, 1996, the City shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the occupation tax rate specified in section 3-4-4. 
(Ord. of 12/4/95) 
Sec. 3-4-15 - Prior ordinance. 
To the extent that any occupation taxes or regulatory fees are owed pursuant to an ordinance passed prior to this one, such amounts remain due and owing and the provisions of that prior ordinance will remain in effect with respect to such unpaid occupation taxes or regulatory fees until such time as they are paid in full. 
(Ord. of 12/4/95) 
Sec. 3-4-16 - Severability. 
In the event any portion of this chapter shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, it is the intention of the City Council of the City of Sandersville that such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12/4/95) 
APPENDIX A 
(1)	Carnivals; $165.00 Per Week 
(2)	Taxicab and limousine operators; $30.00 per vehicle 
(3)	Scrap metal processors; $50.00 
(4)	Pawnbrokers; $110.00 
(5)	Dealers in precious metals; $50.00 
(6)	Peddlers; $50.00 per day; $500.00 yr. 
(7)	Fortunetellers; $350.00 
(Ord. of 12/4/95) 
CHAPTER 5 - Electric Suppliers 

Sec. 3-5-1 - Gross receipts business tax established; verified statement of revenues to be filed. 
Each electric supplier (including specifically electric membership corporations whether or not operated for profit), within the meaning of O.C.G.A. Section 46-3-1, et seq., distributing and selling electric power within the City which is not otherwise paying a franchise fee pursuant to a franchise agreement, and whether or not said electric supplier has, operates and maintains offices within the City shall pay a gross receipts tax at the rate of four (4) percent on any and all gross revenue derived from distribution and sale of electric power to their customers, members or purchasers within the City, according to the verified statement of said gross revenues which shall be submitted by said electric supplier at the time said taxes are paid. This gross receipts business tax is levied pursuant to authority granted the City in Ga. L. 1941, p. 1712 and 1713, Section 42. 
(Ord. of 10/7/96, Sec. 1; Ord. of 12/16/96, Sec. 1) 
Sec. 3-5-2 - Taxes payable monthly; taxes to be in lieu of certain other taxes. 
The taxes hereinabove set out in this chapter, shall be due and payable to the City on a quarterly basis with a tax payment due on January 15 following the prior quarter, with a quarter consisting of Oct., Nov. and Dec., and the next payment being due on April 15 with said April payment being due for Jan., Feb. and March. The next payment will be due on July 15 for revenues due for April, May and June and the fourth installment being due on October 15 for the revenues for July, Aug. and Sept. The first installment under this chapter will be due on the 15th day of the month of the calendar quarter after the passage of said chapter. Said taxes shall be calculated on gross revenues billed for the immediately preceding quarter as defined herein; also, the percentage of gross revenues hereinabove prescribed to be collected shall be in lieu of all other license and business or occupation taxes, but shall not at any time be considered to interfere with, or in any way prevent the collection of ad valorem taxes upon the property of said electric supplier in the same manner as all other property, real and personal, in the City is taxed. 
(Ord. of 10/7/96) 
Sec. 3-5-3 - Electric service within the city. 
Electric suppliers distributing and selling electric power within the City, and which do not have a franchise agreement with the City, do not acquire any additional rights by the payment of the tax herein levied under this chapter other than those rights granted under the Georgia Electric Territorial Service Act. 
(Ord. of 10/7/96) 
Sec. 3-5-4 - Enforcement and administration. 
(a)	The City Administrator or designee shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter, and shall have the power to prepare and provide the necessary forms and for the collection of the tax herein levied. 
(b)	The City Administrator or designee shall issue executions for the collection of all outstanding and unpaid taxes imposes and assessed by this chapter. The unpaid taxes and executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes due the City. 
(Ord. of 10/7/96; Ord. of 6/21/04) 
CHAPTER 6 - Excise Tax on Hotel/Motel Rooms, Lodgings and Accommodations[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, adopted December 19, 2016, in effect, repealed ch. 6. §§ 3-6-1—3-6-17 and enacted a new ch. 6 as set out herein. Former ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Ord. of 5/20/02; the Ord. of 6/21/04; and Ord. of 8/16/11. 

Sec. 3-6-1 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
Due Date: The twentieth (20 th ) day after the end of monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Estimated Tax Liability. The operator's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio means the primary documentation produced by a hotel or other facility that demonstrates interaction between the operator or operator and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax(es), and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest Room. A room or rooms occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one (1) or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel/Motel/Cabin/Residence/Lodge. Any structure or any portion of a structure including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, studio, hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, lodge, auto or trailer court, truck stop, tourist camp, tourist cabin, rental cabin, campground, timeshare, or other condominium apartment community, public or private club containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. Such term does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention center, or other facility in which human beings are housed and detained under legal constraint. 
Monthly Period means a calendar month. 
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel or motel, or the right to use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or apartment. 
Occupant or Guest. Any person (or persons utilizing as a single unit) who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess, any room in a hotel or motel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement or otherwise. 
Operator/Innkeeper/Operator. Any person operating a hotel/motel (as set out herein) in the City including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sub lessee, lender in possession, licensee, online travel companies, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel/motel, including private owners who rent or lease private residences for more than two (2) days in any one (1) year, and who is subject to the taxation imposed for the value to the public any rooms, lodgings or accommodations. 
Permanent Resident. Any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days. 
Person. Any individual, firm partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust receiver, trustee, syndicate, business entity, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, to include the plural as well as the singular number, excepting, however, the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the City is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Rent. The consideration or value received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of all kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction there-from whatsoever. 
Return. Any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided by O.C.G.A. 48-13-51, et seq., specifically 48-13-51(a) (3). 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 12/19/16) 
Sec. 3-6-2 - Imposition and rate of taxation. 
There is hereby levied and imposed, and there shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the City, a tax at the rate of five (5) percent of the amount of rent; provided that levy and collection of that portion of such tax amounting to two (2) percent of the rent which is required to be expended for the purpose of promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows, or for other purposes provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3), shall be suspended during periods of time during which the City has no contract for the expenditure of such funds with the state, a department of the state government, a state authority, or a private sector nonprofit organization, or a contract with some combination of such entities. Written notice of the dates of the beginning and end of such periods of suspension shall be given to each operator of a hotel in the City on or before the date immediately preceding the date each period begins and ends by the city clerk or his or her designee. Such notice shall be deemed sufficient if delivered to any person authorized to collect rent for the operator of the hotel to whom notice is required to be given. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 12/19/16) 
Sec. 3-6-3 - Commencement/effective date of ordinance. 
The tax herein imposed shall be paid upon any occupancy occurring on or after April 1, 2017, including, but not limited to such occupancy that was entered into pursuant to a contract, lease or other agreement entered into prior to such date. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 12/19/16) 
Sec. 3-6-4 - Exemption from tax. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no tax shall be collected from an occupant upon the fees charged for any rooms, lodging, or accommodations: 
(a)	Furnished to the occupant for use as meeting rooms; 
(b)	For the use of any jail cell, detention center or other building where such housing or detention is under legal restraint. 
(c)	For the use of any hospital medical treatment facility. 
(d)	From the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; 
(e)	From any official or employee of the State of Georgia, its units of local government or any instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; 
(f)	From a foreign sovereign enjoying exemption by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State; 
(g)	For any room, lodging or accommodations furnished for a period of one (1) or more days to local government employee or officials when traveling on official business. 
(h)	For rentals over thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(i)	From an occupant who certifies in writing that they are staying in such room, lodging, or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty or natural disaster. 
(j)	After the occupant has become a permanent resident of the hotel; 
(k)	When occupancy is provided without charge in money or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 12/19/16) 
Sec. 3-6-5 - Collection of tax by operator. 
It shall be the duty of every operator providing lodging accommodations within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City to collect the tax on occupants as imposed herein. Every operator furnishing guest rooms in a hotel within the City shall collect a tax of five percent (5%) on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under section 3-6-4. The operator shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the operator at the same time that the rent is collected. The operator shall be liable to the City for the full amount received or collected as tax, whether collected appropriately or inappropriately; and for any amount of tax that should have been collected, but was not. 
Any person who receives or collects the tax, or any consideration represented to be the tax, from another person holds the amount so collected in trust for the benefit of the City and is liable to the City for the full amount collected, plus penalty and interest. 
An individual who controls or supervises the collection of the tax from another person, or an individual who controls the accounting for or remittance of the tax, and who willfully fails to remit or cause the tax to be remitted, is liable as a responsible individual for an amount equal to the tax not remitted or caused to be remitted, plus penalty and interest. The dissolution of a corporation, partnership or other business or fraternal association does not affect a responsible individual's liability under this subsection. Furthermore, the liability imposed by this subsection shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 12/19/16) 
Sec. 3-6-6 - Registration of lodging operator. 
Every person engaging in or about to engage in the business of providing lodging accommodations, as above defined, in the special district shall immediately register said business with the city clerk's office, as the duly authorized representative of the City, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, on a form provided by the city clerk for such purpose. Persons engaged in such business must so register no later than thirty (30) days after the date this section becomes effective, but such grace period for the filing of the registration after the effective date of the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of such tax on and after the date of imposition thereof. 
(a)	The required registration hereunder shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business; the location of the place or places of business, the mailing address of the business, the principal contact person at said business and such other information as would facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(b)	The registration shall be signed by the owner (if a natural person), by an officer (if a corporation) or a partner (if a partnership). 
(c)	A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. However, a realtor offering cabins for rent shall be deemed to be one (1) place of business and shall not require a separate registration for each cabin rented. 
(d)	An operator offering more than one (1) cabin or unit for rent under the same federal and state tax identification number shall be required to file the same number of returns as required by the State of Georgia for the filing of state sales tax returns. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 12/19/16) 
Sec. 3-6-7 - Certificate of taxing authority. 
Upon the registration of a lodging operator as herein above provided, the city clerk shall issue to such lodging operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax on the occupants. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business or person to which it is applicable. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business or person to which it relates. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Such certificates shall be non-assignable and nontransferable, and shall be returned immediately to the city clerk upon cessation of business by the registered operator at the location name, or upon sale or transfer of such business at such location. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 12/19/16) 
Sec. 3-6-8 - Due date and required report. 
All taxes levied by this chapter shall be due and payable to the City monthly, on or before the twentieth (20 th ) day of every month following each monthly period in which taxes are collected. A return for the preceding monthly period, together with the appropriate remittance, shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk or governing authority of the City. 
In the event that an operator is permitted under applicable state guidelines to make quarterly sales tax returns to the State of Georgia, said operator shall be permitted to make quarterly sales tax returns to the City. At the time of registration, the operator shall indicate that he is permitted to make quarterly sales tax returns together with month and day said quarterly returns are due. The failure of the operator to indicate that he is permitted under applicable state statute to file quarterly reports will infer that monthly reports are due and collectable. 
At the time any such report is due, the operator shall file a copy of the corresponding state sales tax return for the sole purpose of verifying the sums reported and due. 
In the event an operator is permitted under applicable state guidelines to file annual excise, or lodging tax returns, to the State of Georgia, said operator is required to file monthly or quarterly returns for lodging tax to the City. 
In the event there are no rentals in a reporting period, operators are required to file a return to the City stating they had zero rentals for the period. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 12/19/16) 
Sec. 3-6-9 - Deposit to hotel/motel tax fund. 
No later than the twenty-fifth (25 th ) day of each month, such excise taxes as have been paid under the provisions of this ordinance shall be deposited to the City's Hotel/Motel Tax Fund and the statute-required portion of such funds shall thereafter at the direction of the city council be expended for the promotion of the tourism industry in Sandersville, Georgia; or, such funds may at the direction of the City Council, otherwise be expended for the purpose of promoting tourism, conventions and trade shows as provided by statute. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 12/19/16) 
Sec. 3-6-10 - Collection fee allowed operators. 
Operators collecting the tax levied hereunder shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for, and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and payment of the amount due. The rate of the deduction shall be three (3) percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. If the amount due was delinquent at the time of payment, no deduction shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 12/19/16) 
Sec. 3-6-11 - Penalty and interest. 
Penalty for failure to pay tax. An operator who fails to pay the amount of tax as prescribed when due shall pay a penalty from and after the 20 th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount should have been returned until the date of payment of such tax and interest. The penalty shall be added to the tax in the amount of five percent (5%) of the amount due plus interest on the total amount of delinquent taxes at the rate of one percent (1%) per annum. In addition, the operator shall not be entitled to the fee allowed in Section 3-6-10 this chapter. The late penalty will be strictly enforced. 
Penalty for failure to file a return. 
(a)	If any operator fails to file a return as required under the provisions of this section, the City shall make an estimate of the amount of gross rentals which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in which the operator failed to file the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the City. 
(b)	The city clerk shall give to the operator written notice of determination as herein provided. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the operator at his/her/its last known address as it appears on any of the City records. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(c)	The amount of the determination made hereunder shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths (¾) of one (1) percent per month, or a fraction thereof, from the twentieth day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the day of payment. 
(d)	In addition, a penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax due or five dollars ($5.00) whichever is greater for each 30 days or fraction thereof of delinquency, not to exceed twenty five percent (25%) or twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in the aggregate, whichever is greater, shall be assessed and paid by the operator to the City. 
(e)	The estimated tax together with applicable penalties and interest may be collected utilizing any of the enforcement methods set forth in this chapter. 
Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the City by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten (10) days of the due date, such return may be accepted. 
Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and O.C.G.A. § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the City shall stand in lieu of the State. 
Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return and where willful intent exists to defraud the City of any tax due, a penalty of fifty (50) percent of the amount due shall be assessed. 
Extension of time for making returns. The governing authority of the City may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than thirty (30) days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the operator. Such grant may not be applicable for longer than twelve (12) consecutive months. An operator granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than one hundred (100) percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten (10) days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one (1) percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 12/19/16) 
Sec. 3-6-12 - Records required from operators. 
Each operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this section shall keep for a minimum period of three (3) years all records, folios, receipts, invoices, certificates of exemption and such other documents and other pertinent papers setting forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the City may, in writing, from time to time require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination by officers of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 12/19/16) 
Sec. 3-6-13 - Administration of this chapter. 
The city clerk, under the supervision of the city administrator, shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter for the levy and collection of the tax herein imposed and, in so doing shall have the following authority: 
(a)	To examine, or authorize the examination of, books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any operator subject to this resolution, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(b)	To require the filing of reports by any person or persons having in their possession or custody information relating to rentals which are subject to the tax herein levied; and, 
(c)	To allow a credit on any amount due payable from persons who paid the tax herein levied but who were erroneously or illegally subjected thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 12/19/16) 
Sec. 3-6-14 - Legal obligation of the ordinance. 
(1)	At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any portion of such tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, the city attorney at the direction of the city council may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the City to collect such amount due together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(2)	If any operator becomes liable for any amount required to be paid by this section and subsequent thereto sells or quits the business, the successors or assignees of such operator shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount due. In the event said purchaser of the business fails to withhold the required amount, he/she/it shall become personally liable for the extent of the tax owed, together with any applicable penalties and interest. Any operator or person who ceases to operate the entity under which the same is registered with the City, said operator or person must notify the city clerk in writing within thirty (30) days of closing said enterprise. 
(3)	(a)	Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this chapter or who shall fail to do anything required by this resolution shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the magistrate court of the city and upon conviction, shall be assessed with any penalty, including fine, confinement, or both, allowed by law for the violation of City ordinances each and every day that such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)	In order to enforce this chapter or to correct or abate any violation of the chapter, the city council, in addition to other remedies may institute an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 12/19/16) 
Sec. 3-6-15 - Severability clause and repealer. 
(a)	If any paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or any portion of this ordinance shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, or if the provisions of any part of this chapter as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of this chapter not so held to be invalid, or the application of this chapter to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the city council to provide separable and divisible parts, and it does hereby adopt any and all parts hereof as may not be held invalid for any reason. 
(b)	All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the terms of this ordinance are hereby repealed, but it is hereby provided that any ordinance or law which may be applicable hereto and aid in carrying out or making effective the intent, purpose and provisions hereof, which shall be literally construed to be in favor of the city is hereby adopted as part hereof. 
(c)	The effective date of this Resolution shall be the first (1 st ) day of March, 2017. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 12/19/16) 
Sec. 3-6-16 - Fees. 
In order to comply with the mandates of the applicable laws of the State of Georgia, an administrative fee is hereby implemented on any business or person under the purview of the within ordinance. Said administrative fee shall be in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) payable annually. Said administrative fee shall be remitted to the city clerk before the 1 st day of January of each year that this ordinance is in effect. The administrative fee after January 1 will be seventy five dollars ($75.00). The city clerk, or designated representative, shall issue a lodging certificate to said enterprise paying said administrative fee. 
Sec. 3-6-17 - Publication, notice and hearing. 
Adopted, after publication, notice and hearing on the 19 th day of December, 2016 by majority vote of council on two (2) separate reading: 
First Reading: November 21, 2016. 
Second Reading: December 19, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 12/19/16) 
TITLE 4 - Public Safety 
CHAPTER 1 - Law Enforcement 
State Law reference— Powers of city concerning police protection, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III; peace officers' standards and training, O.C.G.A., Sec. 35-8-1 et seq.; compensation of officers restricted, O.C.G.A., Sec. 36-30-9; tort liability of officers, O.C.G.A., Sec. 36-33-3; obstructing or hindering law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A., Sec. 16-10-24; subsistence allowance, O.C.G.A., Sec. 35-1-3. 
Cross reference— Appointment of special police officers, Charter, Sec. 29; duty of police officers to preserve peace, Charter, Sec. 37; duties of police chief, Charter, Sec. 33; authority of mayor and council to regulate police force, Charter, Sec. 38; duty of police to enforce state law, Charter, Sec. 39. 

Sec. 4-1-1 - Composition. 
(a)	The police department shall consist of the chief of police and such other officers and personnel as the mayor and council shall prescribe. 
(b)	The mayor and council shall elect one chief of police, one assistant chief of police, and as many additional police officers as in the judgment of mayor and council is proper and necessary. The salaries of these various officers shall be such as is fixed by the mayor and council by ordinance. All police officers shall be uniformed as the city council may, by committee or otherwise, direct. 
Sec. 4-1-2 - Duties. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the police officers to preserve order in the city; to suppress riots, to arrest all drunk and disorderly persons and commit them to the city or county jail, or bring them before the municipal court to be dealt with as the evidence warrants; to arrest, with or without a warrant, all persons who have committed breaches of the criminal law of the city while in the city limits; to arrest persons guilty of offenses against the criminal laws of the city who are charged by warrant with criminal infractions; to patrol the city; to disperse illegal assemblages; and generally to obey all commands issued to them by the mayor and council through the laws, ordinances and charter of the city. 
(b)	The chief of police and police officers of the city shall serve all notices, summons, subpoenas, orders, processes of any kind and execute all warrants issued by city authorities. 
(c)	The police chief or assistant police chief shall attend all meetings of the mayor and council and all sessions of municipal court, to preserve order. 
(Code 1941, Secs. 150, 152, 156) 
Sec. 4-1-3 - Absence of police chief. 
In the absence, disability, or disqualification of the police chief, the assistant police chief shall perform his duties; in case of absence, disability or disqualification of both the police chief and assistant police chief, any police officer of the city designated by the mayor shall perform his duties. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 157) 
Sec. 4-1-4 - Conduct generally. 
(a)	All police officers shall be polite and attentive to members of the public and one another. 
(b)	No police officer shall use vulgar, obscene or profane language while on duty. 
(c)	No police officer shall report for or be on duty while under the influence of drugs or alcohol. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 309) 
Sec. 4-1-5 - Uniform. 
All police officers shall be in full uniform while on duty, unless the officer's supervisor otherwise directs. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 309) 
Sec. 4-1-6 - Off duty officers; weapons. 
Police officers may carry their badges and weapons while off duty or on suspension. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 309) 
Sec. 4-1-7 - Attendance. 
All police officers must report for duty on time. Tardiness of 30 minutes will constitute failure to report. Failure to report may be punishable by suspension. Repeated offenses will be cause for dismissal. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 309) 
Sec. 4-1-8 - Acceptance of rewards and gifts. 
Police officers shall not, directly or indirectly, accept from any person either liable to arrest, or complaint, or in custody, or after he has been discharged, or from any family members or friends of such person, any reward or gift. 
Sec. 4-1-9 - Leaving post while on duty; sleeping on duty. 
(a)	Police officers shall not leave their beat or post except for some police or personal necessity, and in such case shall notify the officer in charge of their whereabouts, giving the reason for leaving, and shall return as soon as possible. 
(b)	Police officers shall not sleep on duty. 
(Code 1941, Secs. 309, 310) 
CHAPTER 2 - Fire Prevention and Protection 
State Law reference— Powers concerning fire protection, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III; powers of local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A., Sec. 25-3-1 et seq.; fire fighters' standards and training, O.C.G.A., Sec. 25-4-1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Authority of mayor and council to establish fire department, Charter, Sec. 66; powers of mayor and council concerning fire prevention, Charter, Sec. 65. 
ARTICLE A - Fire Department 

Sec. 4-2-1 - Establishment. 
A volunteer fire department, which shall be known as the Sandersville Fire Department, is hereby established. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 230) 
Sec. 4-2-2 - Composition. 
The fire department shall be composed of such number of teams as deemed necessary from time to time by the mayor and council. Each team shall be headed by a lieutenant who shall be subject to the control and direction of the fire chief. 
Sec. 4-2-3 - Fire chief; selection; duties. 
(a)	The chief of the department shall be appointed by the mayor and council. 
(b)	The chief shall have full authority and power to control and manage all three (3) companies; and each and every member thereof in case of fire or other cause of the department as may seem best to him; it shall be his duty to personally direct the movements of the department during fires or whenever the department is called out. He shall see that the companies keep all hose and reels entrusted to them in proper condition. It shall be his duty to do all things imposed on him by state law, local ordinance or directive of the mayor and council. 
Sec. 4-2-4 - Firefighters; selection. 
(a)	The members of the fire department shall be appointed by the mayor and council upon written application to city council; when a member is elected he shall be assigned to one of the three companies. The members shall receive only such compensation as the mayor and council grants. 
(b)	The captain and foreperson of each company shall be appointed by the mayor and council upon nomination of the chief of the department. 
Historical Note: Subsec. (b) is derived from Code 1941, Sec. 234. 
Sec. 4-2-5 - Establishment of rules. 
The rules and by-laws of the department shall be drawn up by the ordinance committee and approved by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 4-2-6 - Fire department property; storage. 
All hose, reels, and other property shall be kept in a building known as the fire department building. 
Sec. 4-2-7 - Obstructing fire department. 
Any person who shall be guilty of willfully interfering with, or in any way, obstructing or hindering any member when on duty or called out for drills shall be punished as prescribed in the code. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 291) 
Sec. 4-2-8 - Workers' compensation coverage. 
All volunteer firefighters performing volunteer firefighter services rendered to and on behalf of the city shall be included under the definition of "employee" for workers' compensation purposes and will be classed as municipal employees to the extent of any accidents which occur to any such firefighters while engaged in firefighting activities on behalf of the city. 
Secs. 4-2-9—4-2-20 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B - Fire Prevention Code and Safety Standards 

Sec. 4-2-21 - Fire prevention code; adoption. 
(a)	There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the Standard Fire Prevention Code, as recommended by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., being particularly the 1988 edition thereof, with all subsequent revisions and updated editions thereto, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, a copy of which code is filed in the office of the city clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city; provided, however, that should any provisions of the fire prevention code as adopted hereby be in conflict with any other provisions of this code of ordinances, the provisions of this code of ordinances shall prevail and be controlling. 
(b)	Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the code hereby adopted, it shall be held to mean the City of Sandersville. 
(Ord. of 6/6/88) 
Sec. 4-2-22 - Enforcement of code; modification of code. 
(a)	The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department. 
(b)	The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent. In any modification, the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(c)	Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the city council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Ord. of 5/20/69, Secs. II, IV, V) 
Sec. 4-2-23 - Violation of fire code; penalty. 
(a)	Any person who: 
(1)	violates any of the provisions of the code or fails to comply with the code; 
(2)	violates or fails to comply with any order made pursuant to the code; 
(3)	builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved or in violation of a certificate or permit issued where an appeal was not taken; or 
(4)	fails to comply with an order as affirmed or modified by the city or by a court of competent jurisdiction; 
shall be guilty of an offense. 
(b)	The offense is punishable as provided in section 1-1-8 of this code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each 10 days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)	The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
Sec. 4-2-24 - Removal of fire hazards. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to put in, install or maintain in any building in the city, electrical works, electrical wiring, or electrical apparatus of any other kind that is not approved by the fire prevention code adopted in section 4-2-21 or to make such installation in a different manner from that approved by the code. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the building inspector to inspect all such work and wiring before the current is turned on, and to make a report to the mayor of any defective work, apparatus or fittings, stating wherein they are defective and deficient. 
(c)	The mayor shall cause to be served upon the owner of a defective building or apparatus a notice to be at the next meeting of city council, to which notice a copy of the building inspector's report shall be attached, requiring such person to show cause why the defective condition or apparatus or wiring should not be removed. 
(d)	If no good cause is shown to the contrary, it shall be the duty of the police of the city to remove defective work, wires or fittings under direction of the building inspector at cost of the owner to be collected as provided in the laws of the city for removing obstructions from the streets. 
CHAPTER 3 - Emergency Management 
State Law reference— Emergency management responsibilities of local governments, O.C.G.A., Sec. 38-3-37. 

Sec. 4-3-1 - Definition; participation in county-wide system. 
(a)	As used in this chapter the term "emergency management" shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than the functions for which the state and federal governments are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by enemy nuclear attack, sabotage, or other hostile causes. These functions include, without limitations, fire-fighting services, law enforcement services, medical and health services, rescue services, engineering services, warning services, communications, defense from radiological fallout, welfare services, evacuation when and where necessary, emergency transportation, plant and utility protection, restoration of public utility services, and other functions relative to the protection and well-being of the population of the city, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to preparation for and the carrying out of the above functions. 
(b)	The city hereby elects to participate in the county emergency management system and plan. 
Sec. 4-3-2 - Liaison to county director. 
The fire chief shall serve as liaison between the city and the county emergency management organization. 
Sec. 4-3-3 - Emergency powers. 
In the event of an actual enemy attach upon the United States or any other disaster which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of Sandersville, the mayor, or in his absence, his legally appointed successor, may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues, the following emergency powers: 
(1)	To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management forces. 
(2)	To seize, take for temporary use, or condemn any property for the protection of the public. 
(3)	To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the city, to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies. 
(4)	To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. of 8/9/71, Sec. III) 
Sec. 4-3-4 - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Ord. of 8/9/71, Sec. IV) 
Sec. 4-3-5 - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-1-8. 
(Ord. of 8/9/71, Sec. V) 
Sec. 4-3-6 - Liberality of construction. 
This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purposes. 
(Ord. of 8/9/71, Sec. VI) 
CHAPTER 4 - National Incident Management System (NIMS) 

Sec. 4-4-1. - Adopted. 
The City of Sandersville hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established under HSPD 5 and the Unified Command System as established under O.C.G.A. 38-3-57 as its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents and directs all incident managers and response organizations in the City of Sandersville train and exercise and use these systems in their response operations. 
(Ord. of 10-4-2005) 
CHAPTER 5 - Washington County Joint Pre-Disaster Mitigation Plan 

Sec. 4-5-1. - Adopted. 
The Washington County Joint Pre-Disaster Mitigation Plan is hereby adopted as the official plan of the City of Sandersville. 
The respective officials identified in the strategy of the plan are hereby directed to implement the recommended actions assigned to them in the plan. These officials will report as directed in this plan on their activities. 
The Washington County Joint Pre-Disaster Mitigation Planning Committee will provide progress reports (as directed in the plan) on the status of the implementation of the plan to the mayor and city council. 
(Res. of 12-5-2005) 
TITLE 5 - Public Works 
CHAPTER 1 - Streets and Sidewalks 
State Law reference— Constitutional powers regarding streets, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); authority of municipality to own, operate and maintain streets; O.C.G.A., § 36-34-3; street obstructions, O.C.G.A., § 36-30-10; municipal street administration, O.C.G.A., § 32-4-90 et seq.; assessments for improvements, O.C.G.A., Title 36, Ch. 39. 
Cross reference— Regulation of sidewalks and crosswalks, Charter, § 64; removal of obstruction from streets and sidewalks, Charter, § 67; authority of Mayor and Council over streets and sidewalks, Charter, § 74. 

Sec. 5-1-1 - Dedication of streets and sidewalk. 
No dedication to the City by any owner of property to be used as a street, alley or other public use shall be valid until the same shall have been accepted in writing by the governing body. The street superintendent shall be charged with the responsibility of inspecting streets that are to be offered for dedication to the City to insure that the streets meet current City specifications before acceptance. 
Sec. 5-1-2 - Maintenance of streets and sidewalks. 
The Mayor and Council shall provide for the maintenance of streets and sidewalks of the City, by contract or otherwise. The street committee shall see that the rules, regulations and laws and ordinances of the City are observed and enforced and that the bridges are kept in proper condition. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 200) 
Sec. 5-1-3 - Obstruction of streets. 
(a)	No person shall be allowed to maintain any fence, railing, steps, portico or other obstruction beyond the line of his lot and thus encroach upon any street, alley or sidewalk of the City, nor shall any gate be permitted to open outward, so that it will obstruct any street, alley or sidewalk. 
(b)	If any person has erected or is erecting such encroachment in violation of subsection (a), he shall be notified to remove the same and upon failure to comply with such notice within twenty-four (24) hours after service of notice by the Chief of Police, the Chief of Police shall remove the same, and cost of removal shall be collected by issuance by the City Administrator or designee of an execution, which shall be collected in the same manner that executions for taxes are collected. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 203; Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 5-1-4 - Obstruction of sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any merchant or other person to have, place or keep upon the streets or sidewalks of the City any goods, wares of merchandise, or other obstruction of any kind; provided that the merchants and others shall be allowed to temporarily use streets and sidewalks while loading or unloading goods, wares of merchandise, and that attended vehicles only may be left upon the streets while loading or unloading merchandise. 
Sec. 5-1-5 - Sidewalks, cleanliness responsibility of abutting property owners, enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of all occupants of improved property and owners of vacant property, in front of which the sidewalks have been paved, to keep such sidewalks clean, and to do such sweeping and scraping as may be necessary to remove clay, dirt and trash therefrom, and to render the same passable, comfortable and sightly. In addition, it shall be the duty of the street superintendent, after five (5) days' written notice to any such person of the necessity for cleaning such sidewalk, to have done such work as may be necessary to render such walk clean and to render a bill covering the cost of such cleaning to the owner or agent of such property in person, or if such person or agent is a nonresident, then by mail. Upon the nonpayment of such bill within ten (10) days after service of same as aforesaid, the City Administrator or designee shall issue an execution therefor against the owner of the abutting property, and such execution shall be a lien upon such property and shall be collected as other executions issued by the City. 
(Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 5-1-6 - Permit to dig in streets. 
No person, firm or corporation shall make any excavations or openings or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles or for any other purposes, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the City Administrator or designee. A permit shall not be required where the work is performed under a contract with the City but in the event that work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the City Administrator or designee and the police department at least two (2) hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 5-1-7 - Same; application for permit. 
All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street or sidewalk, as set forth in § 5-1-6, shall make written application therefor, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. 
Sec. 5-1-8 - Same; city indemnified. 
Any person, firm or corporation obtaining a permit as provided for in §§ 5-1-6 and 5-1-7 agrees, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, to indemnify and hold harmless the City against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees, for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's operations. 
Sec. 5-1-9 - Street repair. 
When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the City shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person, firm or corporation making that excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening. Any person, firm or corporation, neglecting, refusing or failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof; and where any neglect, refusal or failure is continued, after notice from the City Administrator or designee, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 5-1-10 - Excavations; leaving unprotected. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who obtains a permit under the sections of this chapter to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the City without placing and maintaining proper guard rails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the work, sufficient to warn the public of any excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reason-able care from injuries on account of work. 
Sec. 5-1-11 - Planting of shade trees. 
All persons who plant shade trees on the sidewalks of the City shall plant them in line with other trees on the sidewalk; failure to do so shall be a violation of this section and the trees shall be removed at cost of the person who violated this section, to be collected as taxes are collected. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 205) 
Sec. 5-1-12 - Structure numbering. 
Whereas, the City of Sandersville has implemented an enhanced 911 system so as to reduce response time of emergency as well as law enforcement vehicles in the City of Sandersville; and 
A citywide system of structure numbering is necessary for the implementation of the E911, it is hereby ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City of Sandersville, Georgia and by its authority thereof, that the owners of any and all businesses and residences in the City will cause to be posted on said residence, business or structure at a minimum of two (2) locations, numbers at least three (3) inches high, indicating each business, residence and structure by its assigned 911 street address number. 
(a)	It is hereby specified that the numbers shall be placed on the structure itself, on the side visible to the driveway or street so that numbers can be clearly visible. 
(b)	All owners of businesses, residences or structures, shall place numbers on their mailbox with said mailbox being located at the curb in such a manner as to be visible from both sides. In the event a mailbox is not located at the curb or at a location near their driveway, then the numbers and letters shall be placed visible from the street. The numbers shall be placed, visible from the street, on or above ground level, attached to a post or other object at the drive-way or curb cut. Said numbers should be three (3) inches in height or larger and of a color contrasting with the color of the background on which said numbers are located. 
(c)	It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of said residence or dwelling unit, business or structure, upon the affixing of the new numbers to remove any different numbers that might be mistaken for or confused with the number assigned to the structure. 
(d)	Citizens of the City shall have until the 1st day of September, 1994 to place said numbers in their appropriate place. 
(e)	Persons failing to comply with this section will be given one (1) warning of their failure to comply and given seven (7) days in which to comply. In the event said person fails to comply, then said person shall be guilty of violation of this section and be punished by imprisonment in the Sandersville City Jail for a period of time not to exceed one (1) day and/or a fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(f)	Persons, firms, corporations or any other entities constructing, renovating or planning to occupy a new location shall apply for, receive and install identification numbers prior to occupancy. 
CHAPTER 2 - Solid Waste Collection and Disposal 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to provide for garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III(a)(2). 

Sec. 5-2-1 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of these regulations the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
(1)	Administrative officer. The person authorized by the mayor and city council to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter, or his representative. 
(2)	Collector. A person or persons, as defined herein, who under formal agreements, verbal or written, with or without remuneration, does the work of collecting and/or handling solid wastes from one or more residences or structures. 
(3)	Disposal area. A site, location, tract of land, or facility, used or intended to be used for the final disposal of solid waste, garbage, putrescible waste, hazardous waste, or other waste, not including the land or facility used for the disposal of solid waste or other waste from a single-family dwelling on which the owner, occupant or lessee of the land or facility resides. 
(4)	Garbage. Food waste, including waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used for or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
(5)	Hazardous waste. Material in a solid or semi-solid state resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides or drugs (other than normal household use), pathological wastes, chemical wastes, flammable or explosive materials, and similar waste material in a solid or semi-solid state, that the administrative officer may consider a likely hazard to the public health or safety, except radioactive waste materials, as provided in rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources, Chapter 270-5-20, entitled "Radioactive Materials." 
(6)	Industrial waste or industrial solid waste. The solid waste materials from factories, processing plants and manufacturing enterprises, including food processing wastes, meat and poultry processing waste, hatchery waste, construction and demolition waste, condemned food, ashes and cinders from power plants, agriculture products waste, land clearance waste, and similar waste. 
(7)	Person. Any person, partnership, public or private corporation, association, institution, individual or other entity. 
(8)	Premises. Land, buildings or other structures, vehicles, watercraft, or parts thereof, upon or in which solid waste is stored. 
(9)	Rubbish. A variety of combustible and non-combustible waste not subject to rapid decomposition derived from places of residence, commercial areas and institutions and including paper, rags, plastics, cartons, boxes, tree and yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, minerals, cans, bottles, glass, crockery, excelsior, bedding, rubber, discarded clothing, and similar materials. 
(10)	Scavenge. Uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials. 
(11)	Solid waste. Putrescible and non-putrescible waste, except human body waste, and including garbage, rubbish, paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, tin cans, glass, crockery, dunnage, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, waste materials generated in industrial operations, residue incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, construction wastes, and any other wastes in a solid or semi-solid state, not otherwise defined in this section. 
(12)	Waste. Unwanted or discarded material, except human body waste and animal waste. 
(Ord. of 5/26/75, Sec. I) 
Sec. 5-2-2 - Administration of solid waste collection. 
(a)	The mayor and council, in order to protect the health and safety of the people in the city, authorizes and directs the administrative officer, by implementing and enforcing the provisions of these regulations, to control the storage, collection, and disposal of solid waste in the incorporated areas of the city. He shall plan, organize, procure equipment and personnel, and manage a publicly owned and operated solid waste collection and disposal service and/or establish criteria for evaluation of private collection and disposal services, make recommendations to the mayor and council for contracts for solid waste collection and/or disposal between the mayor and council and private collectors and/or disposal site owners and/or operators. He shall regulate the establishment, maintenance and operation of public or private solid waste collection and/or disposal systems, methods, and sites. 
(b)	Collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste shall be under the supervision and control of the administrative officer. He shall have authority to establish routes and days of collection, types and locations of solid waste containers, and such other matters pertaining to collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste as he may find necessary and to change and modify the same after notice as required by law, provided such measures are not contrary to the provisions of these regulations. 
(c)	All solid waste generated or accumulated in the incorporated areas of the city shall be collected, transported and disposed of by the city through its designated agents, employees, or contract representatives. No other person shall collect, transport or dispose of any solid waste generated or accumulated in the city except as follows: These rules and regulations shall not, however, prohibit the producers of industrial solid waste or the owner of premises upon which industrial solid waste has accumulated from collecting, transporting and disposing of such waste, subject to laws and regulations pertinent thereto, if such service is not provided by the city. 
(d)	Any person aggrieved by a requirement of, or fee charged by, the administrative officer shall have the right of appeal to the mayor and council which may confirm, modify or revoke any such requirement or fee. 
(Ord. of 5/26/75, Sec. II) 
Sec. 5-2-3 - Regulation of contract solid waste collectors. 
(a)	Any person may contract with the mayor and council to engage in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of solid waste, provided such persons have applied for and obtained an appropriate solid waste permit in accordance with state regulations. Persons contracting for solid waste collection shall, before engaging in such business, be licensed by the city and shall conform to all regulations providing for safe and sanitary collection and transportation of waste to a point of disposal, and shall execute a bond to the city in the sum of not less than $5,000 with a responsible surety company duly authorized to do business in Georgia, to be approved by the mayor and council who shall establish conditions for the full and faithful performance of all agreements and covenants in the contract. 
(b)	No person shall contract for the collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste who does not possess a current license for such business operation in the city. Applications for licenses shall be written and shall be considered after evidence has been presented to show that the applicant has received a current permit, appropriate to the type of business concerned, as required under applicable laws of the state. Licenses shall then be issued in accordance with criteria established by the administrative officer after payment therefore has been made in full. 
(Ord. of 5/26/75, Sec. IV (c)(d)) 
Sec. 5-2-4 - Precollection procedures; containers. 
(a)	The city shall provide to all households disposable paper bags designed for solid waste storage and disposal. Bags shall be supplied at a rate of two (2) bags per week per household. Bags shall be supplied every six (6) months. 
(b)	Disposable paper or plastic bags of a type, size and material designed for solid waste storage and disposal may be used to contain garbage and rubbish for storage and collection. Disposable bags shall be unbroken and securely sealed and loaded in a manner that normal handling will not cause the bag to open. 
(c)	Commercial establishments shall be provided metal box containers (four (4) cubic yard capacity) for collection and disposal of solid waste by the city, and shall pay such fee as established from time to time by the mayor and council for use of such containers. Such containers shall be placed in the rear of the establishments or as accessible as possible to facilitate collection by city vehicles. 
(Ord. of 5/26/75, Sec. III(a)) 
Sec. 5-2-5 - Precollection procedures; solid waste preparation. 
(a)	Garbage and rubbish shall be drained of excess liquid before being placed for collection. 
(b)	Rubbish may be placed in containers of not over 50 pounds gross weight when placed for collection or in bundles of not over 50 pounds each. Limbs or cuttings shall be not over four (4) feet in length and four (4) inches in diameter. Larger items in size or weight shall be handled at special fees which may be established by the mayor and council upon request. 
(c)	No person shall place any solid waste in any street, public place, roadway or private premise except it be in proper containers for collection or under the express prior approval of the administrative officer. No person shall place any solid waste in any stream, lake or other body of water. 
(d)	Solid waste to be collected by the city or its representative shall be placed at the curb or roadway in front of the residence or establishment in which it accumulated, but not in the street or in the gutter. 
(Ord. of 5/26/75, Sec. III(b), (c)) 
Sec. 5-2-6 - Accumulation of solid waste; nuisance. 
Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any premise is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of solid waste within such reasonable time as may be fixed by written notice of the administrative officer is a violation of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 5/26/75, Sec. III(c)) 
Sec. 5-2-7 - Scavenging. 
No person other than the owner thereof, or an agent or employee of the administrative officer, or any employee of a person holding a contract with the city for collection of solid waste shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing solid waste pending collection, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any such container from the location where it has been placed by the owner thereof. 
(Ord. of 5/26/75, Sec. III(d)) 
Sec. 5-2-8 - Collection generally. 
(a)	Frequency of collection. 
(1)	City collection trucks shall collect garbage and refuse from residential households twice weekly. Collection of trash, rubbish and other waste material shall be twice weekly or more often as deemed necessary by the administrative officer. 
(2)	Collection of solid waste from commercial and industrial establishments shall be from three (3) to six (6) times per week. 
(b)	All collection days and routes may be changed at any time at the discretion of the administrative officer to maintain sanitary conditions in the city. Collections shall not be made on the following holidays unless otherwise specified by the administrative officer: New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. 
(c)	Small dead animals, not over 30 pounds in weight, if kept separate from garbage and rubbish, will be collected without charge upon notice to the administrative officer, provided that a charge will be made for all such animals collected from animal hospitals, kennels, pet shops and the like. Owners of large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal. 
(Ord. of 5/26/75, Sec. IV(a), (b)) 
Sec. 5-2-9 - Collection vehicles. 
All vehicles used on streets and highways for solid waste collection, transportation or disposal shall be kept clean and shall be certified in regard to highway safety by the Motor Vehicle Division of the Georgia Department of Public Safety. Such vehicle bodies shall be in good condition and repair, covered and constructed in such manner that the contents thereof cannot be spilled, leaked or blown from the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 5/26/75, Sec. IV(c)) 
Sec. 5-2-10 - Disposal of solid waste. 
The Washington County Board of Commissioners provides an approved solid waste sanitary landfill for disposal of solid waste generated within Washington County. All solid waste collected by the city shall be delivered and deposited at the Washington County Sanitary Landfill for disposal. 
(Ord. of 5/26/75, Sec. V) 
Sec. 5-2-11 - Air pollution. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, or any representative of any firm or corporation, doing business in the city to burn garbage, refuse, trash, rubbish or other waste material within the corporate limits of the city subject to penalty prescribed in section 5-2-13. 
(Ord. of 5/26/75, Sec. VI) 
Sec. 5-2-12 - Charges and fees. 
(a)	Solid waste service charges for the purposes of financing such collection and disposal systems are hereby levied at rates to be fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(b)	Solid waste service charges, as provided by this section, shall be payable monthly, included in the monthly utility bill, and such charges shall be collected at city hall. 
(Ord. of 5/26/75, Sec. VII) 
Sec. 5-2-13 - Penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, and any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this code; each violation hereof shall be deemed a separate offense; and each day's failure to comply herewith shall constitute a separate offense for each of the days and shall be punishable as such. In addition to the above penalty, each offender may have his city electrical and water service terminated by the city. 
(Ord. of 5/26/75, Sec. VIII) 
CHAPTER 3 - Cemeteries 

Sec. 5-3-1 - Sale of lots. 
The City Administrator or designee shall be responsible for selling of all lots in the City cemeteries. He shall make and deliver to each purchaser a deed to the lot purchased. The deed shall be signed by the Mayor and City Administrator or designee on behalf of the City. Price of lots shall be fixed by the Mayor and Council. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 245; Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 5-3-2 - Records; maps. 
(a)	The City Administrator or designee shall keep a record of the owners of cemetery lots and shall not allow any person to be buried on a private lot, except by consent of the owner. 
(b)	The City Administrator or designee shall make quarterly reports of every person interred in the City cemetery, stating the number of the lot on which each person was interred. If there are any bodies disinterred, this fact shall also be included on the quarterly reports. The City Administrator or designee shall keep reports in a book furnished by the Mayor and Council for that purpose, and this book shall be open at all times to public inspection. 
(c)	The City Administrator or designee shall, from time to time, make such amendments and corrections in the map of the cemeteries as are necessitated by changes in ownership of the lots, the opening of new lots or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 5-3-3 - Monuments. 
No person shall willfully mutilate or in any manner deface or injure any monument, tombstone, gate, fence, railing, or other enclosure in or around the cemeteries; nor shall they injure, destroy or remove any flowers or shrubbery from any cemetery. Persons violating this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided for in Section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 247) 
CHAPTER 4 - Telecommunications Rights-of-way 

Sec. 5-4-1 - Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in this chapter, have the following meanings, with all terms defined in this Section 5-4-1 in the singular to have the correlative meaning when used in the plural and vice versa: 
City means the City of Sandersville, Georgia. 
Effective date means the date this ordinance is adopted by the Council of the City of Sandersville, Georgia. 
Equipment means the poles, wires, electrical conductors, conduits, subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances that are located in the rights-of-way. 
Ordinance means this ordinance, together with any appendices, amendments, or modifications attached thereto. 
Person means an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an association, a trust or any other entity or organization, including a governmental or political subdivision or an agency or instrumentality thereof. 
Rights-of-Way or Streets means the streets, alleys and public places of the City within the corporate limits of the City, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, there-over or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
Services means any telephone service, interconnection service, access service and any other telecommunications services provided by a telephone company in connection with the telecommunications system, except for "cable service," as that term is defined at 47 U.S.C. 522(6). 
Telephone company means any person that is engaged in the provision of telephone exchange service or exchange access over a telecommunications system or the provision of any other telecommunications services over a telecommunications system. Such term does not include a person insofar as such person is engaged in the provision of a commercial mobile service, including wireless telecommunications services, and does not utilize the streets to provide such services. 
Telecommunications system means the system over which services are provided inclusive of all equipment. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-2 - City's right of oversight. 
The work of constructing, erecting and maintaining facilities of a telephone company shall be done under the regulation of the City and shall be subject to the police power of the City and the City's ordinances. The City has the right to oversee, regulate and inspect the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and applicable law. The City reserves the right to adopt or issue such rules, regulations, orders or other directives governing a telephone company or its equipment as it shall find necessary or appropriate in the exercise of its police power or the management of the City streets and such other orders as the City shall find necessary or appropriate pursuant to and in furtherance of the purposes of this ordinance. The use of the streets by a telephone company shall not interfere with the use of the streets by others, except to the extent permitted by this ordinance. The telephone company shall leave all streets and other property in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the telephone company's installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance or removal of the equipment from the streets and without materially affecting, altering or disturbing in any way any electric or other cables or wires, or any pipes, structures or attachments. The City shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of such streets and to require the telephone company to make any additional repairs in order to bring such streets to the condition required by this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-3 - Regulation of use of streets preserved. 
Nothing in this ordinance restricts the authority of the City to regulate the use and occupancy of the streets by any person or entity providing service. Persons or entities subject to paying a fee pursuant to ordinance adopted April 3, 2000, shall not be exempt from municipal regulations relating to the time, manner and method of installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of the equipment located within the city's streets. Pursuant to applicable provisions of the City Charter and other general law, the City expressly reserves its' right to require a franchise from any telephone company providing service whose equipment occupies the City's streets. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-4 - Permits and approvals. 
Pursuant to City ordinances or other applicable regulation, a telephone company shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals necessary before constructing, installing, operating, upgrading, repairing, maintaining or removing equipment. Prior to the City's issuing a construction, building or other permit, a telephone company may be required to (i) submit an application in writing specifically describing the nature, extent, and location of the portion of the rights-of-way to be used by the telephone company and (ii) furnish an indemnity bond acceptable to the City or other security acceptable to the City for any damage to any part of the street, the City or to any member of the public caused by the work of the telephone company performed under authority of such permit. The obligations of the telephone company under this ordinance and any liability of the telephone company shall not be limited by the City's acceptance of the bond or the security. Any fees that the City charges to a telephone company to issue construction, building or other permits or approvals shall not be offset against the compensation that a telephone company is required to pay to the City pursuant to ordinance adopted April 3, 2000 nor against any other fees or taxes the telephone company may pay the City. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-5 - Repair and replacement of streets. 
A telephone company shall, at its own cost and expense, replace, and properly relay and repair the surface, base, and landscape treatment of any public sidewalk or street that may be excavated or damaged by reason of the erection, construction, maintenance or repair of its facilities promptly and in no event later than thirty (30) days after completion of the work in accordance with existing standards of the City in effect at the time of the work. Upon failure of a telephone company to perform any such repair or replacement, after ten (10) days' notice from the City, the City or its agent or contractor may repair such portion of the streets as may have been disturbed by a telephone company, its contractors or agents, and upon receipt of a bill from the City, a telephone company will promptly reimburse the City for its costs so incurred. Such repair or replacement shall restore the streets to the condition required by Section 5-4-2 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-6 - Abandoned equipment. 
All equipment, including both aerial and underground equipment that is abandoned within the public rights-of-way, shall be removed by the telephone company unless an alternative plan is approved by the City. Any abandoned equipment allowed to remain in the public rights-of-way shall continue to be the responsibility of the telephone company. Such telephone company shall be liable for all costs and damages arising from the presence of the abandoned equipment in the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-7 - New grades or lines; relocations. 
If the grades or lines of any street are changed at any time during the term, then a telephone company shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the notice of the City, protect or promptly alter or relocate equipment so as to conform with such new grades or lines. Upon notice from the City, a telephone company shall remove and relocate equipment where the City deems such removal and relocation necessary as a result of the construction or maintenance of any part of the street or due to the extension of a public road. If a telephone company refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate equipment, in accordance with this Section 5-4-6, the City shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate such equipment and a telephone company shall pay to the City the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. The City and its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants, and independent contractors shall not have any liability to the telephone company for any damage as a result of or in connection with the breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-8 - Quality. 
All work involved in the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. If, at any time, it is determined by the City or any other agency or authority of competent jurisdiction that any equipment is harmful to the health or safety of any person, then a telephone company shall, at its own cost and expense, promptly correct all such conditions. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-9 - No obstruction. 
In connection with the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment, a telephone company shall not obstruct the streets, subways, railways, rivers or other traffic to, from or within the corporate limits of the City without the prior consent of the City. Equipment of a telephone company in the streets shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with the use of the streets and adjoining property. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-10 - No interference. 
A telephone company shall not interfere with the technical operation of any other telecommunications system or any other utility operating within the rights-of-way within the corporate limits of the City. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-11 - Underground utilities. 
A telephone company shall comply with any current or future City ordinances, rules or orders requiring the placement of equipment underground. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-12 - Moving equipment. 
A telephone company shall, upon prior written notice by the City or any person holding a permit to move any structure, and within the time that is reasonable under the circumstances, temporarily move equipment to permit the moving of said structure. A telephone company may impose a reasonable charge on any person other than the City for any such movement of its equipment. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-13 - Safety precautions. 
The telephone company shall, at its own cost and expense, undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its work sites and comply with the Georgia Department of Transportation's Uniform Manual on Traffic Control Devices, as it may be amended from time to time, or any successor manual adopted by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-14 - Emergency relocation of equipment. 
The City may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster, or other emergency, as determined by the City in its sole discretion, cut or move equipment, in which event the City shall not incur any liability to a telephone company, any affiliated person or any other person. When possible, a telephone company shall be consulted prior to any such cutting or movement of equipment and shall be given the opportunity to perform such work itself. All costs to repair or replace such equipment shall be borne by a telephone company. If the City determines that the failure of a telephone company to properly restore or repair the streets constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the City may undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts. A telephone company shall promptly reimburse the City for all costs incurred by the City in regard to the repair or restoration. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-15 - Street closings. 
If all or any part of the streets are eliminated, discontinued or de-mapped, the telephone company shall cease operation of the telecommunications system with respect to such streets upon the effective date of a final action of the City in connection therewith. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-16 - Reports. 
At the request of the City, a telephone company shall promptly submit to the City such information as the City may reasonably request regarding a telephone company and any affiliated person to verify compliance with any term or condition of this chapter. The City may require a telephone company to provide, among other things, written construction plans in advance of beginning construction and to provide as-built drawings after construction completion. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-17 - Treatment of proprietary information. 
Access by the City to any of the documents, records or other information covered by this ordinance shall not be denied on grounds that such documents, records or information contain proprietary information. A telephone company may label any documents, records or other information as proprietary if it considers them such, and the City shall protect the documents, records or other information from disclosure to the extent permitted under applicable law. In the event that any other person requests such information under the Georgia Open Records Act (OCGA 50-18-70, et. seq.), and the City reasonably believes that such requested documents, records or information may be within the exclusion guidelines of the Georgia Open Records Act, the City shall not release proprietary documents, records or other information without written notice to a telephone company. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-18 - Insurance; specifications. 
A telephone company shall, at its own expense, maintain a liability insurance policy or policies, in a form acceptable to the City, together with evidence acceptable to the City demonstrating that the premiums for said policy or policies have been paid. Such policy or policies shall be issued by companies duly licensed to do business in the State of Georgia and acceptable to the City. Such companies must carry a rating by Best of not less than "A". Such policy or policies shall insure (i) a telephone company and (ii) the City and its officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and employees (through appropriate endorsements, if necessary) against each and every form of liability of a telephone company referred to in this ordinance in the minimum combined amount of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00), or such other amount as may be agreed to by the City, for bodily injury and property damage. The foregoing minimum limitation shall not prohibit a telephone company from obtaining a liability insurance policy or policies in excess of such limitations, provided that the City, its officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and employees shall be named as additional insureds to the full extent of any limitation contained in any such policy or policies obtained by a telephone company. Notwithstanding the above, in lieu of the insurance coverage required by this Section 5-4-18, a telephone company may provide such proof of financial resources as may be deemed acceptable by the City that a telephone company may have available to pay claims. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-19 - Liability not limited. 
The legal liability of a telephone company to the City and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the liability insurance policies required by this ordinance including, without limitation, a telephone company's indemnification obligations set forth in this ordinance, shall not be limited by the insurance policies required by Section 5-4-18, nor by the recovery of any amounts thereunder, except to the extent necessary to avoid duplicative recovery from or payment by a telephone company. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-20 - Liability of telephone company. 
A telephone company shall be responsible for any liability, including, without limitation, any liability of the City and any person, including, without limitation, any officer, employee, agent, attorney, consultant and independent contractor of the City, arising out of or in connection with the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment. A telephone company shall, at its own cost and expense, replace, repair or restore any damaged property to its prior condition and shall pay appropriate compensation in the event of any injury to or death of any person occasioned by any act or failure to act of a telephone company, any affiliated person, or any officer, employee, agent or subcontractor thereof, in connection with the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment. The City, its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors shall not be responsible for any liability of a telephone company, any affiliated person or any other person, arising out of or in connection with the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment or the provision of services through the equipment. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-21 - Liability limitation of City. 
Nothing in this ordinance abrogates the right of the City to perform any public works or public improvements. Neither the City nor its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants or independent contractors shall be responsible to the telephone company or any affiliated person for any liability as a result of or in connection with the protection, breaking through, movement, removal, alteration, or relocation of any equipment by or on behalf of a telephone company or the City in connection with any emergency, public work, public improvement, alteration of any municipal structure, any change in the grade or line of any street, or the elimination, discontinuation, and closing of any street, as provided in this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
Sec. 5-4-22 - Indemnification of city. 
A telephone company and each affiliated person shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors from and against all liabilities, whether special, incidental, consequential or punitive, and all other damages, costs and expenses (including reasonable attorneys' fees) arising out of or in connection with the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment or the provision of services through the equipment. 
(Ord. of 4/3/00) 
TITLE 6 - Municipal Utilities 
CHAPTER 1 - Water and Electricity[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility companies or municipalities, O.C.G.A., Sec. 16-7-25; Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia, O.C.G.A., Sec. 46-3-110 et seq. 
Cross reference— Authority of City to erect and maintain electric system and water works, Charter, Sec. 59; Mayor and Council assumed duties of water and light commissions, Charter, Sec. 59A; authority of City to set rates, to employ superintendents and other employees, and to collect rates by execution, levy and sale, Charter, Secs. 60(6), (9). 

Sec. 6-1-1 - Connections required; inspections. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to tap or make connection with the City water system, or after the tap or connection has been properly made to make any change or put in additional taps or connections with the City system without first obtaining permission of the superintendent. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the superintendent of the City water department to inspect at any time all connections with the water works system of the City and it shall be his duty to inspect all faucets, openings, plumbing in all places and houses where said water is used so as to protect the City against loss, leakage, waste or otherwise. When necessary, he shall require the plumbing to be replaced and repaired. It shall be the duty of the patrons of the City water system to keep the faucets, openings, and plumbing in good repair and to report to the superintendent any defects in any part of the water system operated by them. If the users of water and lights fail or refuse to keep their part of the equipment in order, the superintendent shall have the right to cut off the water for such users. 
(Code 1941, Secs. 213; 285) 
Sec. 6-1-2 - Repair and maintenance of water and electric plants. 
The Mayor and Council shall have the power and authority to contract for the repair or expansion of the City's water and electric plants. 
Sec. 6-1-3 - Water and electric rates and charges. 
Water and electric rates and charges, including, but not limited to, usage charges, deposits for service and tap fees, shall be determined from time to time by the Mayor and Council. Failure to pay such rates and charges shall constitute a lien upon the property to which water and electric service is rendered by the City. The amount of the lien shall include the principal balance together with all interest and penalties. Such lien shall have the same priority of lien as ad valorem taxes. 
Editor's note— The schedule of rates and charges for water and electric services is on file in the office of the City Administrator and is available for public inspection. 
Sec. 6-1-4 - Utility bills; penalty for late payment; reconnection fee; penalty for special trip for collection. 
(a)	Minimum bill. The minimum utility bill shall be as fixed from time to time by the Mayor and Council. 
(b)	Penalty for late payment. If the bill is not paid by the 20th of the month, a late penalty as fixed from time to time by the Mayor and Council will be added. If the bill is not paid by the 27th of the month, a second late penalty as fixed from time to time by the Mayor and Council will be added. Service will be disconnected on the 4th of the following month if payment is not received. Prior to reconnection, the consumer shall pay the past due bill and as well as all associated fees and costs as well as the reconnect charge as fixed from time to time by the Mayor and Council. 
(c)	Penalty for special trip. An additional charge as established by the Council shall be added to the following month's water or electric bill for any special trip required for collection. 
(Ord. of 6/16/08) 
Sec. 6-1-5 - Utility apparatus; diversion of services. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to destroy, damage or tamper with any utility meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, or other apparatus owned by the City. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied, or in any way to interfere with the proper action of the City, or intentionally to divert any of the utility services of the City, or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of the City any service sold or distributed by the City. 
(c)	No person shall knowingly receive the benefit of acts of diversion of, or tampering with the water or electric service without the proper charge. 
(d)	Proof that any of the acts before specified in this section was done on premises in possession of an accused, or that the accused received the benefit of any such act, shall be prima facie evidence that the accused committed such act or aided and abetted in the commission thereof. 
Sec. 6-1-6 - Water and light bonds. 
It shall be the duty of the Mayor and Council to maintain a sinking fund for the purpose of paying interest on and redeeming the water and light bonds issued by the City and subject same to payment of the bonds. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 219) 
Sec. 6-1-7 - No exemptions from payment. 
The Mayor and Council of the City shall not be exempt from payment for water and lights furnished by the City to them individually at their residences, nor shall they be exempt from any other charge or tax. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 314) 
Sec. 6-1-8 - Wells. 
(a)	No person shall dig or extend any well in the City without first having obtained a permit from the City to do so. 
(b)	All drilling operations shall be conducted in accordance with state standards and shall be conducted in such a manner that the water supply of the City is protected from contamination. 
(c)	The City shall have the right to place a meter on every well dug, extended or already existing within the City from which water enters the public sewer system. Sewer charges for the handling of such water shall be imposed on the basis of the City sewer rate schedule. 
Sec. 6-1-9 - Meter location. 
(a)	It is unlawful for any person, partnership, business, corporation or any other legal entity to locate on their property any electric meter or water meter of the City that cannot be conveniently read by the City's electric or water department meter readers. 
(b)	It is specifically stated that free and continuous access shall be available to the City electric and water department meter readers and it is unlawful for any person to construct any walls, fences or any other devices or forms of construction so as to restrict the City's electric and water department meter readers from having free and open access to said meters. 
(c)	It is unlawful for any person, partnership, business, corporation or other legal entity to place any City water meters or electric meters into any location that is guarded by dogs, security devices or any other form of protection that would limit the meter reader's ability to have free and open access to the meters. 
(d)	It is the duty of each person, partnership, business, corporation or other legal entity upon the construction and location of any meter to have the location of the electric or water meter approved by representatives of the electric and water department. 
(e)	The City through its representatives in the electric department and water department shall be authorized to notify by certified mail, of the fact that access is not available to the meters, and the persons, partnerships, businesses, corporations or entities will be given thirty (30) days in which to relocate the electric and/or water meters to an appropriate, convenient place for the meter reader to have such access in order to read the meters. 
(f)	Any person, partnership, business, corporation or other entity found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section shall have utility service disconnected to the location until the violation of this section is corrected, at which time said service shall be reconnected. The cost of reconnection for the service shall be in the amount of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) and the violating party shall bear the cost of said reconnection fee. 
(Ord. dated 12/4/89) 
Sec. 6-1-10 - Cross-connections and backflow prevention. 
(a)	The director of the department of water and sewer or his designee is authorized to discontinue water service to prevent contamination/pollution of the public water supply/system, due to the possible cross-connections, or when necessary to protect the water supply/system or individual properties from emergency cross-connection or backflow situations. 
(b)	The director of the department of water and sewer and/or the Chief Building Inspector and their designees are further authorized to require the installation of a suitable backflow prevention device(s) at the customer's/owner's service connection(s) or other areas as needed to prevent contamination or the risk thereof for the public water system. 
(c)	The director of the department of water and sewer and/or the Chief Building Inspector and their designees shall reserve the right to periodically inspect and test any backflow-prevention device(s) and/or require the customer/owner to provide annually a certificate of certification stating that the backflow prevention devices does operate properly as designed. Inoperative or faulty device(s) shall be promptly repaired/replaced by the customer/owner or water service shall be terminated. 
(d)	Any person(s) found guilty of violating Section 6-1-10 shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment and/or work as outlined in Section 6-1-10 and or additional fines and/or penalties to include the cost of the following: 
(1)	The total cost incurred by the City of Sandersville to repair or replace facilities damaged as a result of the violation of Section 6-1-10. 
(2)	Any injury or damage to person or property and/or loss of service resulting from the violation of Section 6-1-10. 
(Ord. of 1/3/00, §§ 1, 2) 
CHAPTER 2 - Sewers 
State Law reference— Waste management, O.C.G.A., Sec. 12-8-1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Authority of City to operate sewerage system, Charter, Sec. 59. 

Sec. 6-2-1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the sewage collection and treatment facilities, to prevent danger to life or damage to property, to promote the health, safety, and general welfare, to prohibit the introduction of storm, surface or subsurface waters into the sanitary sewers, to provide for the fair distribution of treatment costs, and to form a basis and policy for controlling wastes accepted into the sewage systems of the City of Sandersville, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 9/12/77) 
Sec. 6-2-2 - Definition of terms. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in the chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)	Sewer district. Any of the sanitary sewer districts and their extension or extensions and/or any drainage district or districts now existing or subsequently created by the City. 
(2)	Sewer commission. The duly elected or appointed governing body of a sewer district in the City. 
(3)	Superintendent. The sewer superintendent. 
(4)	Person. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, developer, sub-divider, or group. 
(5)	Owner. Any person in title to or having any interest in real property in any of the sanitary sewer districts and their extension or extensions and/or any drainage district or districts now existing or subsequently created by the City. 
(6)	Sewage. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
(7)	Public sewer. A sewer which is controlled by the City sewer commission. 
(8)	Sanitary sewer. A pipe or conduit which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
(9)	Storm sewer or storm drain. A sewer which carries storm and surface water drainage but excludes sewage, commercial-industrial and domestic wastes. 
(10)	Natural outlet. Any outlet into a water course, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
(11)	Water course. A channel in which a flow of water occurs continuously or intermittently. 
(12)	Sewage treatment plant. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
(13)	Building drain. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system carrying sewage which receives discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building's sewer. 
(14)	Building sewer (sometimes called house lateral). The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
(15)	Sewage. The water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, institutions, industrial establishments, and other places. 
(16)	Domestic wastes. Water-borne human or animal excreta or body wastes and normal culinary, laundry, and washing wastes originating in residences. 
(17)	Commercial-industrial wastes. Any and all other wastes not being domestic wastes but not limited to the wastes from commercial, laboratory and industrial processes, wastes from domestic operations or certain trade operations such as sand, grit, waste petroleum products from automotive service stations and the like, animal wastes, straw and related items from dairy or other farming operations. 
(18)	Garbage. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from handling, storage and sale of produce. 
(19)	Properly shredded garbage. The waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-quarter (¼) inch in any dimension. 
(20)	B.O.D. (denoting biochemical oxygen demand). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at 20 degrees C., expressed in milligrams per liter. 
(21)	ph. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter solution. 
(22)	Suspended solids. Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filterings. 
(Ord. of 9/12/77) 
Sec. 6-2-3 - Required use of public sewers. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited, in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this chapter. 
(c)	Except as provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)	The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a sanitary sewer of the City, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with these provisions, within 60 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line. 
(e)	Any industry or establishment introducing industrial wastes to the sanitary sewer system shall agree to comply with the United States Environmental Protection Agency's pretreatment regulations (40 CFR Part 128). 
(Ord. of 9/12/77) 
Sec. 6-2-4 - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)	Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, under the provisions of section 6-2-3(d), or where industrial or commercial wastes are excluded, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with this chapter. 
(b)	Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the sewer commission. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the City, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of $10 shall be paid to the City at the time the application is filed. 
(c)	A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is complete to the satisfaction of the superintendent. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction. In any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspections shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the sewer commission. 
(d)	The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all requirements of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division (EPD), and obtain the approval of the State EPD prior to a permit being issued. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing sub-surface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 20,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)	Each developer or subdivider shall be required to install or have installed, at his expense and throughout the entire development or subdivision, sanitary sewer lines, manholes and building sewers. All such facilities shall comply with these provisions and with the exception of the building sewer, shall become the property of the sewer commission when the facilities are connected to the public sewer. 
(f)	At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 6-2-4(c), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this provision, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(g)	The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewerage disposal facilities at all times, at no expense to the City. 
(h)	No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by local, state or federal agencies having authority to impose such requirements. 
(i)	When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to said sewer within 60 days and the private sewerage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run dirt or gravel. 
(Ord. of 9/12/77) 
Sec. 6-2-5 - Building sewers and connections; grant of permit for sewer use. 
(a)	The sewer systems of the sewer districts of the City, as constructed, added to or changed, shall be under the charge and control of the sewer commission under whose supervision they shall be used by property owners. No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, except under the inspection and direction of the sewer commission and after a written permit shall have been issued by the commission before such uncovering, connection, use, alteration, or disturbance is to take place. The sewer commission shall adopt rules and regulations to govern the maintenance and use of the sewer systems and the Mayor and Council shall fix the fees sufficient to pay for the cost of inspection of an entry or entries. 
(b)	Permits granted shall be for a specific waste or wastes and such permits shall be granted only after the submission and approval of plans as set forth here. Subsequent wastes of different quantity, quality or characteristics shall be covered by separate permits. 
(c)	There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)	for residential and commercial service, and 
(2)	for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the sewer commission. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee in an amount fixed from time to time by the Mayor and Council shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(d)	All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(e)	A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. The front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer; however, the City does not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection. 
(f)	Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
(g)	The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(h)	Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(i)	No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the superintendent for disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(j)	The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(k)	The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(l)	All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Street, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City. 
(Ord. of 9/12/77) 
Sec. 6-2-6 - Use of public sewers for the discharge of non-domestic wastes. 
(a)	No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, impounded water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer, without written permission of the sewer commission. 
(b)	Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the sewer commission. Industrial cooling water or other unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon approval of the sewer commission to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)	Except as provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)	Any liquid or vapor having a temperature lower than 32 degrees or higher than 150 degrees. 
(2)	Water or waste which may contain more than 100 milligrams per liter, by weight, of fats, oils, or grease. 
(3)	Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(4)	Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, grit, straw, animal wastes, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction of the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works in the opinion of the sewer commission. 
(5)	Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0, or having any other hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works, in the opinion of the sewer commission. 
(6)	Any water or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant in the opinion of the sewer commission. 
(7)	Any water or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(8)	Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance. 
(9)	Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
(10)	Any water or wastes containing excessive concentrations of specific ions. 

 
  Notes: 
  1. No data are available for mercury, silver, tin, titanium, or tungsten. 
  2. The maximum limits are as recommended by the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency and are subject to change from time to time by the U. S. EPA and/or the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(d)	Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the sewer commission, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, grit, and other harmful ingredients. 
(1)	All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the sewer commission, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(2)	Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. 
(3)	Grease and oil interceptors shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(4)	Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed in any place or building having a capacity to serve group meals. 
(5)	Where installed, all grease, oil, sand and grit interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at his expense in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(e)	The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having 
(1)	a five (5) day Biochemical Oxygen Demand greater than 300 milligrams per liter by weight, or 
(2)	containing more than 350 milligrams per liter by weight of suspended solids, or 
(3)	containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in paragraph 3 of this section, or 
(4)	having an average daily flow greater than two percent (2%) of the average daily sewage flow of the sewer system, shall be subject to the review and approval of the sewer commission. Where necessary in the opinion of the sewer commission, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to (1) reduce the Biochemical Oxygen Demand to 300 milligrams per liter and the suspended solids to 350 milligrams per liter by weight, or (2) reduce objectionable characteristics of constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in this section, or (3) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the commission together with a letter from the City engineer approving the proposed preliminary treatment facilities and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. 
(f)	Pretreatment standards for any major contributing industry must, in any case, meet U.S. EPA standards as defined in 40 CFR Part 128. 
(g)	Where preliminary treatment facilities are required for any waters or wastes no permit will be granted until such pretreatment units have been placed in operation and have demonstrated their effectiveness by test. The cost of such testing, sampling and analyzing shall be borne by the waste contributor. The preliminary treatment facilities shall be maintained continuously and satisfactorily in effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(h)	When required by the sewer commission, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying commercial-industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be conveniently and safety located. It is to be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the sewer commission. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(i)	All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in paragraphs (c) and (e), shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewerage" or with methods approved by the treatment plant superintendent and may be determined at the control manhole provided for in paragraph (h), or upon suitable samples taken at the manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole may be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole to the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. If, in the judgment of the superintendent, analyses must be performed which are beyond the scope of the laboratory at the sewerage treatment plant, these analyses shall be performed at a laboratory designated by the superintendent and the cost of the analyses shall be borne by the owner. 
(j)	No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the sewer commission and any industrial, commercial, or other owner from whose premises an industrial-commercial or domestic waste eminates which is of unusual strength or character from being accepted by the sewer commission for treatment subject to approval by applicable state and federal agencies and to payment by such owner. 
(k)	Wastewater from any building sewer entering a public sewer, which is strictly domestic in nature but of high strength, will cause the user to be subject to a surcharge based on a formula to be determined by the Mayor and Council. 
(Ord. of 9/12/77) 
Sec. 6-2-7 - Sewer user charge for contribution of domestic wastes only. 
(a)	Residential owners connected to the public sewer system shall pay for sewer service at rates to be fixed from time to time by the Mayor and Council. Each individual unit of a multiple family residence shall be considered as a single residence unless the entire multiple family residence is considered a commercial user. This class user includes but is not limited to housing projects, mobile trailer parks, apartments, and small commercial users. 
(b)	Large commercial and industrial users contributing domestic waste only shall pay a minimum monthly charge in accordance with a formula to be determined by the Mayor and Council. 
(c)	User charges in this section are subject to the surcharge provisions of section 6-2-6, paragraphs (j) and (k), where applicable. 
(Ord. of 9/12/77) 
Sec. 6-2-8 - Equitable cost recovery charge for contribution of wastes other than domestic. 
(a)	Definitions: 
(1)	Delivery flow rate characteristics. The rate, by volume and pollutant strength, at which an industry discharges its process wastes to the municipal sewage system. 
(2)	Industrial user. Any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions: 
a.	Division A. Agriculture, forestry, and fishing. 
b.	Division B. Mining. 
c.	Division D. Manufacturing. 
d.	Division E. Transportation, communications, electric, gas, and sanitary services. 
e.	Division I. Services. 
A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if the sewer commission determines that such user will introduce domestic-type wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. Industrial operations conducted at governmentally-owned facilities are exempt from industrial cost recovery requirements. 
(3)	Significant industrial user. Any industrial user that will contribute greater than 10 percent of the design flow or design pollutant loading of the treatment works. 
(4)	Letter of intent. A written statement from an industrial user to the municipality of that user's intent to utilize a specified portion of the publicly-owned waste treatment facility for a given length of time. 
(5)	Maximum recovery period. The length of time during which the cost recovery system will be in effect will correspond to the useful life of the facility or group of facilities, but shall not exceed 30 years. 
(6)	Reserve capacity. That unused portion of the treatment work's capacity that has been set aside by formal, written agreement(s) for use by a specific industry or industries. Factors such as strength, volume and delivery flow rate characteristics shall be considered and included when determining the reserve capacity to insure a proportional distribution of the cost recovery obligation. 
(7)	Treatment works. Any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature to implement Public Law 84-660, or necessary to recycle or reuse life of the works, including intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping, power, and other equipment and their appurtenances, extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any work, including site acquisition of the land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment; or any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating, or disposing of municipal waste, including storm water runoff, or industrial waste, including waste in combined storm water or sanitary sewer systems. 
(8)	Useful life. Estimated useful period during which a treatment works will be operated is 30 years. 
(9)	Federal regulations. Water Pollution Control Act (PL 84-660). 
(b)	The City has received federal grant funds under PL 84-660 as amended, and is required to develop an Equitable Cost Recovery (ECR) system in compliance with the applicable federal regulations under PL 84-660. All provisions of this chapter are subject to the approval of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and any subsequent changes are subject to U.S. EPA approval. 
(c)	All industrial users connected to the municipal sewer system who discharge other than domestic wastes shall pay an annual Equitable Cost Recovery charge in accordance with a formula maintained by the Mayor and Council. 
(d)	The sewer commission may elect to receive the ECR payment either in monthly installments or annually. 
(e)	Industrial users of this class are subject to the surcharge provisions of section 6-2-6, paragraphs (j) and (k) where applicable. 
(f)	Any significant revision to the approved ECR system must be submitted to, and approved by, the regional administrator (or the state water pollution control agency, when certified to do so by the regional administrator) prior to implementation. Significant revisions include any modification of the provisions of the ordinance establishing the legal framework of the ECR system or any change in the method of ECR allocation to individual industries. Changes in ECR payments from individual industries caused by changes in the waste discharged by those industries or by the entrance of new industries into the system do not require EPA approval. 
(g)	All significant industrial users shall furnish the City with a letter of intent expressing their intent to pay the share of the federal grant allocable to the treatment of their wastes. The letter shall include a statement of the user's intended period of use and the amount of capacity the user wishes to have allocated for treatment of its wastes (the term "capacity" refers to pollutant strength as well as volume of discharge). If an industrial user discontinues use of the treatment works in the future, its payment for cost recovery will cease and the capacity formerly utilized by that industry will become available for increases in loading from existing users, or for new industrial users who will assume their proportional share of the capital costs during the remaining portion of the recovery period. In the event of an industry's discontinuance, the amount of costs recovered will decline. There is no requirement for other industries to assume the portion of the ECR payment which is unrecovered due to the departure of an industry. 
(h)	The City shall determine the method of monitoring the discharge of industrial users and whether or not the monitoring shall be continuous or at regular intervals. The cost of all monitoring shall be borne by the industry being served. 
(i)	The industrial cost recovery period will commence upon completion of project construction. In instances where that is not appropriate, e.g., where industrial use commences more than one (1) year before the project completion date, the ECR period will begin from the date of beneficial use by the first industrial user. Not later than 30 days after commencement of the ECR period, the City will notify the regional administrator, in writing, of the date of this implementation of the ECR system. The first payment to the City by industrial users shall be made not later than one (1) year after the beginning of the ECR period. The initiation of the ECR system can occur before or after the final construction inspection or after the final audit and need not be related to either of these events. 
(j)	Pre-existing agreements between applicants and industry, or between applicants and other political jurisdictions, whereby industrial users would pay less than their allocable share of a federal grant cannot be recognized, regardless of the validity of such agreements as a matter of state law. 
(k)	The volume of wastewater from any building sewer which exceeds two percent (2%) of the average daily flow of the sewer system and which is allowed to discharge the full volume to a public sewer will cause the user to be subject to a charge based on a formula maintained by the Mayor and Council. The sewer commission shall determine the average daily flow from all users periodically and shall determine the average daily flow of the user by actual measurement and/or flow estimates to determine the charge for flow above two percent (2%) of the sewer system average daily flow. The user may request actual measurements of his sewerage discharge at any time and obtain same, provided that user bears the expense. 
(Ord. of 9/12/77) 
Sec. 6-2-9 - Repair and maintenance work. 
(a)	Any repair or maintenance work in connection with sewer pipes and drains connected directly or indirectly to any sanitary or storm sewer system or storm drain shall be performed in accordance with specifications approved by and under the supervision and inspection of the sewer commission. 
(b)	For work performed on sewers, pipes, laterals, or drains which are not a part of a sanitary sewer or storm sewer system at the direction or under the supervision of the sewer commission for the particular or special benefit of any individual parcel or portion of real property, a charge is hereby established in an amount equal to the actual cost thereof to the commission. 
(c)	The commission shall annually assess against the individual parcel of land the amount of any such charges remaining unpaid on October 1 and such charges shall be added to the tax roll and collected in the same manner and at the same time as the other taxes are assessed, levied and collected pursuant to statute. 
(Ord. of 9/12/77) 
Sec. 6-2-10 - Power and authority of inspectors. 
(a)	The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the sewer commission, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing or proper activities in accordance with the terms of this provision or any regulations promulgated thereunder. The powers and authority herein granted shall be in addition to powers of inspection otherwise granted by law to sewer commissions. 
(b)	The sewer commission or its authorized representatives shall be permitted access to information which has a direct bearing on the volume, type and quantity of pollutants and source of discharge to the public sewers or waterways or sewer works. 
(Ord. of 9/12/77) 
Sec. 6-2-11 - Enforcement, remedies and penalties. 
(a)	Any sewerage user permit issued shall be subject to cancellation after a hearing in the event of a finding by the sewer commission at such hearing that the user or permittee of the sewerage system has violated these provisions. Such hearing shall take place on 10 days' written notice to the permittee or user. Upon any cancellation provided for in this subsection or otherwise in this section, the sewer commission may terminate the use of the sewer by severing the connection to the sewage works. 
(b)	Any person violating these provisions of this chapter shall be responsible in money damages for any injury to the sewer system or expense caused the commission by such violation. This money may be collected by civil action in the Superior Court of the State of Georgia. Obedience to these provisions may also be enforced by injunction. 
(c)	Any person violating any provisions of this chapter and interfering with, entering or using the sewer systems without obtaining permission hereunder, shall be guilty of an offense and subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $100, or to imprisonment of not less than one (1) day nor more than two (2) months, or both such fine and imprisonment, and in addition when a violation of these provisions is continuous, each 24 hours' duration shall constitute a separate, distinct and additional violation. 
(Ord. of 9/12/77) 
CHAPTER 3 - Identity Theft Prevention Program 

Sec. 6-3-1 - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the Identity Theft Prevention Program. 
(Ord. of 8/3/09, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-2 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. of 8/3/09, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-3 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Article, the following definitions apply. 2 
(a)	City means the City of Sandersville. 
(b)	Covered account means (i) An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and (ii) Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
(c)	Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
(d)	Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
(e)	Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
(f)	Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
(g)	Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
(h)	Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
(i)	Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
(j)	Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the City. 
(Ord. of 8/3/09, § 1) 
2 Other than "City" and "personal identifying information", definitions provided in this section are based on the definitions provided in 16 CFR § 681.2. 
Sec. 6-3-4 - Findings. 
(1)	The City is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(2)	Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of City services include electric, water, sewer, garbage, internet, and all water and sewer tap connections. 
(3)	The City's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is a limited number of fraudulent account openings. 
(4)	The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, and attempting to change account information have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(5)	The City limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the City's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(6)	The City determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
a.	Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
b.	Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
c.	Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
d.	Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. of 8/3/09, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-5 - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(1)	As a precondition to opening a covered account in the City, each applicant shall provide the City with personal identifying information of the customer such as: a photo ID (valid driver's license or ID card), verification of given social security number (social security card, top portion of a federal tax return, or forms provided from the social security administration), a valid lease or rental agreement from property owner or provide proof of ownership (loan application papers or copies of deed filed at the local court's office). Such information shall be entered directly into the City's computer system, shall not otherwise be recorded, and be limited to who can access information. 
(2)	Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The City may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. of 8/3/09, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-6 - Access to covered account information. 
(1)	Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized City personnel. 
(2)	Such password(s) shall be changed by the Customer Service Supervisor on a regular basis, shall be at least eight (8) characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(3)	Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the City Administrator and the password changed immediately. 
(4)	Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the City Administrator and the City Attorney. 
(Ord. of 8/3/09, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-7 - Credit card payments. 
(1)	In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(2)	All credit card payments made over the telephone or the City's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer database. 
(3)	Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four (4) digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. of 8/3/09, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-8 Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)	Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
a.	A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.	A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.	A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.	Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
i.	A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
ii.	An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
iii.	A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
iv.	An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)	Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.	Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.	Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.	Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.	Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.	An application or lease or rental agreement that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)	Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.	Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
i.	The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
ii.	The social security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.	Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.	Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.	Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.	The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.	The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.	The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.	Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.	The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)	Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.	Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, City receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.	A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
i.	The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.	An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
i.	Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
ii.	A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
d.	An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
e.	Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.	The City is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.	The City is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.	The City is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)	Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. of 8/3/09, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-9 Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(1)	In the event that any City employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the Customer Service Supervisor. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the City Administrator, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the City Administrator in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a City employee shall perform one (1) or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the City Administrator: 
a.	Contact the customer; 
b.	Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
i.	Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
ii.	Close the account; 
c.	Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
d.	Notify a debt collector within forty-eight (48) hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
e.	Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
f.	Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(2)	In the event that any City employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the Customer Service Supervisor. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the City Administrator, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the City Administrator in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a City employee shall perform one (1) or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the City Administrator: 
a.	Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
b.	Deny the application for the new account; 
c.	Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
d.	Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 8/3/09, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-10 Updating the program. 
The City Council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the Council, update the Identity Theft Prevention Program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the City and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the City Council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)	The City's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)	Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)	Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)	Updates in the types of accounts that the City offers or maintains; and 
(5)	Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. of 8/3/09, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-11 Program administration. 
The Customer Service Supervisor is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The City Administrator is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the City Administrator, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the City Council for consideration by the Council. 
(1)	The Customer Service Supervisor will report to the City Administrator at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.	The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of City in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.	Service provider arrangements; 
c.	Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.	Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)	The Customer Service Supervisor is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the Identity Theft Prevention Program. The Customer Service Supervisor shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. of 8/3/09, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-12 Outside service providers. 
In the event that the City engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one (1) or more covered accounts the Customer Service Supervisor shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 8/3/09, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-13 Treatment of address discrepancies. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the City will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the City has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. of 8/3/09, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-14 Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
(1)	Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 3 
(2)	City means City of Sandersville. 
(Ord. of 8/3/09, § 1) 
3 See 16 CFR § 681.1(b). 
Sec. 6-3-15 Policy. 
In the event that the City receives a notice of address discrepancy, the City employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one (1) or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)	Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.	Information the City obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the Customer Information Program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1); 
b.	Information the City maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; 
c.	Information the City obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant City employee; or 
(2)	Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. of 8/3/09, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-16 Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(1)	In the event that the City reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the City is accurate, the City is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the City received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
a.	The City is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the City requested the report; 
b.	The City establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
c.	The City regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(2)	Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the City to such agency for the reporting period in which the City establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. of 8/3/09, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-17 Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The City employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one (1) or more of the following methods: 
(1)	Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)	Reviewing the City's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)	Verifying the address through third-party sources; or 
(4)	Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. of 8/3/09, § 1) 
TITLE 7 - Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs 
State Law reference— Establishment of recreation systems authorized, O.C.G.A., Sec. 36-64-1 et seq. 
CHAPTER 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 7-1-1 - Rules and regulations; generally. 
The Mayor and Council may, by ordinance, establish reasonable rules and regulations covering the operation of the City's recreation and park facilities. When the rules and regulations are posted or displayed on the facility involved, such rules and regulations shall have the force and effect of law and any person committing any action in violation thereof shall be deemed to have violated this section and shall be punished as provided in § 1-1-8 of this Code. 
Sec. 7-1-2 - Group use of facilities. 
(a)	Park facilities are available on a "first come-first served" basis. 
(b)	Groups wishing to reserve use of the park pavilion or community room may do so by contacting the City Hall. 
(c)	No charge to the public may be made by any group using the community room. 
(d)	Nonprofit groups wishing to use the park as part of a fund-raising activity may do so only after securing prior approval of the Mayor and Council. 
(e)	No commercial use of the park shall be permitted. 
CHAPTER 2 - Tree City U.S.A. Board 

Sec. 7-2-1 - Creation and establishment of a Tree City U.S.A. Board. 
There is hereby created and established a Tree City U.S.A. Board for the City of Sandersville, Georgia which shall consist of ten (10) members, citizens and residents of this community, who shall be appointed by the City Council of the City of Sandersville. These members shall include a horticulturist, registered landscape architect, registered forester, city government representative, and six (6) interested citizens. 
(Ord. of 5/6/91) 
Sec. 7-2-2 - Term of office. 
The term of ten (10) members shall be three (3) years, except that the term of three (3) of the members appointed to the first board shall be for only one (1) year and the term of three (3) members of the first board shall be for two (2) years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed by the Board for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(Ord. of 5/6/91) 
Sec. 7-2-3 - Compensation. 
Members of the Committee shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. of 5/6/91) 
Sec. 7-2-4 - Operation. 
The Committee shall be chaired by the person selected by Board members. It shall make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members seven (7) shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. of 5/6/91) 
Sec. 7-2-5 - Duties and responsibilities. 
It shall be the responsibility of the Board to develop and/or update annually and administer a written City Tree Plan for the care and planting of street and park trees. Such plan will be reviewed by the City Council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive City Tree Plan for the City. The Committee, when requested by the City Council, shall investigate, recommend and report on any special question coming within the scope of its work. 
(Ord. of 5/6/91) 
Sec. 7-2-6 - Review by City Council. 
The City Council has the right to review and act on the recommendations of the Tree City Board. All final decisions shall be made by the City Council. 
(Ord. of 5/6/91) 
TITLE 8 - Planning and Development 
CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE A - Planning Commission 
State Law reference— Authority of city to plan and zone, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para IV. 

Sec. 8-1-1 - Members; meetings. 
(a)	The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of eight (8) members who shall be residents of the City of Sandersville, with said eight (8) members to be appointed by the Mayor and City Council. It is hereby specifically designated that each Council Member that serves as a Council Member for a voting district shall nominate two (2) potential Planning and Zoning Commission Members from their respective district, and the Mayor and Council shall vote to either approve or disapprove these nominated members at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting following submission of the members to serve on the Planning and Zoning Commission. None of the members shall hold public office in the City. 
(b)	The terms of the members shall be for three-year staggered terms. 
(c)	Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor and Council who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. 
(d)	All members shall receive compensation as set by the Mayor and City Council and may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(e)	Meetings shall be limited to two (2) per month, except in emergencies. 
(f)	The Mayor or one (1) Council member may serve as an ex officio member of the Planning and Zoning Commission without power of voting or compensation. 
(Ord. of 11/5/79; Ord. of 3-23-92; Ord. of 9-18-06) 
Sec. 8-1-2 - Officers; rules of procedure. 
(a)	The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect its chairperson and vice chairperson from among its members. The term of the chairperson and vice chairperson shall be for one (1) year with eligibility for re-election. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be a non-elected officer or employee of the municipality. 
(b)	The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. 
(Ord. of 11/5/79) 
Sec. 8-1-3 - Meetings open to public; records. 
All meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be open to the public except as otherwise provided by law, and all records of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be a public record. 
State Law reference— Georgia Sunshine Law, O.C.G.A., § 50-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 8-1-4 - Staff; expenditures. 
(a)	The Planning and Zoning Commission may appoint such employees and staff as necessary for its work and may cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from federal, state, or local, public or semi-public agencies, or private individuals or corporations. It may expend such funds and may carry out such cooperative undertakings and contracts for such services as it may require. 
(b)	The expenditures of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the Mayor and Council. 
(Ord. of 11/5/79) 
Sec. 8-1-5 - Powers and duties. 
(a)	The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments. It shall prepare such plans for physical, social, and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morale, convenience, prosperity, or the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the development of its political jurisdiction. In particular, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall: 
(1)	Prepare a master plan for the development of the city. 
(2)	Prepare and recommend for adoption to the mayor and council a zoning ordinance and map for the city. 
(3)	Prepare and recommend for adoption to the mayor and council, regulations for the subdivision of land within the city, and administer the regulations that may be adopted. 
(4)	Prepare and recommend for adoption to the mayor and council, a plat or plats of an official map showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widening or narrowed streets, public open spaces or public building sites, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings or other structures within such lines, within the city or a specified portion thereof. 
(b)	Unincorporated areas adjacent to the city may be added to the jurisdiction of the planning and zoning commission for general planning and for master plan preparation and administration of zoning ordinances, land subdivision regulations, and official maps, if the governing bodies of the county and municipality agree to the boundaries of such additional areas, procedures for joint action, procedures for the adoption and administration of ordinances and resolutions, regulations applying to the area, and the manner of obtaining equitable representation on the municipal planning commission. Such agreement shall be formally established by appropriate official action by the governing authorities involved. 
(c)	The planning and zoning commission may: 
(1)	Make, publish, and distribute maps, plans and reports, and recommendations relating to the plan and development of the city to public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, education, professional, and other organizations and citizens. 
(2)	Recommend to the mayor and/or council members, programs for public improvements and the financing thereof. 
(3)	Enter upon land, make examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon; provided, however, that the planning and zoning commission shall be liable for any injury or damage to property resulting therefrom. 
(d)	In general, the planning and zoning commission shall have powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote the planning of the city. 
(Ord. of 11/5/79) 
Sec. 8-1-6 - Cooperation required. 
All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the planning and zoning commission, within a reasonable amount of time, such available information as it may require. 
(Ord. of 11/5/79) 
Secs. 8-1-7—8-1-10 - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 2 - Administration and Enforcement 
ARTICLE A - Purpose and scope 

Sec. 8-2-1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Hereinafter, the State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes". 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-2 - Code remedial. 
8-2.2.1 General. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof - which are public safety, health, and general welfare-through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
8-2.2.2 Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
8-2.2.3 Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The City of Sandersville, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-3 - Scope. 
8-2.3.1 Applicability: general. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
8-2.3.2 Building. The provisions of the Standard Building Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
8-2.3.3 Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
8-2.3.4 Gas. The provisions of the Standard Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. 
These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
8-2.3.5 Mechanical. The provisions of the Standard Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems. Except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
8-2.3.6 Plumbing. The provisions of the Standard Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
8-2.3.7 Fire prevention. The provisions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
8-2.3.8 Energy. The provisions of the CABO Model Energy Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
8-2.3.9 CABO one- and two-family dwelling. The provisions of the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
8-2.3.10 The Unsafe Building Abatement Code. The provisions of this code provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
8-2.3.11 Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any Federal or State agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
8-2.3.12 Appendices. Appendices referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
8-2.3.13 Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
8-2.3.14 Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his/her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-4 - Building department. 
There is hereby established a department to be called the Building Department and the person in charge shall be known as the Building Official. The Governing Body shall establish the qualifications for the Building Official and other Code Enforcement personnel. 
8-2.4.1 Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by Section 8-1-1 thru 8-1-6, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
8-2.4.2 Records. The Building Official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
8-2.4.3 Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the Planning & Zoning Commission, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of the Construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
8-2.4.4 Reports. The Building Official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He/She may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the Planning & Zoning Commission during said year. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-5 - Existing buildings. 
8-2.5.1 General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The Building Official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
8-2.5.2 Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the Building Official. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-6 - Special historic buildings. 
The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as Historic Buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the Building Official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
ARTICLE B - Powers and Duties of the Building Official 

Sec. 8-2-7 - General. 
The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The Building Official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-8 - Right of entry. 
8-2-8.1 Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the Construction codes, or whenever the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Building Official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the Building Official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
8-2-8-2 When the Building Official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Building Official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-9 - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the Building Official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the Building Official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-10 - Revocation of permits. 
8-2-10-1 Misrepresentation of application. The Building Official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
8-2-10.2 Violation of code provisions. The Building Official may revoke a permit upon determination by the Building Official that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-11 - Unsafe buildings or systems. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-12 - Requirements not covered by Code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by or the construction codes, shall be determined by the Building Official. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-13 - Alternate materials and methods. 
The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the Building Official. The Building Official shall approve any such alternate, provided the Building Official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the Construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The Building Official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-14 - Permit application. 
8-2-14-1 When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the Building Official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
8-2-14.2 Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
8-2-14-3 Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the Building Official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
8-2-14-4 information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the Building Official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his/her authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the Building Official. 
8-2-14-5 Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six (6) months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One (1) or more extensions of time for periods of not more than ninety (90) days each may be allowed by the Building Official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
8-2-14-6 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-15 - Building. 
(a)	One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet (11.15 m 2 ). 
(b)	Fences not over six (6) feet (1,829 mm) high. 
(c)	Oil derricks. 
(d)	Retaining walls which are not over four (4) feet (1,219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids. 
(e)	Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons (18,927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed two (2) to one (1). 
(f)	Sidewalks and driveways not more than thirty (30) inches (762 mm) above grade and not over any basement or story below and which are not part of an accessible route. 
(g)	Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
(h)	Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
(i)	Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy, as applicable in Section 101.2, which are less than twenty-four (24) inches (610 mm) deep, do not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons (19,000 L) and are installed entirely above ground. 
(j)	Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes and not including service systems. 
(k)	Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one-and two-family dwellings. 
(l)	Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of Group R-3, as applicable in Section 101.2, and Group II occupancies. 
(m)	Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five (5) feet nine (9) inches (1,753 mm) in height. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-16 - Electrical. 
Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of this code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for the radio and television transmissions, but does apply to equipment and wiring for power supply, the installations of towers and antennas. 
Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the installation of any temporary system required for the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-17 - Gas. 
(a)	Portable heating appliance. 
(b)	Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-18 - Mechanical. 
(a)	Portable heating appliance; 
(b)	Portable ventilation equipment; 
(c)	Portable cooling unit; 
(d)	Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code; 
(e)	Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
(f)	Portable evaporative cooler; 
(g)	Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten (10) pound (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one (1) horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-19 - Plumbing. 
The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code. 
The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
8-2-19-1 Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the Building Official. 
8-2-19-2 Repairs. Application or notice to the Building Official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps, or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer drainage, drain, leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. 
8-2-19-3 Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration of repair of generation, transmission, distribution or metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of public service agencies by established right. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-20 - Drawings and specifications. 
8-2-20.1 Requirements. When required by the Building Official, two (2) or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
8-2-20-2 Additional data. The Building Official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the Building Official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
8-2-20-3 Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
1.	All Group A, E, and I occupancies. 
2.	Buildings and structures three (3) stories or more high. 
3.	Buildings and structures five thousand (5,000) sq. ft. (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-21 - Exception. 
Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
8-2-21-1 Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
8-2-21-2 Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The Building Official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
8-2-21-3 Hazardous occupancies. The Building Official may require the following: 
1.	General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
2.	Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-22 - Examination of documents. 
8-2-22-1 Plan review. The Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the Construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
8-2-22-2 Affidavits. The Building Official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the construction codes. For buildings and structures the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The Building Official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the Building Official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the Construction codes. Where the Building Official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-23 - Issuing permits. 
8-2-23-1 Action on permits. The Building Official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the Building Official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
8-2-23-2 Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the Building Official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
8-2-23-3 Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the Building Official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
8-2-23-4 Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the Building Official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the Director of Public Works for the lines of the public street on which he/she proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the Building Official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in Chapter 22 of the Standard Building Code. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-24 - Contractor responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-25 - Conditions of the permit. 
8-2-25-1 Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the Construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six (6) months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the time the worked is commenced. One (1) or more extensions of time, for periods not more than ninety (90) days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the Building Official. 
8-2-25-2 Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the Building Official, are hazardous or complex, the Building Official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the Building Official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the Building Official. 
8-2-25-3 Plans. When the Building Official issues a permit, he/she shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One (1) set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the Building Official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the Building Official or his/her authorized representative. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-26 - Fees. 
8-2-26.1 Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc. has been paid. 
8-2-26.2 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc. system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred (100) percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
8-2-26.3 Accounting. The Building Official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
8-2-26.4 Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body. 
8-2-26.5 Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the Building Official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the Building Official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-27 - Inspections. 
8-2-27.1 Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the Building Official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
8-2-27.2 Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the Building Official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
8-2-27.3 Inspection service. The Building Official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by [Section] 3.8.6 He/She may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he/she is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
8-2-27.4 Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The Building Official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy or Completion. 
8-2-27.5 Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his/her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the Building Official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the Certificate of Occupancy or Completion is issued by the Building Official. 
8-2-27.6 Required inspections. The Building Official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make or cause to be made the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the Technical Code: 
(Ord. of 3/1/04; Ord. of 3/18/13) 
Sec. 8-2-28 - Building. 
(a)	Foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
(b)	Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
(c)	Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-29 - Electrical. 
(a)	Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
(b)	Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
(c)	Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-30 - Plumbing. 
(a)	Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
(b)	Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
(c)	Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(d)	Note: See Section 311 of the Standard Plumbing Code for required tests. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-31 - Mechanical. 
(a)	Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
(b)	Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
(c)	Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-32 - Gas. 
(a)	Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
(b)	Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
(c)	Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-33 - Energy. 
(a)	Foundation inspection: be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
(b)	Frame inspection: to be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
(c)	Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-34 - Written release. 
Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the Building Official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-35 - Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. 
Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the Building Official. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
Sec. 8-2-36 - Plaster fire protection. 
In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the Building Official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the Building Official has been received. 
(Ord. of 3/1/04) 
CHAPTER 3 - Flood Damage Prevention[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 6, 2010, repealed Title 8, Ch. 3, §§ 8-3-1—8-3-20, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment Ch. 3, pertained to similar subject matter. See Ordinance and Resolution Table for derivation. 
†Historical Note: The provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise indicated, are derived from a Model Ordinance Revision of July, 2008. 

ARTICLE A. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 8-3-1 - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and council, of Sandersville, Georgia, does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-2 - Findings of fact. 
(a)	The flood hazard areas of Sandersville, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-3 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; and 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-4 - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)	To protect human life and health; 
(2)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)	To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)	To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
ARTICLE B. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8-3-5 - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Sandersville, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-6 - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated July 22, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated July 22, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Washington County and are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: 141 West Haynes Street (City Hall). 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-7 - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-8 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-9 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-10 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-11 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of City of Sandersville or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-12 - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisoned for not more than five days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Sandersville from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
ARTICLE C. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 8-3-13 - Designation of building official. 
The building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-14 - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the building official on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage: 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of Article D, section 8-3-17(2); 
d.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)	Construction stage: 
For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the building official an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The building official shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-15 - Duties and responsibilities of the building official. 
Duties of the building official shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)	Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)	Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)	Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Article B, section 8-3-6, then the building official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of Article D. 
(5)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with Article C, section 8-3-14(2). 
(6)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with Article C, section 8-3-14(2). 
(7)	When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the Building Official shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with Article C, section 8-3-14(1)(C) and Article D, section 8-3-17(2) or section 8-3-19(2). 
(8)	Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)	Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the Letter of Map Revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the building official shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(12)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the building official and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
ARTICLE D. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 8-3-16 - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)	Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
i.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot above grade; and, 
iii.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.	So as not to violate the "Lowest Floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-17 - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one-foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Article D, section 8-3-16(4), "Elevated Buildings". 
(a)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one-foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)	Non-residential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one-foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in Article C, section 8-3-15(6). 
(3)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.	All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one-foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.	Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
i.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
ii.	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. Article D, section 8-3-16(6) above) 
d.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
i.	Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. 
ii.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
iii.	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "New Construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of Article D, section 8-3-17(3)a., c., above. 
(4)	Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Article B, section 8-3-6, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.	Only if Article D, section 8-3-17(4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article D. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-18 - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Article B, section 8-3-6, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Article B, section 8-3-6, then the building official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article D. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one-foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a Limited Detail Study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Article D, section 8-3-16(4) "Elevated Buildings". 
(a)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-19 - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Article B, section 8-3-6, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (Zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)	No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)	New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with Article D, section 8-3-17. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-20 - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in Article B, section 8-3-6, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Article D, section 8-3-16(4), "Elevated Buildings". 
The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one-foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in Article C, sections 8-3-14(1)(c) and 8-3-14(2). 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-21 - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(d)	For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-22 - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)	Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)	All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
ARTICLE E. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 8-3-23 - Procedures. 
(a)	The planning and zoning commission as established by mayor and council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)	The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning and zoning commission may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Washington County, as provided in the O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of Historic Structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)	In reviewing such requests, the planning and zoning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-24 - Conditions for variances. 
(a)	A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(1)	A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(3)	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(b)	The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an Historic Structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d)	The building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the planning and zoning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
ARTICLE F. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 8-3-25 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "New Construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the Building official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Areas of Special Flood Hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in Article B, section 8-3-6. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)	Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)	Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)	Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)	Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
†Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before 9/1/86. 
†Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before 8/4/86. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Flood proofing, means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic Structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
†New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after 9/1/86 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after 8/4/86 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
†New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after 8/4/86. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis; 
(2)	Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
Sec. 8-3-26 - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10) 
CHAPTER 4 - Zoning 
State Law reference— Authority of local governments to zone, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; zoning procedures law, O.C.G.A., § 36-66-1 et seq. 
Historical Note: The provisions of this code, unless otherwise indicated, are derived from an ordinance adopted February 2, 1981. 
ARTICLE A - General Provisions 

Sec. 8-4-1 - Enactment clause. 
The Mayor and Council comprised of the Mayor and Aldermen of Sandersville under the authority granted by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV, of the Georgia Constitution of 1983, hereby ordains and enacts into law the following articles and sections. 
Sec. 8-4-2 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of Sandersville, Georgia." 
Sec. 8-4-3 - Jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall govern the use of all land and the development thereof within the corporate limits of the City. 
Sec. 8-4-4 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter shall be to promote the proper location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the sizes of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density and distribution of population, and the uses of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities and other purposes so as to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; to promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; to protect property against blight and depreciation; to secure economy in governmental expenditures; to conserve the value of buildings and to encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and structures throughout the City and for other purposes. 
Sec. 8-4-5 - Definitions. 
(a)	Interpretation of certain terms and words . Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
(1)	The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
(2)	The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. 
(3)	The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel." 
(4)	The word "constructed" includes the words "erected," "built," "altered," "rebuilt," and "repaired." 
(5)	The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
(6)	The word "map" or "zoning map" refers to the Official "Zoning Map of Sandersville, Georgia." 
(b)	Exceptions . Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purpose of the chapter, certain terms and words used herein are defined as follows: 
(1)	Accessory building or use . A building or use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use and located on the same lot with such principal building or use. If an accessory building is attached to the main building either by a common wall or if the roof of the accessory building is a continuation of the roof of the main building, such accessory building shall be considered a part of the main building. 
(2)	Administrator, zoning . The person, officer, or official and his authorized representative, whom the Mayor and Council has designated as its agent for the administration of these regulations. 
(3)	Alley . A private or public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
(4)	Alteration, building or structural . Any change in the supporting members of a building (such as any type of supporting structural members) except such a change as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; any change in use from that of one district classification to another; or of a building from one location to another. 
(5)	Apartment . A room or group of rooms providing complete living quarters for occupancy by one (1) family and which is part of a residential building designed for occupancy by two (2) or more families. 
(6)	Apartment house . A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by three (3) or more families living independently of each other. 
(7)	Boarding or rooming house . Any dwelling in which three (3) or more persons either individually or as families are housed for payment with or without meals. 
(8)	Buffer strip . A space developed or improved with evergreen trees or other plantings and/or a fence or wall which may be required in certain locations to reduce the conflicting or adverse effects of different uses abutting each other. 
(9)	Building . Any structure, designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
(Ord. of 5/16/94) 
(10)	Building height . The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the front of the building to the highest point of the building. 
(11)	Building Inspector . The person or persons appointed by the Mayor and Council and charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(12)	Building, main or principal . The principal building on a lot or building site designed or used to accommodate the primary use to which the premises are devoted; where a permissible use involves more than one structure designed or used for the primary purpose, as in the case of group houses, each such permissible building on one (1) lot as defined by this chapter shall be construed as comprising a main building. 
(13)	Building site . "Building site" means (i) the ground area of one (1) lot, or (ii) the ground area of two (2) or more lots when used in combination for a building or group of buildings, together with all open spaces required by this chapter. 
(14)	Business or commerce . The purchase, sale or other transaction involving the hand-ling or disposition of any article, service, substance or commodity for livelihood or profit; or the management of office buildings, offices, recreational or amusement enterprises; or the maintenance and use of offices, structures and premises by professions and trade-rendering services. 
(15)	Care home . An orphanage, rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, boarding home for the aged, or similar use established to render domiciliary care, but not including facilities for the care of mental patients, epileptics, alcoholics, drug addicts and not including nursery schools. 
(16)	Center line of a street . The center line of a street is the line surveyed and monumented by the governing body as such, or if a center line has not been surveyed and monumented, it shall be that line midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street. 
(17)	Club or lodge, private . An incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreational, or like activities, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
(18)	Curb cut . The providing of ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting public street. 
(19)	Dwelling . A building designed or used for permanent living quarters for one (1) or more families. 
(20)	Dwelling, single family . A structure containing not more than one (1) dwelling unit designed for residential use, which meets or exceeds the following standards: 
1.	Minimum width in excess of sixteen (16) feet. 
2.	The roof shall have a minimum three to twelve (3:12) roof pitch and shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, built up gravel materials, or other materials approved by the building official. 
3.	The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl lap or other materials of like appearance. 
4.	Be attached to a permanent foundation. 
5.	Be constructed according to standards established either by the State Minimum Standard Codes as amended from time to time or the Standard Building Code or the National Manufactured Housing, Construction and Safety Standards Act. 
6.	Manufactured homes and modular homes placed in residential zoning districts shall meet the minimum compatibility standards herein set forth and all towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed. 
7.	At each exit door there must be a landing that is a minimum of four (4) feet by six (6) feet. All steps having more than three (3) risers above grade shall be equipped with handrail located not less than thirty (30) nor more than thirty-four (34) inches above the leading edge of each step. 
8.	The building official may approve deviations from one or more of the developmental or architectural standards provided herein on the basis of a finding that the materials to be utilized or the architectural style proposed for the dwelling will be compatible and harmonious with existing structures in the vicinity. 
(Ord. of 5/16/94) 
(21)	Dwelling, two-family (duplex). A building designed for or occupied exclusively by two (2) families living independently of each other, with separate housing facilities for each family unit separated from each other by an unpierced fire wall extending from ground to roof. 
(22)	Dwelling, multi-family . A building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for more than two (2) adjoining dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a common wall or common floor connecting it to at least one (1) other dwelling unit in the building. 
(23)	Dwelling unit . A structure or a portion of a structure designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one (1) or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels, motels, boarding houses or like uses. 
(Ord. of 5/16/94) 
(24)	Family . One (1) or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit. 
(25)	Farm . Any plot or tract of land consisting of at least three (3) acres and devoted to agricultural purposes. 
(26)	Floor area, gross . The total number of square feet of floor area in a building determined by horizontal measurements between the exterior faces of walls, excluding basement areas, porches, carports, and garages. 
(27)	Home occupation . An occupation or activity and the retail sale of the products of such activity, if any, only when such occupation or activity takes place in the same building used as a private residence and is conducted by residents only. Such activity shall be confined to twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the residence. See § 8-4-51. 
(28)	Hospital . Any institution receiving inpatients, or a public institution receiving outpatients, and authorized under Georgia law to render medical, surgical, and/or obstetrical care. The term "hospital" shall include a sanitarium for the treatment and care of senile psychotics or drug addicts, but shall not include office facilities for the private practice of medicine or dentistry. 
(29)	Hospital, small animal . "Small animal hospital" means an establishment in which veterinary services, clipping, bathing, boarding and other services are rendered to dogs, cats, and other small animals and domestic pets. 
(29a)	Industrialized Building . Any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the "Industrialized Building Act", Georgia Law 1982 pp 1637—1643 (Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Title 8, Chapter 2, Article 2, Part 1). 
(Ord. of 5/16/94) 
(30)	Junk yard . Any land or building, used for the abandonment, storage, keeping, collecting, or baling of paper, rags, scrap metals, other scrap or discarded materials, or for the abandonment, demolition, dismantling, storage, or salvaging of automobiles or other vehicles not in running condition, machinery, or parts thereof. 
(31)	Kennel . A place where four (4) or more adult dogs or cats are kept, whether by owners of the dogs and cats or by persons providing facilities and care, whether or not for compensation. An adult dog or cat is an animal of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of four (4) months. 
(32)	Lot . Land occupied, or to be occupied, by a building, group of buildings or uses, and accessory buildings, together with such yards and lot area as required by this chapter. 
(33)	Lot, corner . A lot having frontage on two (2) or more public streets at their intersection. 
(34)	Lot depth . The average horizontal length between the front and rear lot lines. 
(35)	Lot of record . A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court, or a parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
(36)	Lot, through . A lot other than a corner lot, having frontage on more than one (1) street. 
(37)	Lot width . The distance between the side lot lines, measured along the front yard setback line as established by this chapter, or if no setback line is established, the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along the street right-of-way line. 
(38)	Map (zoning map) . The "Zoning Map of Sandersville, Georgia" incorporated into this chapter as part thereof by reference thereto. 
(39)	Manufactured home . A structure defined by and constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq. The definition at the date of adoption of this part is as follows: 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary and complies with the standards established under this title. 
(Ord. of 5/16/94) 
It is specifically provided that this statute shall not apply to modular homes if said modular homes are not located on a permanent frame or chassis. If a modular home is not located on a permanent frame or chassis, it shall be treated the same as a site built home governed by applicable codes and ordinances for the City as they apply to site built homes. 
Multiple-wide homes shall only be required to have diagonal ties and anchors. No over-the-roof or vertical ties shall be required. 
(39a) Modular Home . A factory-fabricated transportable building consisting or units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with regulations or either the Southern Building Code Congress International or the Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
(Ord. of 5/16/94) 
(40)	Mobile home . A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
(Ord. of 5/16/94) 
(41)	Manufactured home community . A contiguous parcel of land under single owner-ship which has been planned and improved for the placement of five (5) or more manufactured or mobile homes for residential occupancy. This definition shall not include manufactured home or mobile home sales lots on which unoccupied homes are located for purposes of inspection and sale. 
(Ord. of 5/16/94) 
(42)	Nonconforming use . Any lawful use existing at the time of enactment of this chapter that does not conform with the use for this district as specified in this chapter. 
(43)	Nursing home . Any facility, authorized by Georgia law, in which aged, chronically ill, or incurable persons are housed and furnished with meals and nursing care. 
(44)	Nursery school . An agency, organization or individual providing daytime care of four (4) or more children not related by blood or marriage or not the legal wards or foster children of the attendant adult. 
(45)	Principal use . The principal purpose for which a lot or the main building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied, or maintained. 
(46)	Professional office building . A building constructed for or remodeled for use as office space for professions including, but not limited to, medical, dental, legal, forestry, surveying, financial, architectural, engineering, real estate, or insurance. See § 8-4-55. 
(47)	Public street . Right-of-way dedicated to the City or owned by the City for public street purposes. 
(48)	Setback . The shortest distance between the centerline of a street and the principal building or structure on a lot. 
(49)	Shopping center . Two (2) or more commercial establishments planned and managed as a single unit with off-street parking and loading facilities provided on the property. 
(50)	Sign . Any surface, fabric, or device bearing lettered, pictorial, or sculptured matter designed to convey information visually and exposed to public view; or any structure including billboard or poster panel designed to carry the above visual information. 
a.	Advertising permanent use sign . A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold or offered only elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is displayed. 
b.	Advertising incidental use sign . A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold or offered as a minor and incidental activity upon the premises where the sign is displayed. 
c.	Bulletin board . A sign used to announce meetings or programs to be held on the premises of a church, community recreation center, school, auditorium, library, museum, or similar noncommercial places of public assembly. 
d.	Identification sign . A sign used to identify only the name of the individual, family, organization, or enterprise occupying the premises. 
e.	Point of business sign . A sign which directs attention to a business, profession, or industry located upon the premises where the sign is displayed, to type of products sold, manufactured, or assembled, and/or to service or entertainment offered on said premises, but not a sign pertaining to the preceding if such activity is only minor and incidental to the principal use of the premises. 
(51)	Special exception . A special exception is a use which within certain districts specified by this chapter is not permitted as a matter of right but may be permitted within these districts by the Mayor and Council after said Council has (i) reviewed the proposed site plans for the use, its location within the community, its arrangement and design, its relationship to neighboring property and other conditions peculiar to the particular proposal which would determine its desirability or undesirability; (ii) has found the proposal not to be contrary to the intent of this chapter; and (iii) has approved the use as specified. 
(52)	Street . Relates to, and includes streets and avenues, boulevards, roads, highways, expressways, and other ways. See subsection (46). 
a.	Major street . A street having a one-hundred-foot right-of-way and/or designated as a Georgia state highway or a county road. 
b.	Minor street . A street deeded to the City having less than a one-hundred-foot right-of-way. 
(53)	Structure . Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include, but are not limited to the following: site built buildings, industrialized buildings, modular homes, manufactured homes, mobile homes, billboards, swimming pools, advertising signs, satellite dishes, fallout shelters, fences, walls, concrete paving and/or asphalt driveways, including resurfacing. 
(Ord. of 5/16/94) 
(54)	Structural alterations . Any change in the supporting members of a building such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, floor or roof joists, girders or rafters, or changes in roof or exterior lines. 
(55)	Tourist home . A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations are provided or offered to transient visitors for compensation. 
(56)	Trailer park, travel . Any portion or parcel of land designed to accommodate one (1) or more travel trailers or recreation vehicles to be used for living or sleeping purposes, including any land, building, structure, or facility used by the occupants of such units on such property. 
(57)	[Repealed. Ord. of 5/16/94] 
(58)	Trailer, camping-recreation vehicle . A vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation uses, which is identified on the unit by the manufacturer as a camper, travel trailer, recreation vehicle, or motor home, and is not more than eight (8) feet in body width. 
(59)	Use . The purpose for which land or buildings is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either is or may be occupied or maintained. 
(60)	Variance . A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance, not a change in a zoning district, where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. A variance can only be approved by the Mayor and Council. 
(61)	Yard . An open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied except as permitted by this chapter. 
a.	Yard, front . That area of a lot lying between the abutting street right-of-way and the principal building of the lot and extending across the front of a lot from side lot line to side lot line. 
b.	Yard, rear . That area of a lot extending across the rear of a lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear lot line and the principal building on the lot. 
c.	Yard, side . That area of a lot between the side lot line and the principal building on the lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
(Ord. of 3/4/13) 
Sec. 8-4-6 - Interpretation and application. 
In interpreting and applying this chapter, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of the chapter. Except as hereinafter provided, this chapter shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul, or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings, or upon the height of buildings, or require a larger percentage of lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other resolutions, rules, regulations, permits, or any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
Sec. 8-4-7 - Zoning affects all land and buildings. 
No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied; and no building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered unless in conformity with this chapter. 
Sec. 8-4-8 - Every use must be upon a lot. 
No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this chapter except as provided in §§ 8-4-22(2) and 8-4-101. 
Sec. 8-4-9 - Only one principal building per lot. 
(a)	Except as herein provided (See § 8-4-52), there shall be no more than one (1) principal building, structure, or use upon any lot other than lots with C-1, C-2, I-1, or I-2 districts. 
(b)	No mobile, modular, manufactured or industrialized home may be added to an existing home or principal building. 
(Ord. of 5/16/94) 
Sec. 8-4-10 - Open space not to be encroached upon. 
No open space shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity to the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces, and such other regulations required by this chapter for the district in which such building is located. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and planted buffer strips shall be construed not to be encroachments of yards. (See § 8-4-28.) 
Sec. 8-4-11 - Required open space may not be used by another building. 
No part of any yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building, structure, or use by this chapter shall be considered to be part of a required yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space for any other building, structure, or use except as provided in § 8-4-66. 
Sec. 8-4-12 - Reduction of yards or lot area. 
Except as provided in § 8-4-24, no lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be reduced, divided, or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located unless said reduction or division is necessary to provide land that is needed and accepted for public use. 
Sec. 8-4-13 - Encroachment on public rights-of-way. 
No building, structure, service area, or required off-street parking and loading facilities, except driveways, shall be permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
Sec. 8-4-14 - Location of accessory buildings or uses on residential lots. 
(a)	Accessory buildings may be erected in any required yard except a front yard, provided that in no instance shall such a building be placed nearer to a side or rear property line than ten (10) feet. Certain accessory buildings identified in 8-4-44, "Table of Permitted Uses," by an asterisk (*), shall be required to be completely enclosed by a four-foot high, or higher masonry, wood, or chain link fence. (See Section 8-4-19) 
(Am. Ord. of 12/4/89; Am. Ord. of 10/7/96; Ord. of 10/2/00) 
(b)	In case of double frontage lots, accessory buildings shall observe front yard requirements on both street frontages wherever there are any principal buildings fronting on said streets in the same block or adjacent blocks. 
Sec. 8-4-15 - Accessory buildings or uses on nonresidential lots. 
Accessory buildings or uses on nonresidential lots shall comply with front, side, and rear yard requirements established for the zoning district in which such accessory buildings or uses are located. 
Sec. 8-4-16 - Storage of recreation vehicle, travel trailer, or camper. 
One (1) recreation vehicle, travel trailer or camper as defined in § 8-4-5(57) may be stored on a residential lot provided it is locked and unoccupied. 
Sec. 8-4-17 - Mobile office. 
A manufactured or mobile home may be converted and used as an office provided that it shall not be used as a residential dwelling unit. 
(Ord. of 5/16/94) 
Sec. 8-4-18 - Every lot shall abut a street. 
No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut for at least twenty-five (25) feet on a public street, except in a C-1 zone where the minimum size lot is twenty (20) feet and which is not accessible via a public drive of not less than twenty (20) feet width, exclusive of parking. Buildings in I-2 districts are exempt from these requirements. 
Sec. 8-4-19 - Lots with multiple frontage. 
In the case of a corner lot, side yard setback requirements from the property line shall be equal to seventy-five (75) percent of that required for the front yard setback for the district. On a corner lot where the main entrance into a residence is facing a side yard, it shall be permissible for purposes of this chapter to construe the residence to be fronting on the street other than that street which said entrance faces, and side and rear yard requirements may be provided accordingly. If a building is constructed on a through lot having frontage on two (2) roads not at an intersection, a setback from each road shall be provided equal to the front yard requirement for the district in which the lot is located. 
Sec. 8-4-20 - Screening required. 
Wherever screening is required by this chapter, a durable masonry wall, or fence and hedge of sufficient capacity to provide a visual blind designed to be compatible with the character of adjoining properties, shall be provided. Such fences and walls shall be at least five (5) feet in height measured from the ground along the common lot line of the adjoining properties. Hedges or comparable natural plantings shall be of such variety that an average height of at least five (5) feet could be expected by normal growth within no later than three (3) years from the time of planting. 
Sec. 8-4-21 - Side and rear yards not required next to railroad. 
Within any nonresidential district, side yards and rear yards shall not be required adjacent to railroad rights-of-way. 
Sec. 8-4-22 - Substandard lots of record. 
Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter, which has an area or a width which is less than required by this chapter, shall be subject to the following exceptions and modifications: 
(1)	Adjoining lots . When two (2) or more adjoining lots with continuous frontage are in one (1) ownership at any time after the adoption of this chapter and such lots individually are less than the minimum square footage and/or have less than the minimum width required in the district in which they are located, then such group of lots shall be considered as a single lot, provided, however, that when such combination of lots would create a single lot having a width and area one and three quarters (1¾) times or more than that width and area required by this chapter, then such lot may be divided into two (2) lots of equal width and equal area and said lots used as conforming lots. 
(2)	Lot not meeting minimum lot size requirements . In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter which has an area or a width which is less than that required by this chapter may be used as a building site for a single-family dwelling or other use permitted in that zone; provided, however, that the same yard, setback, open-space, and other dimensional requirements are met that would be required for a standard lot. 
Sec. 8-4-23 - Intersection visibility and corner setback. 
In all zones, except C-1; no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, marquee or other obstructions to vision between the heights of two and one-half (2½) and ten (10) feet shall be permitted within thirty (30) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two (2) streets or railroad lines, of a street intersection with a railroad line, driveway curb cut or along the sides of property lines approaching a street. Exception shall be made for utility poles, lighting standards, traffic and street signs and trees, the branches of which are kept trimmed to a height of eight (8) feet above the street level. Nonconforming buildings shall be excepted from this provision. 
(Ord. of 5/16/94) 
Sec. 8-4-24 - Permitted modification of setback requirement. 
When a building or structure is proposed on a lot and when on either or both lots which adjoin such lot at the street right-of-way line there exists a principal building which does not conform to the setback requirements of this chapter, the required setback for such building or structure shall be as follows: 
(1)	Where only one (1) said adjoining lot contains a principal building with a nonconforming setback, the setback shall be the computed average of (i) the normal setback requirement with (ii) the nonconforming setback; 
(2)	Where both adjoining lots contain a principal building each with a nonconforming setback, the minimum setback shall be the computed average of the two (2) nonconforming setbacks; or 
(3)	Reconstruction or modification of existing nonconforming structures shall be authorized utilizing the original setback. 
Sec. 8-4-25 - Zoning to apply when lot is divided by district boundary line. 
In the event that a district boundary line on the zoning map divides a lot of record held in one (1) ownership on the date of passage of this chapter, each part of the lot so divided shall be used in conformity with the regulations established by this chapter, for the district in which each such parcel is located; except, however, that if the property owner of such a lot, other than a through lot, so desires, he may extend a use allowed on the greater portion of said lot 35 feet beyond the district boundary line in accordance with setbacks and yard requirements of the district into which he is encroaching. 
Sec. 8-4-26 - Required buffers in C-1 and C-2 districts. 
In a C-1 or C-2 district where a lot abuts any residential district, a five-foot-wide buffer shall be provided with screening as specified in § 8-4-20. Off-street parking associated with such uses shall be governed by this same provision. 
Sec. 8-4-27 - Structures permitted above the height limits. 
The height limits of this chapter shall not apply to a church spire, belfry, cupola, dome, or ornamental tower not intended for human occupancy, monument, water tower, observation tower, transmission tower, chimney, smoke stack, conveyer, flag pole, radio or television tower, mast or aerial, parapet wall not extending more than four (4) feet above the roof line of the building, and necessary mechanical appurtenances including silos, storage tanks, and process structures necessary for normal operations of industries in I-2 districts. 
Sec. 8-4-28 - Permitted encroachments of yards and setbacks. 
Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, steps, gutters, and fire escapes may project not more than four (4) feet beyond any required setback line, except where such projections would obstruct driveways which are or may be used for access for service and/or emergency vehicles. 
Sec. 8-4-29 - Modification of side yard requirements. 
When a lot of record has a width less than the frontage required in the district in which it is located and said lot cannot be increased in width as provided in § 8-4-22, then the zoning administrator shall be authorized to grant a variance to reduce the side yard requirements for such a lot provided, however, that there shall be not less than an eight-foot side yard. 
Sec. 8-4-30 - Uses prohibited. 
If either a use or class of use is not specifically indicated as being permitted in a district either as a matter of right, or as a special exception, then such use, class of use, or structures for such uses, shall be prohibited in such district. 
Sec. 8-4-31 - Swimming pools. 
(a)	Commercial . A commercial swimming pool shall not be located closer than twenty (20) feet of a property line. 
(b)	Residential . Same as accessory structure. Swimming pools must be completely enclosed by a four-foot high wall or fence. See § 8-4-14. 
(Ord. of 12/4/89; 5/16/94) 
Sec. 8-4-32 - Zoning of annexed areas. 
Areas annexed to the City shall be placed in the A-1 zoning district and shall remain A-1 until such time as a zoning change is executed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for zoning amendments. 
Sec. 8-4-33 - Right of business maintenance. 
Heavy industry plants in I-2 districts shall have the right to engage in any activity necessary to maintain and expand that industry and shall have the right to engage in any activity to comply with any mandated state or federal legislation or agency. These rights shall exist for I-2, heavy industrial plants, even though specific rights may not be expressly indicated. The rights for activities and fixtures to maintain business and plant maintenance and/or to comply with state and federal regulations shall not be interpreted so as to grant these rights to activities or fixtures that are not necessary for maintenance of heavy industrial plants and shall not permit other businesses to locate in I-2 districts, solely because they engage in similar activities as an independent supplier to said heavy industries. These rights shall exist for contractors that are engaged in such activities for heavy industries on said industries' property. 
Secs. 8-4-34—8-4-40 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B - Zoning Districts 

Sec. 8-4-41 - Establishment of districts. 
In order that the purposes of this chapter may be accomplished, there are hereby established within the City the zoning districts identified as follows: 
(1)	A-1 agricultural district . The purpose of these districts is to provide single-family residential areas with minimum lot sizes of three (3) acres, said areas being protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development, and also permitting rural agricultural uses. 
(2)	R-1 single-family residential district . The purpose of this district is to provide single-family residential areas with minimum lot sizes of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet, said areas being protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development and excessive density and from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
(3)	R-2 single-family residential district . The purpose of this district is to provide single-family residential areas with minimum lot sizes of eight thousand (8,000) square feet, said areas being protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development and excessive density and from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
(4)	R-3 multi-family residential district . The purpose of this district is to provide orderly development of high density residential areas for one-, two-and multi-family dwellings, said areas being protected from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
(5)	R-4 manufactured home community district . The purpose of this district is to provide areas within the City exclusively for manufactured home communities, manufactured homes and mobile homes, and for buildings directly related to the operation of the manufactured home community. Manufactured home communities shall have a minimum of three (3) acres with manufactured home spaces of at least four thousand (4,000) square feet each. See § 8-4-53, Article C. 
(Ord. of 5/16/94) 
(6)	C-1 central business district . The purpose of this district shall be to enhance and protect shopping facilities in the central business district of the City. 
(7)	C-2 general commercial district . The purpose of the general commercial district is to provide for those business activities which are larger users of space than commercial uses serving the central commercial district and to provide for those business activities which cater to the needs of individual neighborhoods, and highway business areas. 
(8)	I-1 light industrial district . The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect areas for those industrial uses which do not create excessive noise, odor, smoke, dust, and which do not possess other objectionable characteristics which might be detrimental to surrounding neighborhoods, or to the other uses permitted in the district. 
(9)	I-2 heavy industrial district . The purpose of the heavy industrial district is to provide a location for those industrial operations and processes which are not considered nuisances but which have objectionable characteristics that are not injurious to the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(10)	F-H flood hazard district . The purpose of the flood hazard district is to identify areas of the City that are defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development as being subject to periodic flooding and to limit development to uses that will be least damaged by flooding. 
(11)	I-O institutional/office district. This district is intended to encourage development of suitable business and professional enterprises of a character and density deemed compatible with the general area in which it is located. It is restricted to professional and business offices and for retail uses in conjunction with any normally appurtenant institutional/office uses. 
(Ord. of 10/6/97) 
Sec. 8-4-42 - Zoning map. 
(a)	The boundaries of each district are shown on a map entitled "Zoning Map of Sandersville, Georgia," dated February 2, 1981, or subsequent revisions, and certified by the Mayor of Sandersville. Said map and all explanatory matter thereon accompanies and is hereby made a part of this chapter. (Revised 7-2-90) 
(b)	An accurate copy of the "Zoning Map of Sandersville, Georgia" shall be on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator at all times. Said map shall accurately show all map amendments made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the date when said amendments became effective. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to see to it that the "Zoning Map of Sandersville, Georgia" displayed in his office is kept up to date and accurately shows all amendments approved by the Mayor and Council. 
Sec. 8-4-43 - Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. 
When uncertainty exists with respect to the location of boundaries of any zoning district as shown on the "Zoning Map of Sandersville, Georgia," the following rules shall apply: 
(1)	Where district boundaries are depicted as approximately following the center lines of streets or highways, center lines of streams or drainage ways, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines, such center lines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)	Where district boundaries are so depicted that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lots shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
(3)	Where district boundaries are so depicted that they are approximately parallel to the center lines of streets, highways, or railroads, or rights-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated in the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said zoning map. 
(4)	Where a district boundary line, as appears on the zoning map, divides a lot in single ownership at the time of enactment of this chapter, the district requirements for the least restricted portion of such lot shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided that such extension shall not include any part of such a lot more than thirty-five (35) feet beyond the district boundary lines. 
Sec. 8-4-44 - Table of permitted uses. 
Within the various zoning districts as indicated on the "Zoning Map of Sandersville, Georgia" no building, structure or land shall be constructed, erected, altered or used except as indicated in the following schedules: 
(1)	Uses permitted by right . Uses permitted as a matter of right are indicated on the following schedule by the letter "X" in the appropriate column. 
(2)	Special exceptions . Uses permitted only after special review and approval of the Mayor and Council (see § 8-4-5(50)) are indicated on the following schedule by the letter "O" in the appropriate column. 

 
(Ord. of 10/6/97; Ord. of 10/2/00; Ord. of 3/4/13) 
Sec. 8-4-45 - Development standards. 
Within the various zoning districts as indicated on the "Zoning Map of Sandersville, Georgia," no building or structure shall be constructed or erected except as indicated in the schedule below. 

 
(Am. Ord. of 5/16/94; Ord. of 10/2/00) 
Secs. 8-4-46—8-4-50 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C - Special Provisions for Certain Uses 

Sec. 8-4-51 - Home occupations. 
A home occupation as defined by this chapter shall be governed by the following requirements: 
(1)	Only residents of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupation. 
(2)	The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the essential residential character of the building. 
(3)	Only one (1) point of business sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet in size, motionless, nonlighted, and attached to the principal building, shall be permitted, and no advertising signs shall be permitted. 
(4)	Use of the building for this purpose shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of one (1) floor of the principal building. 
(5)	No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building shall be permitted. 
(6)	The occupation shall not constitute a nuisance in the neighborhood. 
(7)	No accessory buildings or outside storage shall be used in connection with the occupation. 
(8)	Instruction in music and similar subjects shall be limited to two (2) students at a time. 
(9)	Vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles only shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the customary home occupation. 
(10)	No more than three (3) nontransient guests may be boarded at any one time as a customary home occupation. 
(11)	The following and similar uses shall be considered home occupations: addressing service, art instructor, beauty shop (with no more than one (1) operator), dentist, doctor, drafting, dressmaking, insurance agent, manufacturing agent, massage parlor, music teacher, notary public, photography, real estate agent, tax consultant. See § 8-4-44(93). 
Sec. 8-4-52 - Group development projects. 
Any group of buildings devoted to the same use and intended to be operated under one (1) management, such as a garden apartment project or medical office development, known herein as a group development project, may be permitted as a special exception by the Mayor and Council, providing it shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be two (2) acres. 
(2)	Street access. Any building established as a part of a group development project which cannot properly be served by emergency or service vehicles from an abutting street shall be made accessible to such vehicles by a paved driveway having a roadbed width of not less than twenty (20) feet, exclusive of parking spaces. 
(3)	Separation of buildings. All residential buildings established as a part of a group development project shall be not less than twenty (20) feet apart. 
(4)	Setback requirements. All buildings and structures established as a part of a group development project shall comply with the front yard setbacks, and the exterior side and exterior rear yard requirements established for the district in which located. 
(5)	Uses prohibited. In no case shall a use be permitted as a part of a group development project that is prohibited by this chapter in the district in which such project is to be located. 
Sec. 8-4-53 - Manufactured home communities. 
Manufactured home communities are permitted within the R-4 district as a matter of right. 
(1)	The minimum size shall be three (3) acres; and 
(2)	The community shall have minimum side yards of ten (10) feet and a front yard of at least twenty (20) feet; and 
(3)	Each manufactured home or mobile home shall be connected to water and sewerage; and 
(4)	The minimum lot area per manufactured home or mobile home shall be no less than four thousand (4,000) square feet with a minimum lot width of forty (40) feet where served by public water and sewer; and 
(5)	The minimum distance between any two (2) manufactured or mobile homes or between any manufactured or mobile home and any other building in the park shall be twenty (20) feet; and 
(6)	A twenty-foot drive shall serve all manufactured and mobile home lots and be drained so as to prevent damage to adjoining property, public or private; and 
(7)	A recreation designed for the common use of residents shall be provided within the manufactured home community and shall comply with the following: In all communities accommodating or designed to accommodate twenty-five (25) or more manufactured homes, there shall be one or more recreation areas consisting of a minimum of one-half (½) acre. The size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet for each lot/home and shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards. 
(8)	The maximum density for manufactured home communities shall not be greater than ten (10) manufactured homes per acre as authorized in the approved building and inspection permits. A separate building permit and a separate final inspection permit shall be required to enlarge or extend an existing manufactured home community. 
(Am. Ord. of 5/16/94) 
Sec. 8-4-53a - Industrialized building as single-family dwelling. 
Permitted locations. Industrialized buildings qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be allowed in all residential districts and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to requirements and limitations set forth in the section. 
Sec. 8-4-54 - Manufactured home as single-family dwelling. 
A manufactured home which meets the definition of dwelling, single-family as defined herein shall be permitted by right in all residential districts in which similar dwellings constructed on the site are permitted, subject to the requirements and procedures set forth herein to assure similarity in exterior appearance between such residentially designed manufactured homes and dwellings which have been constructed under these and other lawful regulations on adjacent lots in the same district, zoning classification or general area. 
Manufactured homes meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family, either individually or by specific model shall be permitted in all residential districts subjects to the requirements and limitations set forth in this section which are applicable to manufactured homes and the requirements and limitations applying generally to residential use in such zoning classifications or districts, including minimum lots, yard and building spacing, percentage of lot coverage, off-street parking requirements and approved foundations as described herein. 
(1)	Permitted locations. Manufactured homes which meet the standards established in Article A, §8-4-5(b)(20) Dwelling, single-family, shall be allowed in all residential districts, subject to development standards, (§8-4-45; Article B). 
(2)	Compatibility standards for manufactured homes meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family are as follows: 
a.	Manufactured homes qualifying as dwelling, single-family shall be compared to site-built and other housing in the immediate general area within the same zoning district. Approval shall be granted upon the finding that the manufactured home is substantially similar in size, siding material, roof material, foundation and general aesthetic appearance to: (i) site-built or other forms of housing which may be permitted in the same general area under this section; or (ii) existing development; or (iii) proposed development in the same zoning district. 
b.	All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed. 
c.	At each exit door there must be a landing that is a minimum of four (4) feet by six (6) feet. All steps having more than three (3) risers above grade shall be equipped with handrail located not less than thirty (30) nor more than thirty-four (34) inches above the leading edge of each step. 
Sec. 8-4-54.1 - Other manufactured home and mobile home. 
Manufactured homes which do not conform to the standards established in § 8-4-5(b)(20), dwelling, single-family and mobile homes, shall be permitted within areas zoned A-1 agricultural district and R-4 manufactured home community district provided that each home complies with the district standards in which it is located and also as a special exception in all zoning districts as provided in § 8-4-5(b)(50), for use as a principal dwelling, an accessory dwelling, for security purposes or for development under construction. 
(1)	Each manufactured home or mobile home that is not located in a mobile home park or manufactured home community shall be completely underpinned, except for ventilation and access with approved masonry, metallic, non-metallic, wooden or other materials manufactured for such purposes and anchored in accordance with applicable provisions for non-hurricane zone anchorage. The mobile home or manufactured home must have all towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches removed. 
(2)	Each newly installed manufactured home or mobile home shall conform to the minimum construction standards required by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development before said manufactured or mobile home is entitled to receive any utility service to said home. It is the intent of this section to prohibit moving mobile homes into Sandersville that do not conform to the applicable construction standards established in the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq. To that end, no mobile home shall be allowed to locate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this City unless manufactured home or mobile home complies with the minimum construction standards required by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Provided, however, that any mobile home that is located in the City at the time of the passage of this section shall not be affected by the passage of this section regarding construction standards and said existing mobile home shall be freely transferable and relocatable in City subject to the inspection of the mobile home to ensure that said mobile home meets the minimum standards under which constructed. Said inspection shall be conducted by the City Building Inspections Department or in lieu thereof, tests must be certified and documented by persons holding current licenses issued by the Georgia State Licensing Board to ensure that the plumbing, electrical and heating systems are safe and adequate and that said mobile home is habitable. 
(3)	Each manufactured home or mobile home shall have beneath and descending from each outside door of the home a landing and guard rails around said landing and steps with handrails descending to the ground or grade level. The landing must be a minimum size of four (4) feet by six (6) feet. All steps having more than three (3) risers above grade shall be equipped with handrail located not less than thirty (30) nor more than thirty-four (34) inches above the leading edge of each step. Steps and rails must be constructed of all-weather materials or manufactured kits. Furthermore, all construction and/or manufactured kits shall comply with the requirements of the building code, including amendments thereto. Each newly installed manufactured or mobile home shall comply with the requirements in paragraph (2) of this section before an occupancy permit is issued for said manufactured or mobile home. Each newly installed manufactured or mobile home shall have thirty (30) days from the date utilities are connected to meet the requirements of paragraph (1) and (3) of this section. Failure to do so will result in the disconnection of utility services. 
(Ord. of 5/16/94; Ord. of 10/7/96) 
Sec. 8-4-55 - Professional office building. 
New or remodeled buildings for use as offices for medical, dental, legal, forestry, surveying, financial, architectural, engineering, real estate or insurance professions may be permitted as a special exception and allowed in R-2 and R-3 districts by the Mayor and Council providing the following requirements are met: (See §§ 8-4-5(b)(45) and 8-4-45). 
(1)	Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided with one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area plus one (1) space for each employee. See § 8-4-68. 
(2)	Setback requirements. All professional office buildings and structures shall comply with the front yard setbacks, and the exterior side and exterior rear yard requirements established for the district in which they are to be located. 
(3)	Point of business sign. Only one (1) point of business sign, not exceeding six (6) square feet in size, motionless, nonlighted, and attached to the principal building, shall be permitted, and no advertising signs shall be permitted. (See § 8-4-44(2)158, Table of Permitted Uses.) 
(Ord. of 5/16/94) 
Sec. 8-4-56 - Subdivision developments. 
(a)	Definition. A "subdivision" is the division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, and includes all division of land into three (3) or more lots involving a new street, or a change in existing streets; or division of land involving the extension of water or sewer lines and includes resubdivisions. The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant [number] of lots are equal to the standards of § 8-4-45 nor the division of land into parcels of five (5) acres or more where no new street is involved is not considered a subdivision. 
(b)	Development plan. The development plan for the subdivision shall be prepared as a preliminary subdivision plat and shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. The use to be made of each lot shall be marked on the plat. The plat shall also state the maximum number of dwelling units authorized for the subdivision. When approved, a final plat shall be recorded in the same manner as other subdivision plats along with the necessary covenants and restrictions applicable to the development. In addition, a faithful reproduction of the plat shall be prominently displayed within the subdivision until such time as the subdivision is fully developed. 
(c)	Private deed covenants. The subdivision shall be included within private deed covenants running with the land to assure its continuance in accordance with approved plans and development. 
(d)	Procedures for approval of subdivision developments. 
(1)	Pre-application review. Prior to the submittal of an application for approval of a planned development, the developer shall meet with the planning and zoning commission, the zoning administrator, and the building inspector for a review of the location, scope and nature of the proposed development. 
(2)	Application for approval; site plan required. At least 14 days prior to the regular meeting of the planning and zoning commission, a site plan plot of the proposed development shall be submitted as prescribed below. Each site plan shall be prepared by an architect, engineer, or land surveyor, or by a professional landscape architect, or by a professional planner. Each site plan shall be drawn at an appropriate scale and shall show the following: 
a.	Name: Name of the proposed development. Name and address of the owner and the designer of the site plan and his seal. 
b.	Date: Date, approximately north arrow and scale. 
c.	Boundaries: The boundary line of the tract to be developed drawn accurately to scale and with accurate linear and angular dimensions. 
d.	Location map: A map to an appropriate scale showing the location of the development. 
e.	Contours: Contours with a minimum vertical interval of five (5) feet referred to sea level datum shall be provided for both existing and proposed topography. 
f.	Existing property lines: The location of existing and platted property lines, streets, buildings, water courses, railroads, bridges, water mains, sewers, culverts, drain pipes, and public utility easements, both on the land to be developed and on that portion of the land immediately adjoining which abuts the land to be developed, and any other pertinent characteristics of the land; the names of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land; and the zoning of the property. 
g.	Proposed improvements: The names, where appropriate, and locations and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, buildings, parking, recreation areas and facilities, yards and other open spaces. 
h.	Utility and drainage plans: Utility and drainage plans shall be provided including all information required by the health, street, water and sewer and sanitation departments to determine that water, sewer, sanitary disposal, and storm drainage improvements will be made and located in accordance with city and county requirements. 
i.	Buffer areas: Location, dimensions, and treatment of all required buffer, landscaped or planted area including fences. 
j.	Proposed protective covenants: A preliminary outline of proposed protective covenants, including provisions for the organization and financing of a homeowners' association where appropriate. 
k.	Other information: Other information required by the zoning administrator or the building inspector to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)	Approval. 
(1)	All planned development projects shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission may approve any site plan plat where no variance to this chapter is involved, except as provided herein. If a site plan plat includes a variance to the requirements of this chapter or if the planning and zoning commission denies approval or fails to act within 30 days of submission, the developer may request that the site plan be considered by the mayor and council. The mayor and council as a part of its site plan plat approval may vary, except for use or density provisions, the terms of this chapter where, in its opinion, equal performance can be obtained by means other than those specified herein. 
(2)	Building permits shall not be issued for structures located in a subdivision created subsequent to the adoption of this chapter unless a final plat of such subdivision has been approved and recorded as provided herein. 
(3)	In the event that no improvements are made to land approved for subdivision within two (2) years, the planning and zoning commission may require resubmission of preliminary and final plats. 
(f)	Design standards. 
(1)	Requirements of developer. Unless otherwise stated herein, the developer of such subdivisions will be required to provide all improvements described within subsection (g). 
(2)	Suitability of land. Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, or erosion or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use nor for any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety, or property destruction, unless the hazard can be and is corrected prior to final plat approval. The developer of such subdivision will be required to conform to the requirements of the Georgia Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(g)	Improvements design. 
(1)	Lots. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements set forth in section 8-4-45, except that residential lots not served by a public sanitary sewer and public water supply shall be no less than one (1) acre in area or such greater area as may be required by the county health department. Residential lots served by a private sanitary sewer with public water supply shall meet requirements of the county health department. 
(2)	Street frontage. Units within the subdivision which front on a street shall front only on a public street classified as a minor thoroughfare or other street, or on a private street having a pavement width of not less than 28 feet, or, if such street is designated as being one-way, 20 feet. 
(3)	Easements. Except where alleys are permitted for the purpose, the developer shall provide easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines for utilities; such easements shall be at least 20 feet wide. 
(4)	Sidewalks. Pedestrian easements for sidewalks of at least five (5) feet in width may be required within blocks measuring more than 800 feet in length. Pedestrian easements shall also be provided to grant access to recreation areas and school sites when in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission sufficient access is not provided by proposed streets. Such easements may also be used for utilities and shall be paved with a suitable permanent surface. All sidewalks are to be a minimum of four (4) feet in width, four (4) inches in thickness of 2500 p.s.i. concrete, with three (3) foot wide handicapped ramps at intersections. 
(5)	Streets. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to the street and highway plans of the planning and zoning commission, the state, and the city respectively. All public streets except marginal access streets, within subdivisions which give direct access to the residential lots shall be platted and dedicated to minimum right-of-way of 60 feet. If drainage courses for streets extend beyond the existing or proposed right-of-way, adequate drainage easements shall be dedicated. All streets dedicated to the city shall be constructed and paved (20 feet minimum) according to the specifications set forth by the Georgia State Department of Transportation Specifications of September 15, 1977, which are hereby made a part hereof to the same extent [as if] set out in full. 
(6)	Street signs. There shall be placed at least one (1) standard reflectorized street name sign at every intersection, and two (2) diagonally opposed when deemed necessary by the planning and zoning commission. 
(7)	Drainage facilities. All drainage structures and facilities shall be designed and sized to meet the runoff of the drainage area which they serve. In the event curbs and gutters are placed in the subdivision, all necessary storm sewers, catch basins, and manholes shall be built to meet state department of transportation specifications and standards. 
(8)	Water systems. Water system mains shall be installed to supply the entire subdivision. Such systems shall be designed with the approval of the city water engineer and may be connected to the city water system when property is dedicated to the city. The developer shall be required to complete all underground work for such utilities including the provision of adequate service connections to each lot within the subdivision prior to paving of such subdivision roads. 
(9)	Sewerage. 
a.	When the subdivision is located within the service area of an existing public sewerage system, sanitary sewers shall be installed in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots with connection to the public system. Where lots cannot be economically connected with a sewerage system or where such a system cannot be feasibly developed, they must contain adequate area for the installation of approved septic tank and disposal fields and must be approved in writing by the county health department. 
b.	For the purpose of this chapter, it shall be considered economically feasible to develop a sewerage system when the total cost per lot for sanitary sewers does not exceed the cost per lot for septic tanks by more than 100 percent. In such event, a sewerage system with adequate collection sewers, servicing each lot and providing for a preliminary treatment facility including among other methods a properly constructed sewerage lagoon, shall be provided. 
c.	All materials, equipment, labor, and other matters related to the sanitary sewerage system shall be provided by the developer. When considered feasible by the city engineer, new subdivisions may connect to public sewerage with costs borne by the developer. 
d.	All sewer facilities shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Georgia and the county health department. 
(10)	Utility installation. Public utility installation cost for gas, telephone, electrical, cable television, and street lights shall be borne by the developer or utility company. Installation shall be on street rights-of-way, specified easements, or under streets prior to paving or streets. 
Secs. 8-4-57—8-4-60 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE D - Off-street Parking and Service Requirements 

Sec. 8-4-61 - Scope of provisions. 
Except as provided in this section, no application for a building permit shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such building improvements, or use, a plot plan showing the required space reserved for off-street parking and service purposes. Occupancy shall not be allowed unless the required off-street parking and service facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. These provisions shall not apply to the C-1 and I-2 districts. 
Sec. 8-4-62 - Parking spaces may not be reduced. 
Off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced below the minimum required number for the use or facility to which they are assigned. 
Sec. 8-4-63 - Drainage, construction, and maintenance. 
All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties and/or public streets and shall be constructed of materials which will assure a surface resistant to erosion. All such areas shall be at all times maintained at the expense of the owners thereof, in a clean, orderly, and dust-free condition. 
Sec. 8-4-64 - Separation from walkways, sidewalks, and streets. 
All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks, and streets by curbing or other suitable protective device. 
Sec. 8-4-65 - Parking area design. 
Parking stalls shall have a minimum width of eight and one-half (8-½) feet and length of 20 feet. There shall be provided adequate interior driveways to connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. Interior driveways shall be at least 24 feet wide where used with 90 degree angle parking, at least 18 feet wide where used with 60 degree angle parking, at least 12 feet wide where used with 45 degree parking, and at least 12 feet wide where used with parallel parking, or where there is no parking, interior driveways shall be at least 10 feet wide for one-way traffic movement and at least 20 feet wide for two-way traffic movement. 
Sec. 8-4-66 - Joint parking facilities. 
Two (2) or more neighboring uses, of the same or different types may provide joint facilities, provided that the number of off-street parking spaces are not less than the sum of the individual requirements. 
Sec. 8-4-67 - Pavement markings and signs. 
Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked, and pavement directional arrows or signs shall be provided wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows and signs shall be properly maintained so as to ensure their maximum efficiency. 
Sec. 8-4-68 - Number of parking spaces. 
In order to assure a proper and uniform development of public parking areas throughout the area of jurisdiction of this chapter, to relieve traffic congestion on the streets, and to minimize any detrimental effects on adjacent properties, off-street parking space shall be provided and maintained as called for in the following schedule. For any use or class of use not mentioned in this schedule, the requirements shall be the same as a similar use as mentioned herein. Parking requirements for additions to existing uses shall be based only upon the new addition even if the existing use is deficient. These regulations shall not apply to C-1 and I-2 districts. 

 
Sec. 8-4-69 - Minimum number of loading spaces required. 
Industrial, wholesale, and retail operations shall provide loading space as follows: 
(1)	Spaces appropriate to functions. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as appropriate to the functions and scope of operation of individual or groups of buildings and uses. 
(2)	Design of loading spaces. Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and constructed so that all maneuvering to park and unpark vehicles for loading and unloading can take place entirely within the property lines of the premises. Loading spaces shall be provided so as not to interfere with the free normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on public rights-of-way. 
(3)	Ingress and egress. Ingress and egress to off-street loading spaces shall conform to driveway entrance regulations of the city. 
Sec. 8-4-70 - Curb cut requirements. 
Within any district where the lowering or cutting away of curbs for purposes of ingress and egress is required, such curb cut shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)	No more than two (2) combined entrances and exits shall be allowed any parcel of property, the frontage of which is less than two hundred (200) feet on any one (1) street. Additional entrances or exits for parcels of property having a frontage in excess of two hundred (200) feet shall be permitted after showing of actual requirements of convenience and necessity and upon approval of the planning and zoning commission. Where frontage is fifty (50) feet or less, only one (1) combined entrance-exit shall be permitted. 
(2)	At street intersections, no curb cut shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersection of two (2) curb lines or such lines extended, or within fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of two (2) property lines or such lines extended, whichever is least restrictive. 
(3)	The distance between any two (2) curb cuts on the same side of the street shall be not less than ten (10) feet. Said distance shall be measured between the points of tangency of the curb return radii and the established curb line of the abutting street. 
(4)	All driveways shall be constructed so as to be at least five (5) feet from any property lines, except that a curb return may become tangent to a curb line at a point where said property line extended intersects said curb line. 
(5)	The maximum width of any driveway shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet measured at the right-of-way line. 
(6)	The maximum width of any curb cut including curb returns shall not exceed fifty (50) feet. 
(7)	The sum of the two (2) curb return radii for any one (1) curb cut shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
Secs. 8-4-71—8-4-80 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE E - Sign Regulations 

Sec. 8-4-81 - Signs shall meet requirements of this article. 
All signs within the city shall be erected, constructed, or maintained in accordance with the provisions of this article, regulations of the Department of Transportation, State of Georgia, and applicable sections of the Standard Building Code. Only those signs that are permitted by these provisions shall be erected in the city. 
(Am. Ord. of 5/16/94) 
Sec. 8-4-82 - No signs shall hamper traffic safety. 
No sign shall be erected or continued that: 
(1)	Obstructs the sight distance along a public right-of-way; 
(2)	Would tend by its location, color, or nature, to be confused with or obstruct the view of traffic signs or signals, or to be confused with a flashing light of an emergency vehicle; 
(3)	Would by its nature or moving parts tend to confuse traffic or create any potential hazard to traffic; or 
(4)	Uses admonitions such as "stop," "go," "slow," "danger," etc., which might be confused with traffic directional signals. 
Sec. 8-4-83 - Locations prohibited. 
No sign, other than a city street sign, shall be attached to or painted on any utility pole, tree, rock or other natural object. No signs other than those signs erected by public governmental agencies and signs required by law shall be placed so as to overhang any portion of public properties with the expressed exception that in a C-1 zone one (1) sign per business will be allowed and said sign only be installed to overhang a public sidewalk, under the expressed condition that said sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in size and it shall not be erected in any manner so that any portion of said sign shall hang less than ten (10) feet above the level of the sidewalk or other pedestrian thoroughfare. It is further directed that said sign must be securely attached to the business in such a manner that its installation is done in a firm and safe manner and installed in such a way as to conform in its installation to the building code requirements of the City of Sandersville. 
(Am. Ord. of 5/16/94; Ord. of 10/2/00) 
Sec. 8-4-84 - Illumination not to be a nuisance. 
Illumination devices such as, but not limited to flood or spot lights shall be so placed and so shielded as to prevent the rays or illumination therefrom being cast into neighboring dwellings and approaching vehicles. 
Sec. 8-4-85 - Signs not requiring a permit. 
The following signs shall not require a permit: 
(1)	Signs to regulate traffic; 
(2)	Signs required to be posted by law; 
(3)	Warning signs and no trespassing signs; 
(4)	Signs established by governmental agencies; 
(5)	Signs indicating bus stops, taxi stands, and similar transportation facilities; 
(6)	Signs not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area giving information concerning the location or use of accessory off-street parking facilities or loading and unloading facilities; 
(7)	Temporary real estate signs less than ten (10) square feet in area advertising specific property for sale, lease, rent, or development, or private property; and 
(8)	Temporary signs on private land involved in campaigns of religious, charitable, civic, fraternal, political, and similar organizations. 
Sec. 8-4-86 - Maximum area of signs. 
No free-standing sign shall be larger in area than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. 
Sec. 8-4-87 - Issuance of permits, administration, and filing procedure. 
(a)	Issuance of permits. No sign, except those listed in §8-4-85 shall be erected, hung, or placed or structurally altered without a permit from the Zoning Administrator as defined in the Southern Standard Building Code. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a permit for the erection or construction of a sign only after determining it meets the requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation, Control of Outdoor Advertising; Standard Building Code and this section. 
(Ord. of 5/16/94) 
(b)	Filing procedure. Application for permits to erect, hang, or place a sign shall be submitted on forms obtainable from the Zoning Administrator. Each application shall be accompanied by plans showing the area of the sign, size, character, method of illumination, the exact location proposed for such sign, and in the case of a projecting sign, the proposed method of fastening said sign to the building structure, the vertical distance between such sign and the finished grade, and the horizontal distance between such sign and the street R/W line. 
(c)	Additional information. Each applicant shall, upon the request of the Zoning Administrator, submit any additional information deemed necessary by said administrator. 
(d)	Reserved. 
(e)	May be authorized provided all requirements of Department of Transportation, Southern Building Code, and this section are complied with and approved by Building Inspector. 
(Ord. of 5/16/94; Ord. of 10/2/00) 
Sec. 8-4-88 - Number of signs allowed. 
(1)	A total of three (3) signs may be allowed for one (1) business. Another identification sign may be allowed where a business is on a corner served by two (2) streets. (See §8-4-5(b)50, Definitions) 
(a)	Identification sign. Only one sign, except as stated in (1) above. 
(b)	Point of business sign. Only one (1) free-standing or attached-to-building sign. Square footage may not exceed seven hundred fifty (750). 
(c)	Advertising incidental use sign. May be temporary or converted to permanent. In any case, all safety standards must be meet. If temporary, must comply with § 8-4-87(e), of this chapter. 
(2)	Where several businesses occupy one (1) building, business complex or shopping center, one (1) point of business sign may be displayed at an additional location in a central cluster unit for the businesses of that area. (Article A, §8-4-23). The central cluster area of the signs must not exceed seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. 
(Ord. of 5/16/94; Ord. of 10/2/00) 
Secs. 8-4-89—8-4-100 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE F - Nonconformances 

Sec. 8-4-101 - Nonconforming lots. 
Any lot for which a plat or legal description has been recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Washington County at the time of passage of this chapter which fails to comply with the dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located may, if vacant, be used for any of the uses permitted a conforming use, may have the structure improved, enlarged, or extended; provided that in either case: 
(1)	Minimum requirements of the district for front, side, and rear yard, height, and floor area shall be complied with. 
(2)	The lot be used for duplexes or multi-family dwellings when allowed within the district only if the lot meets the minimum lot area requirements for those uses in the district. 
(3)	The requirements of §8-4-22 are met. 
Sec. 8-4-102 - Nonconforming open uses of land. 
Nonconforming uses consisting of lots used for storage yards, used car lots, auto wrecking, junk yards, golf driving ranges, and similar open uses where the only buildings on the lot are incidental and accessory to the open use of the lot and where such use of the land is not permitted to be established hereafter under this chapter in the district in which it is located, shall be governed by the following restrictions in addition to the other requirements in this chapter. 
(1)	When a nonconforming open use of land has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use. 
(2)	Nonconforming open uses of land shall not be changed to any but conforming uses. 
(3)	A nonconforming open use of land shall not be enlarged to cover more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming. 
(4)	When any nonconforming open use of land is discontinued for a period in excess of six (6) months, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this chapter. Vacancy and/or nonuse of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
Sec. 8-4-103 - Nonconforming uses of structures. 
Nonconforming uses consisting of structures used, at the time of passage of this chapter, for purposes not permitted in the district in which they are located shall in addition to the other requirements of this chapter be governed by the following restrictions: 
(1)	An existing nonconforming use of a structure may not be changed to another nonconforming use regardless of district classification or ownership. The right to maintain the existing (identical) nonconforming use of a structure may be transferred to a new owner provided that all other conditions and requirements in this article for such continuance are met. 
(2)	A nonconforming use of a structure shall not be extended or enlarged except into portions of the structure which at the time the use became nonconforming were already erected and arranged or designed for such nonconforming use. No structural alterations shall be made in any structure occupied by a nonconforming use, which would in any way increase the floor space, area, or volume of space occupied by the use. 
(3)	When any nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued for a period in excess of one (1) year, any future use of the structure shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this chapter. Vacancy and/or non-use of the building, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
(4)	At any time a nonconforming structure is one hundred (100) percent removed from a nonconforming lot, the lot is considered to be vacant and reverts to the conforming zoning district classification. Reconstruction may be allowed under §8-4-105. 
Sec. 8-4-104 - Nonconforming signs. 
(1)	Placement of nonconforming signs will not be allowed. Only signs authorized by regulations of Georgia Department of Transportation, Control of Outdoor Advertising; Standard Building Code and this chapter, may be installed. 
(2)	Nonconforming signs in place upon approval of this article must comply with Article E, § 8-4-87(e). 
(Am. Ord. of 5/16/94; Ord. of 10/2/00) 
Sec. 8-4-105 - Reconstruction of nonconforming structures. 
When a nonconforming structure containing a nonconforming use or a nonconforming sign is razed or damaged by fire, flood, wind or act of God, such structure or sign may be constructed as a nonconforming use only if reconstruction or replacement is started within six (6) months of the occurrence of the razing or damage. Provided further that such damage to the non-conforming structure or sign shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the value of the structure or sign at the time of the destruction and that appropriate written approvals be obtained from all state and local governmental agencies prior to starting repairs. Structures which do not conform to the yard requirements of this chapter shall be governed by this provision. 
(Am. Ord. of 12/27/89) 
Sec. 8-4-106 - Changes in zoning. 
Any nonconformances created by a change in district boundaries or ordinance regulations after the date of passage of this chapter shall also be governed by the provisions of §8-4-101. 
Sec. 8-4-107 - Replacement of nonconforming mobile homes and manufactured homes. 
Manufactured homes not meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family and mobile homes existing on individual lots prior to May 16, 1994 and used for single-family residential purposes and maintained as a nonconforming use may be replaced with a similar structure of a larger size, so long as the replacement does not create new nonconformities with respect to such matters as setback and parking requirements. These homes may be moved, repaired, replaced and rebuilt at the initiative of the owner regardless of whether there exists any damage from any natural or man-made catastrophe. This section is subject to the limitations addressing abandonment and discontinuance of nonconforming situations. 
(This section deals specifically with the frequently recurring question, whether a person may replace a smaller, nonconforming mobile home or manufactured home with a larger one. Since the nonconforming mobile home is not likely to be eliminated, it is better to allow it to be replaced with a more attractive home than to require that it be left in place to become more dilapidated and unsightly. This change will also allow owners to improve and replace their homes which are mobile homes or manufactured homes classified as nonconforming.) 
(Ord. of 5/16/94) 
Secs. 8-4-108—8-4-110 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE G - Administration, Enforcement, And Penalties 

Sec. 8-4-111 - Intent. 
The intent of this article is to provide for suitable and proper administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; to designate the enforcing officer and to outline the proper steps to be taken by parties interested in constructing, erecting, or modifying a structure or other land use; and to set forth the penalties for violating the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 8-4-112 - Zoning enforcement officer. 
The building inspector is hereby appointed as the zoning administrator and it shall be his duty to administer and to enforce this chapter. The building inspector shall keep records of all and any permits, the certificates of occupancy issued, and all submitted subdivision plats, with notations of all special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep copies of all sketches and plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records of his office and shall be made as a public record. The building inspector does not have the authority to take final action on applications or matters involving variances, nonconforming uses, or other exceptions which this regulation has reserved for public hearings. 
Sec. 8-4-113 - Building permit required. 
A building permit, or a sign permit in case of a sign, issued by the zoning administrator is required in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving, or alteration of any building or structure or sign. No building permit or sign permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter; however, a building permit issued before the adoption of this chapter shall remain valid with the same qualifications as issued under this chapter. 
Sec. 8-4-114 - Application for building permit. 
(a)	All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plat or plan in duplicate, drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon; the size of the building to be erected; the location of the building on the lot; the size and location of the lot; the number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate; the setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots and such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. Any building permit shall become void if the work involved has not begun within six (6) months after the date of issuance of the permit, or if the work or development authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the work or development is commenced; provided that extensions of time for periods not exceeding six (6) months each may be allowed in writing by the zoning administrator. 
(b)	The applicant for a building permit shall submit a certificate with his application which certifies that the lot which he proposes to develop is a lot of record. When the lot in question does not meet the lot width and lot area requirements of this chapter, then the applicant shall certify that such lot was a lot of record prior to the adoption of this chapter or is a lot which has been created through governmental taking of property. 
(c)	Building permits issued by the zoning administrator will identify buildings by assigning a street identification number. House street numbers of residential, commercial, and industrial buildings will display street identification numbers of at least three (3) inches in height, that are visible from the facing street (see Article E). 
Sec. 8-4-115 - Sign permits. 
The zoning administrator shall receive applications for the construction of signs, as required by this chapter. Such applications shall follow the same forms as required for building permits, and shall contain information required by this chapter in Article B. The zoning administrator shall process such sign applications and shall issue sign permits and sign permit numbers for proposed signs which comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
Sec. 8-4-116 - Certificate of occupancy. 
Certificates of occupancy shall be issued by the zoning administrator in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)	Certificate of occupancy. Certificate of occupancy issued by the zoning administrator is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
a.	A building hereafter erected; 
b.	A building hereafter altered so as to affect height, the side, front or rear yard; or 
c.	Any building or premises where a change in the type of occupancy or use will occur. 
(2)	Issuance of certificate of occupancy. Upon payment of any required fees, the zoning administrator shall sign and issue a certificate if the proposed use of land or building as stated on the certificate of occupancy is signed thereto by the owner or his appointed agent and is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter, and if the building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch or plan submitted and approved for the building permit. One (1) copy of all certificates of occupancy issued which contain a statement of the intended use of the applicable property, floor loads, and other pertinent information, signed by the owner or his agent shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning administrator. 
(3)	Denial of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this chapter, and the structure conforms with the applicable provisions of the building code and complies with the sketches or plans submitted for obtaining the building permit. 
(4)	Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the zoning administrator has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in or upon any building, structure, or premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the zoning administrator may enter such building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the zoning administrator by this chapter, provided that if such building, structure, or premises is occupied, the zoning administrator shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, the zoning administrator shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the zoning administrator shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(5)	Revocation of certificate of occupancy. The zoning administrator may revoke a certificate of occupancy upon determination that there exists in or upon the building, structure, or premises any use, condition, or code violation which makes such building, structure, or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous for habitation. Written notice of the revocation shall be given to the owner and occupant of the building, structure, or premises five (5) days in advance of the revocation becoming effective. Any occupancy or use of the building, structure, or premises thereafter shall be in violation of this chapter. At such time as the property for which the certificate of occupancy has been revoked has been brought into compliance with the applicable state minimum standard codes and the ordinances of the city and is safe for habitation, and upon payment of the established fee for issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the certificate of occupancy shall be reinstated. 
(6)	Authority to disconnect utility services. Upon revocation of the certificate of occupancy of any building, structure, or premises regulated by this chapter, the zoning administrator shall have the power to require the disconnection of utility services to such building, structure, or premises. The zoning administrator shall notify the owner and occupant of the building, structure, or premises of the decision to disconnect prior to the disconnection or as soon as practical thereafter. 
(7)	Appeal of revocation or disconnection of utility services. The decision of the zoning administrator to revoke a certificate of occupancy or to require the disconnection of utility services to a building, structure, or premises may be appealed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 8-4-132 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-17-14) 
Sec. 8-4-117 - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be fined not less than $25 or more than $100 for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 8-4-118 - Remedies. 
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this chapter, the zoning administrator or any other appropriate authority, or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the violation in the case of such building, structure, or land. 
Secs. 8-4-119—8-4-130 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE H - Appeal Procedure 

Sec. 8-4-131 - Intent. 
This article is established to identify the procedure whereby any aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 8-4-132 - Who may appeal. 
Any party aggrieved because of the alleged error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator may appeal such action to the mayor and council. Such appeal shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date of notification of the decision appealed from by filing with the zoning administrator and with the mayor and council and city clerk's office, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the mayor and council all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
Sec. 8-4-133 - Presentation of evidence. 
The appellant, and any public agency or private individual shall be entitled to present evidence on matters before the mayor and council, and the mayor and council may request technical service, advice, data or factual evidence from the planning and zoning commission for assistance in reaching decisions. 
Sec. 8-4-134 - Decision by mayor and council. 
The mayor and council may, in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning administrator, and to that end shall have all the powers of the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 8-4-135 - Appeal of decision by mayor and council. 
(a)	Any party aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council may seek review of such decision by a court of record as provided by Georgia law. 
(b)	The appeal of the decision of the mayor and council must be filed within 30 days from the date of decision of the mayor and council. Upon failure to file the appeal within 30 days, the decision of the mayor and council shall be final. 
Secs. 8-4-136—8-4-140 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE I - Ordinance, Amendments and Zoning Changes Polices, Procedures and Standards 

Sec. 8-4-141 - Authority. 
The mayor and council may from time to time amend, supplement, or change by ordinance, the boundaries of the use districts or zones established on the comprehensive zoning map or the regulations set forth in this chapter. Any proposed amendment, supplement or change shall first be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendation. 
(Ord. of 2/2/81, as amended by Ord. of 6/6/88) 
Sec. 8-4-142 - Amendments. 
This chapter, including the comprehensive zoning map, may be amended by the mayor and council on its own motion, on petition of an owner of property or on petition of someone having a documented legal interest in property or on recommendation of the planning and zoning commission; but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed or shall first have been submitted to the planning and zoning commission for review and recommendation. Before enacting an amendment to this chapter, the mayor and council shall give public notice and hold a public hearing thereon as set forth in this section. 
(Ord. of 2/2/81, as amended by Ord. of 6/6/88) 
Sec. 8-4-143 - Procedure for amendment. 
Any person or persons, other than the mayor and council or planning and zoning commission, desiring to submit a petition requesting a change in zoning shall file such petition with a plat of the subject property attached thereto, together with a payment of $75 to cover administrative and advertising costs, with the building inspector of the city. Such petition must be signed by the petitioner, who must be the owner of the property or shall have a documented legal interest in the property and shall state the name, address and telephone number of the petitioner; the present zoning classification of the property; the proposed zoning classification of the property; the location of the property and the reasons for requesting the proposed change in zoning; the amount of any gift or campaign contribution made by the petitioner or by any person who has a financial interest in the petitioner if the petitioner is a partnership, corporation or other business entity, to the mayor, any member of the council or planning and zoning commission during the three (3) years immediately preceding the filing of such petition and said petition shall be accompanied by such disclosure as is required by Volume 37, Title 36, Chapter 67A of Official Code of Georgia Annotated, if any. When a petition is filed, the building inspector shall forthwith deliver copies of such petition to the members of the planning and zoning commission and the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 2/2/81, as amended by Ord. of 6/6/88) 
Sec. 8-4-144 - Public hearing notification. 
The building inspector shall then prepare and cause to be published at least twice in the Sandersville Progress, a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the city and its official organ, a notice of the public hearings which will be held by the planning and zoning commission and mayor and council, stating the time, place and purpose of such hearings, the location of the property and name of the owner thereof, the present zoning classification of the property and the proposed zoning classification of the property. The publication of said notice shall be published at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearings. Public hearings shall also be held by the planning and zoning commission on proposed amendments to this ordinance initiated by the mayor and council or by the planning and zoning commission, and notice of such hearings shall be published as hereinbefore provided for notices of hearings on petitions of owners for rezoning. Such notices shall state the time, place and purpose of such hearings and, if rezoning of property is proposed, shall also state the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
(Ord. of 2/2/81, as amended by Ord. of 6/6/88) 
Sec. 8-4-145 - Sign requirements for public hearings. 
(a)	Within three (3) days of the filing of a petition for a change in zoning, the petitioning party shall cause to be erected in a conspicuous location on the subject property a sign. The required sign shall be at least nine (9) square feet (3' × 3') and shall contain a message composed of black letters three (3) inches high upon a white background which shall read as follows: 
"PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE  "ZONE CHANGE 
"A Public hearing will be held at _____ (designated location) ____________ (TIME, p.m. or a.m.) on ____________ (DATE) ____________ (YEAR) by the planning and zoning commission then; at ____________ (TIME, p.m. or a.m.) on ____________ (DATE) ____________ (YEAR) by the Mayor and Council to consider the rezoning of this property from ____________ (PRESENT ZONE) to ____________ REQUESTED ZONE) as provided for in the City revised City Zoning Ordinance. 
" _____ "  CITY OF SANDERSVILLE 
"PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE  "ZONE VARIANCE 
"A public hearing will be held at the ____________ (designated location) ____________ (TIME, a.m. or p.m.) on ____________ (DATE) ____________ (YEAR) to consider the zone variance of this property as provided for in the City revised zoning ordinance. Present Zone ____________ . 
" _____ "  CITY OF SANDERSVILLE 
"PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE  "ZONING SPECIAL EXCEPTION 
"A public hearing will be held at ____________ (designated location) ____________ (TIME, a.m. or p.m.) on ____________ (DATE) ____________ (YEAR) to consider the zoning special exception of this property as provided for in the City revised zoning ordinance. Present Zone ____________ . 
" _____ "  CITY OF SANDERSVILLE 
(b)	All signs, whether erected by a petitioner or by the city, shall be so located as to provide adequate exposure to the public, and after the hearing before the planning and zoning commission, the sign shall be maintained on the subject property by the party responsible for its erection until the mayor and council has taken final action on the proposed rezoning. 
(Ord. of 2/2/81, as amended by Ord. of 6/6/88) 
Sec. 8-4-146 - Planning and zoning commission meeting procedures. 
(a)	The hearing before the planning and zoning commission shall be a public hearing as aforesaid, and be conducted as hereinafter provided. 
(b)	At the commencement of the hearing, the presiding officer shall give a brief explanation of the matter under consideration and the issue or issues to be determined. Following such explanation, the petitioner and proponents of the petition seeking a change in zoning, or the proponents of any other proposed amendment to this chapter, as the case may be, shall be afforded the first opportunity to present their case and evidence to the planning and zoning commission. After this presentment, all parties in opposition shall be afforded an opportunity to present their opposition and evidence, and, after all parties have been so heard by the planning and zoning commission, the planning and zoning commission may, but shall not be required to permit one (1) person to summarize the evidence and arguments of the proponents, and one (1) person to summarize the evidence and arguments of the parties in opposition, limiting the time for the presentation of such summaries to the extent the planning and zoning commission chairman deems appropriate. The presiding officer shall also have the authority to limit the time for presentation of evidence to the extent that the presiding officer deems appropriate. After all parties have been heard and such summaries, if any, have been completed, the planning and zoning commission chairman shall close the floor to open debate and further evidence, and once the floor is closed to open debate and further evidence, and deliberation has begun by the planning and zoning commission on the issue before it, no further evidence may be presented on arguments made either for or against the proposed rezoning or other amendments to this chapter being considered without the expressed consent of the planning and zoning commission. Thereafter, the planning and zoning commission shall begin deliberations and shall take into consideration all evidence properly before it and all pertinent standards and factors set forth in this chapter. 
(c)	When a decision has been reached the planning and zoning commission shall make its written report on the proposed change in zoning or other amendment to this chapter to the mayor and council, reporting the vote of each member of the planning and zoning commission thereon. If such report is not made within 30 days after the public hearing, the petition for rezoning or other amendment to this chapter shall be deemed to have been recommended for approval. Such reports of the planning and zoning commission shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall, upon the date said report is received, post a copy thereof as a regular notice at the place for posting such notices in city shall and forward a copy thereof to the petitioner for rezoning, if any, at the address shown in the petition for such rezoning. A copy of said report shall also be delivered to the mayor, all council members and the building inspector. Should a petition fail to comply with any requirements of this chapter pertaining to the petition prior to the time said public hearing is held, the petition shall for said reason be denied by the planning and zoning commission without inquiring into its merits. If the petitioner desires to further pursue the matter of rezoning the property in question, the petitioner must file a new petition requesting a change in the zoning of the property in question; pay an additional sum as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council to cover administrative and advertising costs; and comply with all requirements of this chapter pertaining to a petition for rezoning, whereupon the planning and zoning commission shall proceed to hear said petition on its merits. 
(Ord. of 2/2/81, as amended by Ord. of 6/6/88) 
Sec. 8-4-147 - Council meeting procedures. 
(a)	The hearings before the mayor and council shall be public hearings as aforesaid and all discussions and deliberations shall be conducted in open meeting, provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall prohibit the mayor and council from going into executive session for the purpose of discussing legal questions arising due to the matter under consideration with the city attorney in an attorney-client relationship. At the commencement of the hearing, the presiding officer, whether the mayor or the mayor pro tem, or someone designated by the presiding officer, shall give a brief explanation of the matter under consideration and the issue or issues to be determined. Following such explanation, the petitioner and proponents of the petition seeking a change in zoning, or the proponents of any other proposed amendment to this chapter, as the case may be, shall be afforded the first opportunity to present their case and evidence to the mayor and council. After this presentment, all parties in opposition shall be afforded an opportunity to present their opposition and evidence, and, after all parties have been so heard by the mayor and council, the council may, but shall not be required to permit one (1) person to summarize the evidence and arguments of the proponents, and one (1) person to summarize the evidence and arguments of the parties in opposition, limiting the time for the presentation of such summaries to the extent the presiding officer deems appropriate. The presiding officer may also limit the time for the presentation of evidence to the extent that the presiding officer deems appropriate. After all parties have been heard and such summaries, if any, have been completed, the mayor and council shall close the floor to open debate and further evidence, whereupon the council shall consider the issue to be determined and the evidence and arguments presented to it during the hearing, and make its decision by open ballot. Once deliberation begins by the mayor and council on the issue before it, no further evidence may be presented or arguments made either for or against the proposed rezoning or other amendments to this chapter being considered without the expressed consent of the council. 
(b)	Since one of the functions of the planning and zoning commission is to consider and plan for the long-range development of the city, the mayor and council shall give great weight to the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission. However, such recommendations have advisory effect only and the mayor and council shall not be bound by such recommendations. If the decision of the mayor and council results in a rezoning of property or any other amendment to the comprehensive zoning ordinance, such amendment shall be adopted by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2/2/81, as amended by Ord. of 6/6/88) 
Sec. 8-4-148 - Standards and factors to be considered in making zoning decisions. 
(a)	The mayor and council recognizes that the proper exercise of its zoning powers requires the consideration and balancing of the public interest in protecting and promoting the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right to unrestricted use of property. To ensure a proper balancing of the aforesaid interests, the planning and zoning commission in considering amendments to the zoning ordinance and applications to rezone property for the purpose of making recommendations to the mayor and council, and the planning and zoning commission in considering or making any zoning decision including, but not limited to, decisions concerning amendments to the zoning ordinance and applications to rezone property, shall consider the following standards and factors: 
(1)	the existing land use pattern, and existing uses and zoning of nearby property; 
(2)	whether existing boundaries of use districts or zones are illogically drawn in relation to existing conditions affecting the property proposed for change; 
(3)	whether changed or changing conditions make the passage of the proposed zoning appropriate; 
(4)	whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the location of the subject property and the development of adjacent and nearby properties; 
(5)	the suitability of the subject property for the purpose of the zoning classification proposed for it; 
(6)	is this request a logical extension of a use district or zone boundary which would improve the pattern of uses in the general area; 
(7)	the length of time the property has been vacant as zoned considered in the context of (1) above and development in the vicinity of the property; 
(8)	whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(9)	whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby properties; 
(10)	the extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions, and the extent to which any such diminution in, or destruction of the property values of the owner of the subject property promotes the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the public; 
(11)	the population density pattern and the possible increase in the use of, or the overloading of public facilities, including but not limited to, water and sewer systems, and streets; 
(12)	the cost to the local government in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining water service, sewer service, streets and public safety measures; 
(13)	whether this request requires a major change in existing levels of public service which cannot feasibly be financed by the local government; 
(14)	accessibility of public transportation to the property; 
(15)	whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of any then-existing land use plan; 
(16)	is the property likely to be used for the use requested; 
(17)	the aesthetic effect of existing and future use of the property as it relates to the surrounding area; 
(18)	impact on environment, including but not limited to drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality, and water quality and quantity; 
(19)	whether there exists a substantial need for the restrictions imposed or contemplated upon the use of the subject property in the interest of the public health, morals, safety or welfare; 
(20)	the relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner, and the relative loss to the public, as compared to the benefit gained by the individual property owner; 
(21)	whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal; and 
(22)	any other factors relevant to the balancing of the public interest in protecting and promoting the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right to unrestricted use of property. 
(b)	The mayor and council shall also consider such of the foregoing factors as may be relevant to consideration of any issue before it or decision concerning the rezoning of property, any amendment to the zoning ordinance or any issues before it on appeal. 
(Ord. of 2/2/81, as amended by Ord. of 6/6/88) 
Sec. 8-4-149 - Miscellaneous policies and procedures. 
(a)	Any attorney at law who intends to participate in any public hearing before the planning and zoning commission, the mayor and council or the board of appeals as attorney for any person shall, prior to the hearing, provide the person who will preside at such hearing with a written statement setting forth the names of the clients whom he will represent during the hearing and the reason each client is interested in the issues to be determined on the hearing. Thereafter, the clients of such attorney shall be bound by statements, stipulations and arguments made in their behalf by such attorney, and their oral participation in the hearing shall be limited to giving testimony when questioned by their attorney or any other attorney involved in the hearing, or by a member of the mayor and council. 
(b)	During any public hearing held by the planning and zoning commission, the mayor and council or the mayor and council acting as the board of appeals under the provisions of this chapter, the building inspector may appear in his capacity and provide such information, and make such comments and observations concerning the matter under consideration as may be appropriate and relevant. 
(Ord. of 2/2/81, as amended by Ord. of 6/6/88) 
Sec. 8-4-150 - Limits on consideration of amendments. 
Upon defeat of an application for a change in zoning, the mayor and council may not consider the property in question for rezoning amendment for at least six (6) months. 
(Ord. of 2/2/81, as amended by Ord. of 6/6/88) 
Sec. 8-4-151 - Provisions provided to applicants. 
A copy of this article is to be given to all applicants who bring zoning changes either for the rezoning of property or for text amendments and all applicants will sign a statement acknowledging receipt of a copy of this article. 
(Ord. of 2/2/81, as amended by Ord. of 6/6/88) 
Sec. 8-4-152 - Variances and special exception requests. 
It is hereby specifically stated that any applications made for zone variances or special exceptions to zoning will be subject to the sign requirements contained in section 8-4-145 and will necessitate a public hearing before the mayor and council as specified and shown in section 8-4-145 contained herein. The intention of this section being that notice be given to the public concerning any zoning variance or special exceptions to zoning and that proponents and opponents be given an opportunity to be heard on said matters. 
(Ord. of 2/2/81, as amended by Ord. of 6/6/88) 
Secs. 8-4-153—8-4-160 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE J - Legal Status Provisions 

Sec. 8-4-161 - Intent. 
This article is established to present the legal status of this chapter and to resolve differences and conflicts between this chapter and other ordinances. 
Sec. 8-4-162 - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a greater width or size of yards, or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter are herewith repealed. 
CHAPTER 5 - Trees and Shrubs 
(Ord of 8/1/94) 
ARTICLE A - General Provisions 

Sec. 8-5-1 - Short title. 
This article shall be officially known as the "Tree Ordinance" of the City of Sandersville. 
Sec. 8-5-2 - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to provide standards for the preservation of trees as part of the land development and building construction process; to protect, preserve and promote the aesthetic appeal, character and value of the city; and to promote public health and safety through the reduction of noise, storm water run-off, air pollution, visual pollution and artificial light glare. Any burden imposed by this article should be compensated for by the resulting increases in property values, commercial activity and economic development. 
Sec. 8-5-3 - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are to protect, maintain, and enhance both the immediate and long term health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City; following objectives support this purpose by encouraging a productive balance between development and nature: 
(1)	To encourage preservation of trees and prevent unreasonable or unnecessary damage to the City's existing tree canopy; 
(2)	To promote and enhance the natural value of trees which contribute to the enhancement of public and private property values, contribute to air purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge, storm water runoff control, noise abatement, to the reduction of energy needed for heating and cooling, and glare; 
(3)	To promote energy conservation by maximizing the shading and cooling effects of trees; 
(4)	To preserve a portion of existing trees and to ensure that local stock of native trees is replenished; 
(5)	To maintain natural beauty in developed areas by promoting the preservation and replanting of trees. 
Sec. 8-5-4 - City Tree Board, establishment and duties. 
(1)	Establishment. There is hereby established a City Tree Board for the City, which shall be appointed by the City Council. 
(a)	The City Tree Board shall consist of ten (10) members. 
(b)	Ex officio members of the Board shall be the City Manager, the County Forester and the County Agent. 
(c)	Tree Board members shall serve without compensation. 
(2)	Duties. Among other duties, said Board shall present short and long range planning recommendations to the Mayor and the City Council no less than once each calendar year, in writing; and 
(a)	The Tree Board shall meet from time to time as convened by any six (6) members, or by the Chairman, but in all events shall convene and meet no less than twice annually. 
(b)	Said Tree Board shall supersede and succeed the duties of the present City Tree Committee. 
(Ord. of 6/1/98) 
Sec. 8-5-5 - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall mean as follows: 
Building area. That portion of a site upon which development may or does occur. 
Caliper. The diameter of a tree, which shall be measured twelve (12) inches above the soil line for trees required to have a four-inch or greater caliper; or, for smaller trees, which shall be measured six (6) inches above the soil line, except that grafted trees shall be measured one (1) inch above the graft union if union can be seen. Measurements of one-half (½) inch or more are rounded to the next higher caliper. 
Certificate of occupancy. A certificate issued by the building inspection department certifying that all requirements for development or redevelopment of property have been met and authorizing occupancy of buildings and structures. 
Clearing. The removal of a tree of four-inch DBH or greater. 
Crown. The main point of branching or foliage of a tree, or the upper portion of a tree canopy. 
DBH (Diameter at breast height). The diameter of a tree measured at a breast height of fifty-four (54) inches above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below fifty-four (54) inches, then the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. Measurements of one-half (½) inch or more are rounded to the next higher DBH. 
Developed area. The site upon which any building, structure, pavement, landscape material, storm water facility, or other improvements, has been or will be placed. 
Development or development activity. As defined in land disturbance activity below. 
Land disturbance activity. 
(a)	The new construction or installation of a structure or parking lot; or 
(b)	Clearing, or otherwise removing trees (four (4) inches or greater) on a site; or 
(c)	Adding removing, exposing, excavating, leveling, grading, digging, burrowing, dumping, piling, dredging, or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil of a site, which would affect trees. 
Land disturbance approval. An official authorization issued by the City allowing the commencement of any land disturbance activities. 
Person. Any individual, landowner, lessee, building contractor, developer or other entity involved in the use of real property, including agents, employees, independent contractors or other in privity with any of the above, whether natural persons, corporations, partnerships, joint ventures or governmental bodies, agencies or officials. 
Preserved tree. Any tree indicated on a site development plan that is to be protected during land disturbances for incorporation into the final landscaping. 
Site. The total area within the property boundaries of a principal parcel to be developed, or contiguous parcels intended for development under a common scheme or plan. 
Specimen tree. Any tree or grouping of trees which has been determined to be of a high value because of its specific size, age, or other professional criteria. Pecan trees are not be included in this definition. 
Tree. Any woody plant that normally grows to an overall height of fifteen (15) feet and develop an average mature spread of crown of twelve (12) feet in the Washington County area. 
Tree credit (tree density factor). A numerical representation used to assign values to trees of various sizes to calculate either credit against reforestation requirements, as in the case of trees protected during the development process, or to determine the extent of replanting required, as in the case of protected trees. (See § VIII B) 
Tree removal. Removal of a tree means any act which causes a tree to die within a period of two (2) years, including but not limited to: 
(a)	Damage inflicted upon the root system by machinery, storage of materials, or soil compaction; 
(b)	Changing the natural grade of the root system within the drip line; 
(c)	Excessive pruning; paving with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious materials within such proximity as to be harmful to the tree. 
Sec. 8-5-6 - General exemption. 
Utility companies and governmental agencies constructing or maintaining easements for water, sewer, electricity, gas, drainage, television or telephone transmission shall be exempt from the provisions of this article if the applicable company or agency has executed an agreement with the City which, at a minimum: 
(1)	Recognizes the need to minimize the cutting or trimming of trees and specimen trees; 
(2)	Establishes, design guidelines for construction and maintenance which identifies the saving of trees and specimen trees as a factor to be considered in the design process; 
(3)	Requires a consultation process with the City Engineer before the commencement of a major construction project, or maintenance, or the removal of trees and specimen trees; 
(4)	Provides that a breach of such agreement constitutes a violation of this article and a loss of exemption from the requirements of this article. 
(5)	All pruning of trees shall comply with the National Arborist Association, Pruning Standards for Shade Trees. 
Sec. 8-5-7 - Replacement trees. 
Replacement trees shall be from the accepted species list (as listed in the University of Georgia Cooperative Extension Service Bulletin Number 625, "Landscape Plant Material for Georgia"), and shall be a mixture of appropriate species from that list. At least twenty-five (25) percent shall be from the large tree category, unless existing trees remaining on site satisfy the large tree requirement. 
Sec. 8-5-8 - Tree density required. 
(1)	Tree density required. Land cleared for development, or land being proposed for development shall have, after development, not less than fifteen (15) units per acre tree density on a given site. No credit shall be given to trees that are not on the recommended list without prior approval of the City Engineer. Not less than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the tree density shall be located on the front fifty (50) feet along the length of the public road frontage and twenty-five (25) percent of that shall be in the large tree variety. If in fact this creates a hardship, then the developer must meet with the City Building Inspector and Sandersville Tree Board to work out a suitable compromise. 
(2)	Calculation of required tree density units. 
Step 1—Multiply the number of acres of site, larger than one (1) acre, by ten (10) to get required units. On sites of one (1) acre or less multiply the number of acres of the site by ten (10) to get required units. (Example: A 2.2 acre site requires 33 units) 2.2 × 15-33. 
Step 2—Locate trees to remain on site, and measure DBH to those trees. Convert diameter in inches DBH to density units, using Table 1. 
Step 3—Calculate any necessary replacement units by subtracting Step 2 from Step 1. Go to Table 2 for density units for replacement trees. 
TABLE 1. EXISTING TREES TO REMAIN 
(Conversion from DBH to density follow units for trees remaining on-site.) 

 
TABLE 2. REPLACEMENT TREES  (Conversion from caliper to density factor units for replacement trees) 

 
(3)	Parking lots of more than one hundred (100) parking spaces. 
a.	Where the tree density requirements have been met by trees left on the site, the parking lots shall be designated as to place additional trees to break up the large expanse of the paved area. 
b.	On sites where the tree density criteria has not been met, the site shall be so designed as to plant some of the trees in the large expanse of the paved parking lot to meet the required tree density units. 
c.	As a general design criteria for a. and b. above, it is the intent of this article to require the planting of suitable trees in the parking lot so as to avoid large expanses of pavement and create an environment where the trees will survive and thrive. 
d.	Multi-level or covered parking areas are exempt from the requirements of this subpart (3). 
(Am. Ord. of 6/1/98; Ord. of 8/21/01) 
Sec. 8-5-9 - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the City Building Inspector to enforce this chapter. The Building Inspector shall have the authority to revoke, suspend or void any land disturbance approval and shall have authority to stop work or suspend all work at a site or any portion thereof. Each preserved tree removed without approval, shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 8-5-10 - Appeals and penalties. 
(1)	Any appeals from the decision of the Building Inspector or his designee about placing a stop work order on a site, or the granting of building permit, or final occupancy permit, shall be taken to the City Council. The appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk, in writing, not less than twelve (12) calendar days prior to the meeting at which the appeal shall be heard and shall specify the reason for the appeal. The appeal shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council. 
(2)	Violations of this chapter or failure to comply with any of the requirements hereof shall be punishable by a fine, which shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each violation of the tree ordinance. Additionally, damages to the trees shall be repaired to the maximum extent feasible. 
If preserved trees are removed with the approval of the Building Inspector, the number of required tree credits in the tree density criteria shall be doubled. 
Sec. 8-5-11 - Conflict. 
Where these provisions conflict with other landscape provisions contained within the zoning ordinance, the stricter provisions shall govern. 
Sec. 8-5-12 - Severability. 
Each separate provision of this chapter is deemed independent of all other provisions herein so that any portion or provision of this article be declared invalid, all other provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable. 
Secs. 8-5-13—8-5-20 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B - Tree Protection on Public Rights-of-way and Other Public Lands 

Sec. 8-5-21 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article apply to any land-disturbing activities affecting trees on public right-of-ways or other public lands. 
Sec. 8-5-22 - Approval procedures. 
Requests for pruning, removal and replanting of trees shall be forwarded to the Building Inspector for approval. 
Sec. 8-5-23 - Maintenance of public trees. 
All pruning and tree caring of preserved trees shall be done in accordance with the National Arborists Association, Pruning Standards for Shade Trees. 
Secs. 8-5-24—8-5-30 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C - Tree Protection on Private Property 

Sec. 8-5-31 - Exemptions. 
This article is subject to the following exemptions: 
(1)	Residential exemption. All single-family and duplex lots in any zone where permitted by the City Zoning Ordinance. 
(2)	Agricultural exemption. Any land zoned agricultural shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)	Commercial timber operations. Commercial timber operations and normal silvicultural practices, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)	Commercial tree operations. Trees grown specifically for sale, such as Christmas trees and nursery stock, are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)	In the event that any tree shall be determined to be imminently hazardous or dangerous condition so as to immediately endanger the public health, safety or welfare or cause imminent harm to a building, and requires immediate trimming or removal (in some cases), without delay, verbal authorization may be given by the Building Inspector or his designee and the tree trimmed or removed in other cases where trimming will not remove the imminent danger. 
(6)	During the period of an emergency such as a flood, ice storm, thunderstorms, windstorms, tornados, or any other act of nature, the requirements of this article may be waived by the Building Inspector or his designee. 
(7)	Any and all areas of the City zoned I-1 or I-2, which includes any and all areas zoned Industrial shall be exempt from this chapter. 
Sec. 8-5-32 - Clearing approval procedure. 
(1)	Approval required for land disturbance activity. Except for the exemptions stated above, a property owner shall not commence any land disturbance activity on his/her property without first obtaining a Land Disturbance Approval. 
Applications for approval for land disturbance activities shall be submitted by the lead owner or an authorized agent on a form provided for this purpose. Such applications shall be submitted to the Building Inspector along with all required attachments. 
(2)	All plans end related documentation shall be reviewed by the Building Inspector for conformance to the provisions of this article and either approved, returned for revisions, or denied within fourteen (14) days of receipt. If denied, the reason for denial shall be annotated on the plan or otherwise stated in writing. 
(3)	A tree protection plan shall show: 
a.	The location of existing and proposed buildings, parking, and other pertinent areas of development. 
b.	The location and species of all trees to be retained on the site for which tree density credits are to be claimed. Applicant shall make a reasonable effort to save large trees on site. 
c.	The location of all trees to be planted on the site for which tree density credit are to be claimed, giving their respective species. 
d.	All tree protective measures to be utilized for trees that are to remain on site. 
(4)	If a tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate approval shall be required for each phase as appropriate. 
Sec. 8-5-33 - Off-site tree replanting requirements. 
On sites to be developed with fewer than one hundred (100) parking spaces, when it is impractical to meet the criteria for replanting on the confines of the property to be developed, the applicant shall provide for replanting to occur on other properties within the City, public or private, that are acceptable to the Building Inspector and Sandersville Tree Board provided all other requirements are met. 
(Ord. of 8/21/01) 
Sec. 8-5-34 - Building permits and occupancy permits. 
No building permit shall be issued unless and until a land disturbance approval has been secured. A final occupancy permit shall not be issued until the application is in compliance with this chapter upon final inspection or that provisions satisfactory to the Building Inspector have been made for compliance, in no event more than six (6) months after occupancy. 
Sec. 8-5-35 - Tree maintenance. 
Care and maintenance of trees is encouraged to minimize health and safety risks. 
CHAPTER 6 - Wetland Protection 

Sec. 8-6-1 - Findings and purpose. 
(a)	Findings of fact. The wetlands within the City of Sandersville, Georgia are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well-being of many communities within the State of Georgia. 
Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
It is therefore necessary for the City of Sandersville, Georgia to ensure maximum protection for wetlands by discouraging development activities that may adversely affect wetlands. 
(b)	Title and purpose. This chapter shall be known as the Wetland Protection Ordinance of the City of Sandersville, Georgia. The purpose of this chapter is to promote wetland protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. The objective of this chapter is to protect wetlands from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic nature and wildlife habitat. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(1)) 
Sec. 8-6-2 - Wetland protection district. 
(a)	Wetland protection district. This chapter shall apply to all lands within wetlands located within the jurisdiction of the City of Sandersville, Georgia. The generalized wetland map, adopted as part of this chapter, shows the general location of wetlands and should be consulted by persons contemplating activities in or near wetlands. The generalized wetland map, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The generalized wetland map shall be on file in the office of the City of Sandersville Clerk. 
(b)	Wetland protection district boundaries. The generalized wetland map is a general reference document, and the wetland boundaries indicated on the map are approximations. The purpose of the generalized wetland map is to alert developers/landowners if they are within proximity to a wetland, which means that there is a high likelihood of the presence of a jurisdictional wetland and a need for the developer/landowner to seek U.S. Army Corps of Engineers guidance as to whether a Section 404 permit will be required prior to any activity. The generalized wetland map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the jurisdiction of the City of Sandersville, Georgia and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this ordinance does not relieve the land owner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(c)	Relationship to zoning. The wetland protection district is hereby established. The wetland protection district shall comprise an overlay zone that supplements and is indicated on the City of Sandersville Zoning Map, which is hereby incorporated and made part of this ordinance by reference. When the two (2) ordinances conflict, the more restrictive ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. of 8/21/01(1)) 
Sec. 8-6-3 - Local development permits. 
(a)	Local development permit requirements. No regulated activity will be allowed within the wetland protection district without written permission from the City of Sandersville in the form of a local development permit. Issuance of a local development permit is contingent on full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. All activities that are not identified in Subsection 8-6-3(b) below shall be prohibited without prior issuance of a local development permit. If the area proposed for development is located within two hundred (200) feet of the wetland protection district boundary, as determined by the City of Sandersville or authorized designee using the generalized wetland map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site and that a Section 404 Permit or letter of permission is required, a local development permit will be issued only following issuance of the Section 404 Permit or letter of permission. 
(b)	Permissible uses (uses as of right.) The following uses shall be allowed as of right within a wetland to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging except as provided herein. 
(1)	Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an additional 404 Permit. 
(2)	Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(3)	Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)	The continued cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(5)	The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)	Education, scientific research and nature trails. 
(7)	Temporary emergency permit. A temporary emergency permit can be issued by the City of Sandersville for the following reasons: 
•Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication or other services, provided that such roads, structures, or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged and written notice prior to the commencement of work has been given to the City of Sandersville and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns and chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland are not impaired and that any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
•Temporary water-level stabilization measures associated with ongoing silvicultural operations. 
•Limited ditching, tilling, dredging, excavating or filling done solely for the purpose of maintaining or repairing existing drainage systems necessary for the cultivation of agricultural crops, provided that the maintenance or repair activity does not result in the impairment, alteration or loss of wetlands not previously subject to agricultural and silvicultural use under the terms and provisions of Subsection 8-6-3(b)(4). 
•Limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of piers, walkways, nature trails, observation decks, wildlife management shelters, boathouses or other similar water-related structures, provided that they are built on pilings to allow unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural contour of the wetland. 
(c)	Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the wetland protection area: 
(1)	Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(2)	Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(d)	Site plans. Applications for a local development permit within the generalized wetland protection district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, with the following information: 
(1)	A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
(2)	A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)	Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of two hundred (200) feet. 
(4)	The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)	Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within two hundred (200) feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two (2) feet; and no greater than one (1) foot for slopes less than or equal to two (2) percent. 
(6)	Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)	All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(e)	Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said plan. The site plan may be amended only with the approval of the City of Sandersville. The City of Sandersville may require additional information deemed necessary to verify compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to evaluate the proposed use in terms of the purpose of this chapter. 
(f)	Subdivision approval in the wetland protection district. Any application for a subdivision approval shall include a Jurisdictional Determination approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present and that a Section 404 Permit or letter of permission is required, subdivision approval will be issued only following issuance of the Section 404 Permit or letter of permission. 
(g)	Subdivision design options in the wetland protection district. Any subdivision that includes jurisdictional wetlands shall be allowed and encouraged to use the following options: 
(1)	Lot size averaging. Lot size averaging is encouraged in single-family detached subdivisions as a means to work around wetlands. The City of Sandersville may allow a reduction in lot size provided that the same number of lots in the same subdivision are oversized by an equal or greater area. The maximum permissible reduction shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum required lot area. The number of lots with areas reduced shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of lots in the subdivision. The City of Sandersville shall require no more than a twenty-five (25) percent adjustment of side, rear and front setbacks for each affected lot. 
(2)	Cluster development. Clustering of residential development is encouraged. When considering subdivision approval, the City of Sandersville will allow incorporation of wetland or other significant natural areas as open space in the subdivision plan. Such plans should designate at least twenty-five (25) percent of the gross land area as open space. Density shall be calculated by subtracting from the total acreage of a parcel all land dedicated or in use for private or public roads, including all vehicular rights-of-way. The resultant acreage will then be divided by the minimum allowed lot size of the district to derive the number of lots permissible. 
(h)	Filing fee. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee specified by the City of Sandersville. Filing fees up to a maximum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation and wetland boundary determinations as deemed necessary by the City of Sandersville. 
(i)	Enforcement authority. The Building Official or designated appointee is hereby established as the administrator of this chapter. 
(j)	Review procedures. The application shall be made to the Building Official or designated appointee and will be reviewed within fifteen (15) days. The review period shall begin upon determination by the Building Official or designated appointee that the application submitted is complete. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval or disapproval) by the Building Official or designated appointee. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the City of Sandersville. If the review process is not completed within thirty (30) days, the application is considered approved. 
(k)	Appeals. Decisions on permit applications made by the City of Sandersville may be appealed to the Mayor and City Council. The appeal must be made within ten (10) days of the decision rendered by the Building Official or designated appointee. A public hearing shall be held for appeals. Public announcement of the hearing shall be printed in a local newspaper of general circulation at least two (2) weeks prior to the hearing. Any person may offer testimony at the hearing. The decision of Sandersville City Council may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as discussed in Section 8-6-6. 
(l)	Duration of permit validity. 
(1)	If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within twelve (12) months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)	If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire twelve (12) months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)	Written notice of the pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the Building Official or designated appointee. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(1)) 
Sec. 8-6-4 - Monitoring and enforcement. 
The City of Sandersville, its agent, officers and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this chapter and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the City of Sandersville deems necessary. 
(1)	All enforcement and monitoring activities conducted by the City of Sandersville that involves entrance to privately owned land by the City of Sandersville shall be preceded by written notification to the landowner. Said notification shall be issued at least five (5) days prior to the activities specified in the notification. 
(2)	The Building Official or designated appointee shall have authority to enforce this chapter; issue permits hereunder; and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. 
(3)	Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers shall have authority to assist the Building Official or designated appointee in enforcement. 
(4)	The Building Official or designated appointee shall have authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this chapter. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified in Section 8-6-6. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(1)) 
Sec. 8-6-5 - Penalties. 
(a)	Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provision of this chapter may be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each violation shall be a separate offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)	When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this chapter, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the City of Sandersville. 
(c)	When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this chapter, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the City of Sandersville. 
(d)	If the City of Sandersville discovers a violation of this chapter that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the City of Sandersville shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner. 
(e)	Suspension, revocation. The City of Sandersville may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of work set forth in the permit. The City of Sandersville shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(1)) 
Sec. 8-6-6 - Judicial review. 
(a)	Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the City of Sandersville concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a special permit shall be reviewable in the Washington County Superior Court. 
(b)	Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the City of Sandersville may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)	Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)	Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)	Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the Building Official or designated appointee. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(1)) 
Sec. 8-6-7 - Amendments. 
These regulations and the generalized wetland map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information concerning wetland locations, soil, hydrology, flooding or plant species peculiar to wetlands becomes available. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(1)) 
Sec. 8-6-8 - Assessment relief. 
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider wetland regulations in determining the fair market value of land. Any owner of an undeveloped wetland who has dedicated an easement or entered into a conservation program with the government or a nonprofit organization restricting activities in a wetland shall have that portion of land assessed consistent with those restrictions. Such landowner shall also be exempted from special assessment on the wetland to defray the cost of municipal improvements such as sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(1)) 
Sec. 8-6-9 - Separability and abrogation. 
All sections and subsections of this chapter are considered separate and distinct. Should any section, subsection, paragraph or part of this chapter be declared by a court of jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, it shall not invalidate any other section, subsection, paragraph or part of this chapter. All ordinances and regulations in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(1)) 
Sec. 8-6-10 - Definitions. 
Functions. The beneficial roles that wetlands serve, including: storage, conveyance and attenuation of floodwater and stormwater; protection of water quality and quality and reduction of erosion; habitat for wildlife, including rare, threatened and endangered species; food chain support for a wide variety of wildlife and fisheries; educational, historical and archaeological value protection; and scenic, aesthetic and recreational amenities. 
Generalized wetland map. A map showing the general locations of wetlands within the jurisdiction of the City of Sandersville. 
Hydric soils. Soils that form as a result of saturated soils conditions. A list of these soils is maintained by the Soil Conservation Service. 
Hydrophytic vegetation. Macrophytic plants tolerant of or dependent on saturated soil conditions. 
Jurisdictional determination. An official, written statement or map signed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or, in the case of coastal marshlands, the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Jurisdictional wetland. A wetland area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Regulated activity. Any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Temporary emergency permit. A temporary permit that may be issued in certain circumstances specified in Subsection 8-6-3(d)(7). 
Wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and distribution sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
Wetland delineation. The establishment of wetland boundaries by a representative of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or an authority designated by the Corps. 
Wetland protection district. All wetlands within the jurisdiction of the City of Sandersville, Georgia and shown on the generalized wetland map. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(1)) 
CHAPTER 7 - Groundwater Recharge Area Protection 

Sec. 8-7-1 - Title of the chapter, findings and objectives. 
(a)	Title of chapter. This chapter shall be known as the Groundwater Recharge Area Protection Ordinance of the City of Sandersville, Georgia. 
(b)	Findings of fact. In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within City of Sandersville, Georgia and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources [that] are contained within aquifers, which are permeable, rock strata occupying vast regions of the subsurface. These aquifers are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface know as groundwater recharge areas. 
Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. 
(c)	Objectives. The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)	Protect groundwater quality by restricting land uses that generate, use or store dangerous pollutants in recharge areas; 
(2)	Protect groundwater quality by limiting density of development; and 
(3)	Protect groundwater quality by ensuring that any development that occurs within the recharge area shall have no adverse effect on groundwater quality. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(2)) 
Sec. 8-7-2 - Establishment of a groundwater recharge area district. 
A groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of City of Sandersville, Georgia that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(2)) 
Sec. 8-7-3 - Pollution susceptibility. 
All recharge areas within the City of Sandersville have a low pollution susceptibility, as indicated by the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(2)) 
Sec. 8-7-4 - Permit requirements and enforcement. 
No building permit, rezoning request or subdivision plan will be approved by the City of Sandersville unless the permit, request, or plan is in compliance with the groundwater protection standards listed in Section 8-7-5. 
(1)	Enforcement. The City of Sandersville, its agent, officers and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this ordinance and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the City of Sandersville deems necessary. 
a.	The Building Official or designated appointee is hereby designated as the administrator and enforcement officer for this chapter. 
b.	The Building Official or designated appointee shall have authority to enforce this article; issue permits hereunder; and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. 
c.	Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers shall have authority to assist the Building Official or designated appointee in enforcement. 
d.	Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each violation shall be a separate offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. 
e.	The Building Official or designated appointee shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this chapter. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified in Section 8-7-6. 
f.	When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of the chapter, the violator shall be required to remove the structure. 
g.	When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this chapter, the violator shall be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable. 
(2)	Permit review and site plan requirement. With the exception of certain exempted activities identified in Subsection 8-7-4(3), applications for a development permit within the groundwater recharge area district shall include a site plan. The following information is required for all site plans: 
a.	A map or maps, drawn to a scale of one inch equals fifty (50) feet or other approved scale, showing all planned improvements including the width, depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, water courses and drainage ways, water lines, wastewater and storm water facilities, and utility installations, shall be provided by the applicant. 
b.	Location, dimensions and areas of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
c.	The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
d.	Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within two hundred (200) feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five (5) feet. 
e.	Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
f.	Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross-sectional drawings. 
g.	Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform to the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of storm-water runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the Building Official or designated appointee. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alternations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(3)	Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
a.	Single family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five (5) parcels. 
b.	Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
c.	Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single family residences. 
(4)	Review procedures. The application shall be made to the Building Official or designated appointee and will be reviewed within fifteen (15) days. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions or disapproval) by the Building Official or designated appointee. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the Building Official or designated appointee. If the review process is not completed within thirty (30) days, the application is considered to be approved. Decisions of the Building Official or designated appointee may be appealed to the City Council. 
(5)	Public notice and public hearing. Public notice of permit applications, through publication in local newspapers, is required. A public hearing on the application, to be held before the City of Sandersville may be scheduled if requested by a citizen. Public announcement of the hearing shall be printed in a local newspaper of general circulation at least two (2) weeks prior to the hearing. A record of the proceedings shall be made and kept on file by the City of Sandersville. Any person may testify at the hearing. Decisions of the City of Sandersville may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction identified in Section 8-7-6. 
(6)	Duration of permit validity. 
a.	If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within twelve (12) months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
b.	If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire twelve (12) months after the date that work ceased. 
c.	Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the Building Official or designated appointee. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(2)) 
Sec. 8-7-5 - Groundwater protection standards. 
(a)	Waste disposal facilities and synthetic liners. For all pollution susceptibility areas, new waste disposal facilities must have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(b)	Requirements for agricultural compounds. New agricultural impoundments shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	High susceptibility areas. For areas of high susceptibility, a liner shall be provided that is approved by the Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS). At a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one (1) foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10 7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the NRCS. 
(2)	Medium susceptibility areas. For areas of medium susceptibility, and NRCS approved liner shall be provided if the site exceeds fifteen (15) acre feet. At a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one (1) foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10 7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the NRCS. 
(3)	Low susceptibility areas. For areas of low susceptibility, an NRCS approved liner shall be provided if the site exceeds fifty (50) acre-feet. At a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one (1) foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10 7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the NRCS. 
(c)	Hazardous waste disposal facilities. No land disposal of hazardous waste shall be permitted within any significant groundwater recharge area. 
(d)	Hazardous waste handling and storage. New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more on any one (1) day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. 
(e)	Above ground chemical and petroleum storage tanks. For all significant groundwater recharge areas, new above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks having a minimum of six hundred sixty (660) gallons must have secondary containment for one hundred ten (110) percent of tank volume or one hundred ten (110) percent of the largest tanks in a cluster of tanks. 
(f)	Wastewater treatment facilities. For high pollution susceptibility Areas, new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner approved by EPD. 
(g)	Stormwater infiltration basins. For high pollution susceptibility areas, no new stormwater infiltration basins may be constructed. 
(h)	Wastewater spray irrigation systems. For high pollution susceptibility areas, wastewater spray irrigation systems or the land spreading of wastewater sludge shall be practiced in accordance with Department of Natural Resources criteria for slow rate land treatment. An application for a development permit for activities involving wastewater spray irrigation or land spreading of wastewater sludge must be accompanied by proof that the applicant has received a land application system permit from EPD. 
(i)	Minimum lot sizes for new homes. New homes served by septic tank/drain systems shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the Department of Human Resources' Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter "DHR Table MT-1"). The minimums set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections 1.A-F) of the DHR Manual: 
(1)	One hundred fifty (150%) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)	One hundred twenty-five (125%) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and 
(3)	One hundred ten (110%) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(j)	Minimum lot sizes for new mobile home parks. New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum size limitations based on application of Table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resources' (DHR) manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter "DHR Table MT-2"). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors set forth in Sections A—F of the DHR Manual: 
(1)	One hundred fifty (150%) percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)	One hundred twenty-five (125%) percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and 
(3)	One hundred ten (110%) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(k)	No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the Washington County Health Department first approves the proposed septic tank installations as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources for On-Site Sewage Management (hereinafter DHR Manual) and Subsections 8-7-5(i), and (j) above. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(2)) 
Sec. 8-7-6 - Judicial review. 
(a)	Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the City of Sandersville concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the Washington County Superior Court. 
(b)	Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the Building Official or designated appointee may, within the time specified by the court elect to: 
(1)	Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire and easement of fee interest in the applicant's land. 
(2)	Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e. grant a variance); or 
(3)	Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the Building Official or designated appointee. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(2)) 
Sec. 8-7-7 - Amendments. 
These regulations may, from time to time, be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(2)) 
Sec. 8-7-8 - Assessment relief. 
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider the requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(2)) 
Sec. 8-7-9 - Separability and abrogation. 
All sections and subsections of this ordinance are considered separate and distinct. Should any section, subsection, paragraph or part of this chapter be declared by a court of jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, it shall not invalidate any other section, subsection, paragraph or part of this chapter. 
All ordinances and regulations in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(2)) 
Sec. 8-7-10 - Definitions. 
Aquifer. Any stratum (rock layer) or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Groundwater recharge area. (Synonymous with aquifer recharge area). An area of the earth's surface where water infiltrated the ground, thereby replenishing the groundwater supplies within an aquifer. 
Pollution susceptibility. The relative vulnerability of groundwater to pollution from chemical spills, leaching of pollutants from dump sites, animal waste from agricultural operations or pollution generated by other human activities. 
Pollution susceptibility map(s). Maps prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) that show the relative susceptibility of groundwater to pollution. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas of high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
Significant groundwater recharge areas. Areas mapped by DNR in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology (chemical nature and form of the rock), soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, presence of "karst" topography (sinkholes, caves and fissures associated with limestone and other carbonate rocks), and potentiometric surfaces. 
(Ord. of 8/21/00(2)) 
CHAPTER 8 - Well Head Protection 

Sec. 8-8-1 - Short title and purpose. 
(a)	This chapter shall be known as the "Wellhead Protection Ordinance". 
(b)	The purpose of this chapter is to insure the provisions of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the City by establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells or springs which are the supply sources for the City water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Ord. of 2/18/02, § 1) 
Sec. 8-8-2 - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall be the meanings given in this Section: 
(1)	Hazardous waste or material. Any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
a.	Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitation reversible illness; or 
(b)	Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
(2)	Sanitary landfill. A disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, is disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
(3)	Wellhead. The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves, and other attachments. 
(Ord. of 2/18/02, § 2) 
Sec. 8-8-3 - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as: 
(1)	Existing wellheads: All the area within a circle of which the center is the water supply wellhead and the radius of which is two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
(2)	Newly developed wellheads: All the area within a circle of which the center is the water supply wellhead and the radius of which is five hundred (500) feet. 
(Ord. of 2/18/02, § 3) 
Sec. 8-8-4 - Permitted uses. 
The following shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
(1)	Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one (1) acre; and 
(2)	Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Ord. of 2/18/02, § 4) 
Sec. 8-8-5 - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses of conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under Section 8-8-4 of this chapter: 
(1)	Surface use or storage of hazardous materials, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(2)	Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)	Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings and street, and driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under Section 8-8-4 of the chapter; 
(4)	Sanitary landfills; 
(5)	Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(6)	Storm water infiltration basins; 
(7)	Underground storage tanks; 
(8)	Sanitary sewer lines within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a well head. 
(Ord. of 2/18/02, § 5) 
Sec. 8-8-6 - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this chapter, including without limitations those applicable to non-conforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the City of Sandersville, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. of 2/18/02, § 6) 
CHAPTER 9 - Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted April 18, 2011, repealed Title 8, Ch. 9, §§ 8-9-1—8-9-10, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment Ch. 9, pertained to "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control." See Ordinance and Resolution Table for derivation. 

Sec. 8-9-1 - Title. 
This chapter will be known as "City of Sandersville Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 4/18/11) 
Sec. 8-9-2 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
(1)	Best management practices (BMPs) means these include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(2)	Board means the board of natural resources. 
(3)	Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
(4)	Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
(5)	Code enforcement officer means the person or persons appointed by the mayor and city council and charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(6)	Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
(7)	CPESC means Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
(8)	Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
(9)	Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
(10)	Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
(11)	Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
(12)	District means the Central Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(13)	Division means the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
(14)	Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
(15)	Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
(16)	Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the State General Permit, best management practices, and requirements in section IV.C. of this chapter. 
(17)	Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
(18)	Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100% of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70% or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
(19)	Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
(20)	Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
(21)	Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
(22)	Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in Section III, Paragraph 5. 
(23)	Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
(24)	Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. 12-7-8. 
(25)	Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
(26)	Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
(27)	Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
(28)	NOI means a Notice of Intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the State General Permit. 
(29)	NOT means a Notice of Termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the State General Permit. 
(30)	Operator means the party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
(31)	Outfall means the location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
(32)	Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
(33)	Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
(34)	Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
(35)	Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
(36)	Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control In Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
(37)	Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
(38)	Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
(39)	Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
(40)	Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Central Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(41)	Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
(42)	State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30. 
(43)	State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
(44)	Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(45)	Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
(46)	Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
a.	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
b.	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
c.	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(47)	Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
(48)	Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 4/18/11) 
Sec. 8-9-3 - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)	Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twety-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)	Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of section 8-9-4(c) of this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)	Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round, provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the Local Issuing Authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the Local Issuing Authority, the Local Issuing Authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)	Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)	Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 4/18/11) 
Sec. 8-9-4 - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)	General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 8-9-4(b) and (c), of this chapter. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)	Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)	Best management practices as set forth in section 8-9-4(b) and (c) of this chapter shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)	A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
(3)	Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)	The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsection (c)(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)	The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)	Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 8-9-4(b)(2) of this chapter; 
(15)	Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a twenty-five (25) foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream; that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)	There is established a fifty (50) foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five (25) foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
(a)	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
(b)	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer, and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)	Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in section 8-9-4(b) and (c) of this chapter. 
(e)	The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 4/18/11) 
Sec. 8-9-5 - Application/permit process. 
(a)	General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)	Application requirements. 
(1)	No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Sandersville without first obtaining a permit from the City of Sandersville to perform such activity and providing a copy of Notice of Intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the City of Sandersville and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 8-9-5(c) of this chapter. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 8-9-4(b), (c) of this chapter will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three (3) copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)	In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9), (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 8-9-4(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 8-9-5(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this chapter section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)	The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)	Plan requirements. 
(1)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 8-9-4(b) and (c) of this chapter, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)	Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)	Permits. 
(1)	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)	No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by section 8-9-4(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 8-9-5(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)	Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)	The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit 
(6)	The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. of 4/18/11) 
Sec. 8-9-6 - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)	The code enforcement officer will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)	The Local Issuing Authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)	The code enforcement officer shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)	The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)	The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety (90) days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 4/18/11) 
Sec. 8-9-7 - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)	Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)	Stop work orders. 
(1)	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)	All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)	When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)	Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 8-9-5(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)	Monetary penalties. 
(1)	Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 4/18/11) 
Sec. 8-9-8 - Education and certification. 
(a)	Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)	For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)	Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)	If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A § 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. of 4/18/11) 
Sec. 8-9-9 - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)	Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and city council members within thirty (30) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)	Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Washington County. 
(Ord. of 4/18/11) 
Sec. 8-9-10 - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)	Effectivity. This chapter shall become effective on the fourth (4th) day of April, 2011. 
(b)	Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(c)	Liability. 
(1)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)	The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)	No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 4/18/11) 
TITLE 9 - Licensing and Regulations 
CHAPTER 1 - Miscellaneous Regulations[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Business and occupation taxes, Sec. 3-4-1 et seq.; authority of City to license businesses, Charter, Sec. 69; revocation of licenses, Sec. 3-4-11. 

ARTICLE A - Motor Fuel Dispensing Pumps[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of City to license self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps, O.C.G.A., Sec. 36-60-1. 

Sec. 9-1-1 - License required; fee. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct, operate, or maintain within the City's corporate limits a motor fuel dispensing station with self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps without first obtaining a license. 
(b)	The annual license fee for operating self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps shall be as fixed from time to time by the Mayor and Council. 
(c)	This article does not apply to motor fuel dispensing units which are not open to the public. 
(Ord. of 5/3/76, Secs. 1, 5) 
Sec. 9-1-2 - Attendant required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to operate or maintain a self-service motor fuel dispensing pump unless an attendant is present at the business location. 
(b)	The attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons of such self-service stations if needed or desired. 
(Ord. of 5/3/76, Sec. 2) 
Sec. 9-1-3 - Penalty provided. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Section 1-1-8 of this Code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable individually. 
(Ord. of 5/3/76, Sec. 3) 
Secs. 9-1-4—9-1-10 - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 2 - Alcoholic Beverages 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverage code, O.C.G.A., Title 3. 
Cross reference— Excise taxes on alcoholic beverages, Sec. 3-2-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE A - Malt Beverages And Wine 
DIVISION 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 9-2-1 - Definitions. 
The meaning of the terms used in this article shall be: 
(1)	License. The authorization by the mayor and council to engage in the sale of malt beverages and wine. 
(2)	Off-premises. Retail sale of malt beverages and wine packaged to go and not to be consumed on the premises where sold. 
(3)	On premises. Retail sale of malt beverages and wine to be consumed on the definite closed or partitioned premises meeting the criteria of a restaurant as defined in paragraph (6). 
(4)	Malt beverages. Fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt, or any similar fermented beverages. However, no such malt beverages shall be sold under the provisions of this section which contain more than six percent (6%) of alcohol by volume. 
(5)	Wine. All alcoholic beverages containing not more than twenty-one (21) percent of alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or natural fermentation with brandy added, including all sparkling wines, champagne, combinations of those beverages, vermouth, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term wine shall not include cooking wines and like products which are mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render them unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at the point of the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this subsection. 
(6)	Restaurant. Any public place, kept, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served. Restaurant will further be defined as being an establishment in which fifty (50) percent of the money taken in by the establishment is from the sale of meals. Any such place must be provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room facilities and equipment and have a seating capacity of at least seventy-five (75) people. It shall also employ a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable good for its guests. At least one (1) meal a day shall be served at least four (4) days a week with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of malt beverages and wine to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. 
(Ord. of 6/18/68; 6/3/85; 7/2/90; Ord. of 10/15/01) 
Sec. 9-2-2 - License required. 
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the sale of malt beverages and/or wine within the city, for consumption on or off the premises, shall be required to obtain a license before business may be commenced. This license shall be issued on an annual basis set forth in this chapter. 
Sec. 9-2-3 - Display of license; multiple locations. 
Every licensee shall be required to display his license in a prominent place. He shall be required to obtain a license for each place of business within the city. 
(Ords. of 6/18/68 and 6/3/85) 
Sec. 9-2-4 - License non-transferable. 
A license issued under this chapter is not transferable to any new person, firm or corporation, unless the transfer is authorized by the mayor and council. 
(Ords. of 6/18/68 and 6/3/85) 
Sec. 9-2-5 - Inspection of licensed premises. 
The business premises of the holder of a license issued under this article shall be open to inspection at any time during business hours by any member of the Police Department, Mayor and council, City Administrator or other city employee designated by the mayor. 
(Ord. of 6/18/68; Ord. of 6/3/85; Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 9-2-6 - Sale to minors. 
(a)	No person engaged in the sale of malt beverages or wine shall sell or permit the sale of any malt beverages or wine to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to purchase malt beverages or wine. It shall also be unlawful for any person to purchase any malt beverages or wine for any other person who is under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to exhibit any faked or borrowed credentials of any kind in an effort to purchase or for the purpose of purchasing any malt beverages or wine. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to loiter in any establishment which sells malt beverages or wine. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to have any malt beverages or wine in his or her possession. 
(Ord. of 4/28/68) 
Sec. 9-2-7 - Suspension; revocation of license. 
(a)	Any license may be revoked or suspended by the Mayor and council for good cause after hearing upon three (3) days' written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a general statement of the charges to be considered. 
(b)	"Good cause" for the suspension or revocation of any such license shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances related to alcoholic beverages, violation of these regulations or other regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the licensing of such business, or for any change in a licensee's status which would preclude issuance of a license initially. 
State Law reference— Due process requirements for revocation, O.C.G.A., Sec. 3-3-2. 
Secs. 9-2-8—9-2-20 - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2 - Off-premises Consumption 

Sec. 9-2-21 - License fees. 
(a)	The annual fees for the off-premises license required by section 9-2-2 shall be as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. The fee shall accompany the application. The license fee shall be for the calendar year and shall not be prorated. 
(b)	Wholesale licenses shall be issued only to those parties who are licensed by the State of Georgia to sell and distribute malt beverages and wine. Applications shall be made with the city clerk. The wholesale business license fees shall be as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 6/18/68) 
Sec. 9-2-22 - Qualifications of applicant. 
(a)	Any applicant for a malt beverage or wine license must show, to the satisfaction of the mayor and council, financial responsibility. 
(b)	Any applicant for a malt beverage or wine license must be of good character; and all managers, clerks or other employees shall be of like character. Corporation applicants shall be of good business reputation. 
(c)	No license shall be granted to an applicant who has been convicted under any federal, state, or local law for a criminal offense involving moral turpitude, or who has been convicted under any federal, state, or local law of any criminal offense involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, or tax law violations, if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant would not maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state, or city laws. 
(d)	No license shall be issued to an applicant who has not been a resident of the State of Georgia for more than 12 months preceding the filing of the application. 
State Law reference— Due process requirements for grant or denial of license, O.C.G.A., Sec. 3-3-2. 
Sec. 9-2-23 - Application required; investigation and report; action by mayor and council. 
(a)	Persons desiring to sell malt beverages or wine shall file an application with the city clerk, who shall refer the same to the chief of police for investigation. The chief of police shall investigate: (i) the moral fitness and reputation of the applicant; (ii) his reputation as a peaceful citizen or law violator; (iii) the general character and reputation of his place of business; and (iv) any other facts that the mayor and council should know in considering the granting of a permit and license to the applicant. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the chief of police to report his findings to the mayor and council at the next meeting or as soon thereafter as possible, which body shall either grant or refuse the permit or license. 
(c)	A notice of each new application for a new location shall be advertised in the official gazette of Washington County once a week for two (2) weeks immediately preceding the meeting of the Mayor and Council at which the application is to be acted upon. The cost of the notice shall be paid by the applicant. 
(d)	Should the mayor and council deny the license application, a written notice of the decision, setting forth the reasons for denial, shall be mailed to the applicant. The applicant shall have the right to a full hearing before the mayor and council, with an opportunity to present evidence and to cross-examine opposing witnesses. The right to a hearing must be exercised by the applicant, in writing, within five (5) days of his receipt of the denial. 
(e)	If the application is granted, the city clerk shall issue the license. 
(Ord. of 10/15/01) 
State Law reference— Due process requirements for grant or denial of license, O.C.G.A., Sec. 3-3-2. 
Sec. 9-2-24 - Location of business. 
No application for a malt beverage or wine license shall be approved for a location in violation of any regulation of the zoning ordinance of the city or in violation of any statutes of the State of Georgia. No location for a malt beverage or wine license shall be approved when such location is within 100 yards of a school or college. The distance shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest property line of the school or college to the nearest wall of the building of the proposed license location. 
State Law reference— Additional distance requirements under state law, O.C.G.A., Sec. 3-3-21. 
Sec. 9-2-25 - Size of locations. 
Each store shall have a minimum of 400 square feet of store space and each location shall have two (2) mercury vapor lamps of sufficient voltage lighting the premises to be located in the front and rear of the store so as to adequately light the premises. 
Sec. 9-2-26 - Employees. 
No person shall be employed, as operator, manager, or clerk of a licensed location under this article who is not of good character or has a record of violations of alcohol control regulations. 
Sec. 9-2-27 - Days and hours of operation. 
(a)	Malt beverages or wine shall not be sold on Sundays or on Christmas Day. 
(b)	Sales of malt beverages or wine shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election if the sale takes place at least 250 feet from open polling places. 
(c)	Malt beverages and wine may be sold at any time except between the hours of 12:00 midnight Saturday and 8:00 a.m. the following Monday and on the days specifically prohibited in subsection (a). 
Editor's note— Authority to permit election day sales, O.C.G.A., Sec. 3-3-20. 
Sec. 9-2-28 - Advertising. 
No malt beverage or wine licensee shall display in any form or in any manner whatsoever any malt beverage or wine price on the exterior of the premises at which the license is being exercised. No store location shall display signs or advertisement other than the name of the store in letters not over eight (8) inches high. Only two (2) signs shall be permitted. 
(Ord. of 4/28/68) 
Sec. 9-2-29 - Wholesale deliveries. 
(a)	Malt beverages or wine shall be received at or delivered to the premises of a retail licensee only by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a state permit. 
(b)	Transportation of malt beverages and wine by any other means or the delivery by the wholesaler shall be grounds for revocation of the retail license or wholesale permit. 
Cross reference— Excise tax reports and remittance by wholesale dealers, Sec. 3-2-2. 
Sec. 9-2-30 - Reports by chief of police. 
The Chief of Police shall promptly report, in writing to the Mayor and council, all cases made by the Police Department involving violations of City ordinances and state laws relating to the licensing, sale, purchase, and possession of malt beverages and wine, and all instances, known to the Police Department, in which disturbances have taken place in establishments where malt beverages or wine is sold under a license issued by the City. 
(Ord. of 6/18/68) 
Sec. 9-2-31 - Penalties. 
(a)	Each violation of any provision of this article shall constitute an offense and every person violating any provision of this article shall be tried in the Municipal Court and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(b)	Licensees violating any provision of this article may have their license revoked or suspended pursuant to Section 9-2-7. 
Secs. 9-2-32—9-2-40 - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3 - On-premises Consumption 
Cross reference— Excise taxes for on-premises consumption, Sec. 3-2-1(2). 

Sec. 9-2-41 - Definitions. 
Alcoholic beverage shall include any distilled or fermented liquid containing consumable alcohol, mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, vodka, cordials or other spirituous liquors by whatever name called, and including fortified wines as defined by the federal administration. 
License shall mean the authorization by the council to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
License for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink on the premises shall mean any person duly licensed to sell by the drink and for the consumption only on the premises. 
Premises shall mean the definite or partitioned-in locality, whether a room, shop or building, wherein distilled spirits shall be sold and/or consumed. 
Restaurant Any public place, kept, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served. Restaurant will further be defined as being an establishment in which fifty (50) percent of the money taken in by the establishment is from the sale of meals. Any such place must be provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room facilities and equipment and have a seating capacity of at least seventy-five (75) people. It shall also employ a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable good for its guests. At least one (1) meal a day shall be served at least four (4) days a week with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of malt beverages and wine to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. 
(Ord. of 12/20/99; Ord. of 10/15/01) 
Sec. 9-2-42 - License required. 
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages within the City of Sandersville shall be required to obtain a license before business may be commenced. This license shall be issued on an annual basis beginning January 1st of each year. However, any and all fees for continuation from year to year must be paid on or before December 15 for the up-coming year. Every licensee shall be required to display this license in a prominent place. He shall be required to obtain a license for each place of business within the City. For a new applicant all fees must be paid prior to application being issued. 
A license is not transferable to any person, firm or corporation. 
The business premises of the holder of a license issued under this article shall be open to inspection at any time during business hours by any member of the police department, Mayor and Council, City Administrator or designee or other City employees designated by the Mayor. 
No person engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages shall sell, serve or permit the sale of alcoholic beverages to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Ord. of 12/20/99; Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 9-2-43 - Suspension; revocation of license. 
(a)	Any license may be revoked or suspended by the Mayor and council for good cause after hearing and upon three (3) days written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a general statement of the charges to be considered. 
(b)	"Good cause" for the suspension or revocation of any such license shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances related to alcoholic beverages, violation of these regulations or other regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the licensing of such business, or for any change in a license's status which would preclude issuance of a license initially. 
(Ord. of 12/20/99) 
Sec. 9-2-44 - License fees. 
The annual fees for the sale of alcoholic beverages and consumption on the premises license shall be fixed from time to time by the Mayor and council. The fee for calendar year 2000 shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for mixed drinks and shall not be pro-rated. The applicant shall also pay any and all other fees in connection with application required by the State of Georgia for processing requirements under state guidelines. 
(Ord. of 12/20/99) 
Sec. 9-2-45 - Qualifications of applicant. 
(a)	Any applicant for alcoholic beverage license must show, to the satisfaction of the Mayor and council, financial responsibility. 
(b)	Any applicant for alcoholic beverage license must be of good character; and all managers, clerks or other employees shall be of like character. Corporation applicants shall be of good business reputation. 
(c)	No license shall be granted to an applicant who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law for a criminal offense involving moral turpitude, or who has been convicted under any federal, state, or local law of any criminal offense involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, or tax violations, if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant would not maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state, or City laws. 
(Ord. of 12/20/99) 
Sec. 9-2-46 - Application required; investigation and report; action by Mayor and Council. 
(a)	Persons desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall file an application with the City Administrator or designee, who shall refer the same to the Chief of Police for investigation. The Chief of Police shall investigate: (i) the moral fitness and reputation of the applicant; (ii) his/her reputation as a peaceful citizen or law violator; (iii) the general character and reputation of his/her place of business; and (iv) any other facts that the Mayor and council should know in considering the granting of a permit and license to the applicant. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to report his findings to the Mayor and council at the next meeting or as soon thereafter as possible, which body shall either grant or refuse the permit or license. 
(c)	A notice of each new application for a new location shall be advertised in the official gazette of Washington County once a week for two (2) weeks immediately preceding the meeting of the Mayor and council at which the application is to be acted upon. The cost of the notice shall be paid by the applicant. 
(d)	Reserved. 
(e)	Should the Mayor and council deny the license application, a written notice of the decision, setting forth the reasons for denial, shall be mailed to the applicant. The applicant shall have the right to a full hearing before the Mayor and council, with an opportunity to present evidence and to cross-examine opposing witnesses. The right to a hearing must be exercised by the applicant, in writing, within five (5) business days of his receipt of the denial. 
(f)	If application is granted, the City Administrator or designee shall issue the license. 
(Ord. of 12/20/99; Ord. of 10/15/01; Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 9-2-47 - Sales only on premises. 
No license shall sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any person except at said licensee's place of business within the premises of the restaurant. 
(Ord. of 12/20/99) 
Sec. 9-2-48 - List of managers to be filed with Chief of Police. 
All persons licensed hereunder shall file with the Chief of Police a list of the names of all managers of the licenses business, with home addresses, within (3) days of the effective date of the license. Changes in the managers with the names of new managers, shall be filed with the chief within three (3) days of any such notice. 
(Ord. of 12/20/99) 
Sec. 9-2-49 - Sale of liquor to intoxicated, etc. persons. 
No licensee hereunder shall give, sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, who is of unsound mind, or who is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to the license holder or his agents or managers. 
Sec. 9-2-50 - Closing requirements. 
(a)	Distilled spirits shall not be sold for consumption on the premises at any of the following times: 
(1)	At any time on Christmas Day, Thanksgiving Day or Sunday except as set out in Subsection (a)(4) and (b) hereafter. 
(2)	At any time in violation of a local resolution, ordinance, or regulation or special order of the Board of Commissioners. 
(3)	At any time or place prohibited by state law or by regulations of the State Revenue Commissioner. 
(4)	On any Monday through Friday before 9:00 a.m. or after 12:00 midnight; on Saturday before 9:00 a.m. or after 12:00 midnight; on Sunday except as set out herein. 
(b)	The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises is hereby authorized on Sunday from 12:30 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. in any licensed establishment which derives at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross sales from prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(c)	Beer and/or wine shall not be sold for consumption on the premises: 
(1)	At any time on Christmas Day, Thanksgiving Day or Sunday except as set out in Subsection (a)(4) and (b) above. 
(2)	At any time in violation of a local resolution, ordinance, or regulation or special order of the Board of Commissioners. 
(3)	At any time or place prohibited by state law or by regulation of the State Revenue Commissioner. 
(4)	On any Monday through Friday before 9:00 a.m. or after 12:00 midnight; on Saturday before 9:00 a.m. or after 12:00 midnight; on Sunday except as set out in subsection (a)(4) and (b) above. 
(Ord. of 12/20/99; Ord. No. 2016-02, § 1, 12/5/16) 
Sec. 9-2-51 - Compliance with state law. 
The applicant for the license for the sale of distilled beverage(s) shall and will always comply with each and every provisions of Georgia state law as well as any local ordinances concerning compliance with planning and zoning as well as building ordinances. 
A restaurant that is making an application for the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises can be located a distance of not less than one hundred (100) yards from a church building and not less than two hundred (200) yards from a school building or any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus. For the purpose of this section the distance must be determined by the most direct route on the ground. 
(Ord. of 12/20/99) 
Sec. 9-2-52 - Brown bagging prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any commercial establishment to allow individuals to bring with them for consumption on said premises their own alcoholic beverages. 
Brown bagging grandfather provision. It shall be lawful for any licensed commercial establishment which held an occupational tax certificate issued by the City of Sandersville as of September 16, 2013, to allow individuals to bring with them for consumption on said premises their own alcoholic beverages. This provision shall not be transferable to any other license, person or business. 
(Ord. of 5-20-13; Ord. of 9-16-13) 
Secs. 9-2-53—9-2-60 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B Distilled Spirits 
Cross reference— Excise tax on distilled spirits, Sec. 3-2-3. 

Sec. 9-2-61 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)	Distilled spirits mean any alcoholic beverage containing alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, cordials, or other spirituous liquors by whatever name called, to include fortified wines as defined by Federal Alcohol Administration, but nothing in this article shall prohibit the sale of wines from natural fermentation of fruits, berries, and other products. 
(2)	Liquor is used throughout this article and means distilled spirits as defined in paragraph (1) of this section. 
(3)	Alcohol means the product of distillation of any liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and shall include synthetic ethyl alcohol. 
(4)	Person means and includes any individual, partnership, corporation, or association. 
(5)	Wholesaler or wholesale distributor mean any person, firm, or corporation engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale any of the distilled spirits as defined in this article. 
(6)	Retailer or retail distributor mean any person, firm, or corporation engaged in selling, at retail, any distilled spirits, for beverage purposes, in unbroken packages. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78) 
Sec. 9-2-62 - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the sale of liquor within the City without first having obtained a license from the governing authority. 
Sec. 9-2-63 - Qualifications of applicant. 
(a)	No retail liquor license shall be granted to any person unless such person is of legal age and has been a resident of Sandersville, Georgia, for a minimum of six (6) months prior to filing an application for such license; the same requirements shall apply to a corporation. 
(b)	Reserved. 
(c)	No employee of the City shall be eligible to receive a retail liquor license. 
(d)	Any applicant for a retail liquor license must be of good character, and all managers, clerks or other employees shall be of like character or the application will not be considered. Corporation applicants shall be of good business reputation. 
(e)	No license shall be granted to an applicant who has been convicted under any federal, state, or local law for a criminal offense involving moral turpitude, or has been convicted under any federal, state, or local law of any criminal offense involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, or tax law violations, if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant would not maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal or state laws, or the laws of the City. 
(f)	The governing authority, in their discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If in their judgment circumstances are such that the granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78; Ord. of 10/19/99) 
Sec. 9-2-64 - Applications presented in person. 
All applications for a retail liquor license shall be presented in person. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78) 
Sec. 9-2-65 - Financial responsibility of applicant. 
Any applicant for a retail liquor license must show, to the satisfaction of the governing authority, financial responsibility. Financial statements must be submitted with each completed application as prescribed by the governing authority. Forms of same are to be furnished by the governing authority along with or included in application forms for license. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78) 
Sec. 9-2-66 - False statements on application. 
The making of any statement on an application for a license to sell liquor which shall be later found to be false shall constitute grounds for revocation of the license. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78) 
Sec. 9-2-67 - Application procedure. 
Application for a retail liquor license shall be made on forms furnished by the governing authority as follows: 
(1)	A retail liquor license shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and no such licenses may be renewed. A licensee who desires to continue in business during the next or subsequent calendar year must make a new application for such year on or before December 1 of the preceding year. 
(2)	Due to the fact that the State of Georgia application, which is a requirement for licensing also has attached a City application form, sub-paragraph 2 is deleted from the City of Sandersville application procedure. 
In addition to the completion and submission of an application form as required by the City, each applicant shall attach thereto a complete application form with all attachments and requirements for a state license. In the event that the state license form requires that the local application be attached, then that requirement of the state form need not be attached. 
(3)	Reserved. 
(4)	A notice of each application for a new location shall be advertised in the official gazette of the City once a week for two (2) weeks immediately preceding the meeting of governing authority that the application is to be acted upon. 
(Ord. of 10/19/99) 
Sec. 9-2-68 - License fees. 
The annual fee for a retail liquor license shall be four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) per annum and shall be paid prior to the issuance of any license, the fee to accompany the application and be in the form of either cash or a bank certified check. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78) 
Sec. 9-2-69 - Transfer of license. 
No retail liquor license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location, and in the event that a licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender his license to the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78) 
Sec. 9-2-70 - Display of license. 
Licenses under this article shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which same was issued. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78) 
Sec. 9-2-71 - Compliance with laws. 
No person shall engage in the sale of liquor in the City of Sandersville without first complying with the rules and regulations set out in this article. Any person violating the rules and regulations set out in this article shall be subject to revocation of his license and punishment as prescribed by the governing authority. In addition to the rules and regulations hereinabove set out, each licensee doing business in the City under this article shall comply with all laws of the State of Georgia, federal laws, and rules and regulations of the State Revenue Commissioner relating to the sale and distribution of distilled spirits in Georgia, and any violation of the same shall subject the licensee to immediate suspension or revocation of his retail liquor license and also shall subject the licensee to criminal prosecution by the proper authority as provided by law and the ordinances of the City. All suspension and/or revocation proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with Section 9-2-7. 
Sec. 9-2-72 - Location of premises. 
No retail liquor license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location is in a portion of the City which is zoned commercial (C-1 or C-2) under the City zoning regulations, and is situated beyond one hundred (100) yards from the property line of any church or cemetery and beyond two hundred (200) yards from the property line of any school ground or college campus, the same to be measured by way of the nearest traveled road, street or highway, as provided by law. Each application for a retail liquor license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church, cemetery, or school or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this article with reference to this section. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78) 
Sec. 9-2-73 - Each location requires separate license. 
A separate retail liquor license shall be required for each place of business. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78) 
Sec. 9-2-74 - Building standards. 
No retail liquor license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of the building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with the ordinances of the City, regulations of the State Revenue Commissioner, and the laws of the State of Georgia. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the building inspector. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal the inside retail area of the building and so as to reveal all of the outside premises of said building. Each applicant for a retail liquor license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78) 
Sec. 9-2-75 - Size of packages sold. 
All licensed retailers shall sell or offer to sell in the original unbroken package only and will be authorized to sell any size package that is permitted under Georgia state law as long as it is in the original unbroken package only. 
(Ord. of 10/19/99) 
Sec. 9-2-76 - Sales of other products. 
(a)	No retailer shall sell or offer for sale or display or keep in stock, at his place of business where liquor is offered for sale, any other product or commodity except the following: 
(1)	wines, when properly licensed; 
(2)	beverages containing no alcohol commonly used to dilute distilled spirits; 
(3)	malt beverages or beer, when properly licensed; 
(4)	tobacco products; 
(5)	packaged ice; and 
(6)	snack items. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78; Ord. of 10/19/99) 
Sec. 9-2-77 - Deliveries off premises prohibited. 
No retailer shall sell or deliver any liquor to any person except in the retailer's place of business. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78) 
Sec. 9-2-78 - Sales prohibited on certain days and during certain hours. 
(a)	No retailer shall be in his place of business, or open his place of business, or furnish, sell or offer for sale any liquor at any of the following times: 
(1)	At any time on Christmas Day, or Sundays; 
(2)	At any time in violation of a local ordinance or regulation or of a special order of the governing authority; or 
(3)	On any day before 8:00 a.m. or after 11:45 p.m. 
(b)	Sales of liquor shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election if the sale takes place at least two hundred fifty (250) feet from open polling places. 
(Ord. of 10/19/99) 
Sec. 9-2-79 - Sales to certain persons prohibited. 
No retailer shall give, sell or offer to sell any liquor to any person who is under the age at which such beverages may be legally purchased in Georgia, or who is noticeably intoxicated, or who is of unsound mind, or who is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to said retailer. At any time a state driver's license shall be considered the only legal proof of age which would relieve a person making a sale from responsibility therefor. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78) 
Sec. 9-2-80 - Posting of signs. 
The holder of a license to sell liquor shall post in the most conspicuous place in his establishment a sign printed in letters at least four (4) inches high reading as follows: "SALE OF LIQUOR TO MINORS STRICTLY PROHIBITED." 
(Ord. of 12/4/78) 
Sec. 9-2-81 - Storage of inventory. 
No licensed retailer shall keep any liquor stored in any bonded or other type warehouse in the City, nor shall he enter into any type of arrangement whereby liquor ordered by him is stored for him by any licensed wholesaler. A retailer shall keep no inventory or stock of liquor at any place except his licensed place of business, and within his licensed place of business his storage space for liquor shall be immediately adjacent to the room in which he is licensed to do business. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78) 
Sec. 9-2-82 - Age of employees. 
No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall be employed in any capacity in any place of business licensed under this article. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78; Ord. of 10/19/99) 
Sec. 9-2-83 - Gambling prohibited on premises. 
There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punch boards, vending machines, slot machines, pinball machines, lotteries, tickets or chances therein or the operation of any schemes for hazarding money or any other thing of value in licensed retailers place of business or in any room adjoining the same, owned, leased or controlled by the licensee with the exception of any state licensed games of chance and state lotteries which are specifically allowed by the State of Georgia. Any violation of this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the license. 
(Ord. of 10/19/99) 
Sec. 9-2-84 - Regulations kept on premises. 
All holders of a license for the sale of liquor shall keep a copy of this article in his premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof and each licensee or his agents selling liquor shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be held responsible for any acts of his employees in any violation of this article or of the laws of the State of Georgia or the rules and regulations of the Georgia Revenue Commissioner. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78) 
Sec. 9-2-85 - Inspections by City; minimum inventory. 
The business premises of the holder of a retail liquor license for the sale of liquor shall be open to inspection at any and all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections. Every applicant who is licensed must maintain a minimum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) stock of goods, subject to inventory audit at the end of each month while the license is enjoyed by the licensee. 
(Ord. of 12/4/78) 
CHAPTER 3 - Pawnbrokers 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A., Sec. 44-12-130 et seq.; municipal regulatory authority, O.C.G.A., Sec. 44-12-136. 

Sec. 9-3-1 - Definitions. 
The following words and terms shall have the following meanings for the purposes of this chapter: 
(1)	Pawnbroker. Any person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or engaged in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or engaged, as part of the business activities described above or in conjunction therewith, in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers. 
(2)	Person. An individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
(3)	Pledged goods. Tangible personal property other than choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in the course of his business. 
Sec. 9-3-2 - License required. 
No person shall conduct business as a pawnbroker, or maintain an establishment for the purposes of conducting business as a pawnbroker, until a business license has been obtained from the City Administrator or designee. Such license application shall be made to the City Administrator or designee and license issued only upon approval by the Mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Cross reference— License fee for pawnbrokers, Exhibit A to Sec. 3-4-1. 
Sec. 9-3-3 - Review of application. 
No action on any application for pawnbroker's license shall be taken until the chief of police has reviewed and investigated such application and forwarded his recommendation thereon to the mayor and council for their consideration, approval, or denial. 
Sec. 9-3-4 - Hours of operation. 
(a)	The hours for opening and closing a pawnshop shall be as follows: opening hour, no earlier than 6:00 a.m.; closing hour, no later than 7:00 p.m., except on Saturdays, when the closing hour may be 10:00 p.m. 
(b)	Pawnshops shall not be open on Sundays. 
(Ord. of 8/3/87, Sec. 3) 
Sec. 9-3-5 - Records to be kept; inspection of records authorized. 
(a)	Any pawnbroker shall be required to keep a book or register, upon which shall be entered each article or thing taken or held as security for a loan made by the person, as well as the name and place of residence of the owner or person pledging the same. The book or register, as well as the articles themselves, shall be at all times open to the unrestricted inspection of City Police Officers. 
(b)	Any person selling or pledging any article as provided in this section shall be required to show positive identification and the person taking the pledge shall require and record in the above-required book or register that identification. 
(Ord. of 8/3/87, Sec. 1) 
State Law reference— Additional requirements for records are found in O.C.G.A., Sec. 44-12-132 et seq. 
Sec. 9-3-6 - Daily report to police; inspection of shop authorized. 
(a)	Each pawnbroker shall make a report to the police department before 12:00 noon each day (except Sunday, when the transactions of Saturday shall be reported on the following Monday), of every article or thing pawned to or purchased, whether such purchase is unconditional, or with the privilege of redemption on the part of the seller, and made on the previous business day. The report shall specify the article or thing, giving a full description, such as number, mark, and all other details as will make identification of such article or thing clear and positive. 
(b)	Each pawnbroker's shop shall be subject to visitation and inspection by the police. If any pawnbroker refuses to submit to visitation or inspection, his or her shop shall be immediately closed by order of the Mayor. 
(Ord. of 8/3/87, Sec. 2) 
Sec. 9-3-7 - Penalty. 
Violators of this chapter shall, upon conviction in municipal court, be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-1-8. 
CHAPTER 4 - Transient Merchants 
State Law reference— Licensing of peddlers by counties, O.C.G.A., Sec. 43-32-1 et seq.; transient merchants, O.C.G.A., Sec. 43-46-1 et seq.; prohibition against standing in roadway to solicit business or contributions from the occupants of vehicles, O.C.G.A., Sec. 40-6-98; solicitation of sale of merchandise on public roads prohibited, O.C.G.A., Sec. 32-6-1. 

Sec. 9-4-1 - Definitions. 
(a)	For the purpose of this chapter, a "transient merchant," "itinerant merchant" or "itinerant vendor" is defined as any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad box car, or boat, public room in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops, or any street, alley or other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. 
(b)	The person, firm or corporation engaged in business as defined in subsection (a) shall not be relieved from complying with this chapter by associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
(c)	Transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor shall not include the following classifications of individuals: 
(1)	Any person, firm or corporation, who solicits orders for future delivery of goods to merchants for the merchant's resale. The orders solicited from merchants shall be orders for future delivery only. 
(2)	Individuals who sell agricultural produce produced by that individual. 
(3)	Individuals who solicit for charitable or religious purposes or individuals soliciting contributions from the public, either on the city streets or door to door for any charitable or religious organization (if the individual does not sell or offer to sell any single item at a cost to the purchaser in excess of $10). To qualify as a charitable or religious organization, the solicitor must possess a current exemption certificate from the Internal Revenue Service pursuant to Section 501(c)(13) Internal Revenue Code 1954, as amended, or maintain continuous existence in Washington County as a charitable, religious or non-profit organization for a period of three (3) years prior to the date of solicitation. 
(4)	Any person who solicits subscriptions by going from place to place in the city to offer for sale subscriptions to magazines or other materials protected by provisions of the First Amendment to the Constitution of the united States of America. 
(5)	Individuals who are engaged in the practice of "yard sales:" the sale by an individual of surplus personal items or handcrafted items. 
(Ord. of 12/5/83, Secs. 2, 3) 
Sec. 9-4-2 - License required; fee. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor as defined in section 9-4-1 to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a license in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	Licensees under this chapter shall pay such license fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. The license shall expire no later than December 31 of the year in which the business is conducted. 
(Ord. of 12/5/83, Secs. 1, 9) 
Sec. 9-4-3 - Application. 
Applicants for a license under this chapter, whether a person, firm or corporation, shall file a written sworn application signed by the applicant, if an individual, by all partners if a partnership, and by the president if a corporation, with the city clerk, which includes: 
(1)	The name of the person managing or supervising the business during the time that it will be carried on in the city; the local and permanent address of such person while engaged in such business; the capacity in which such person will act; the name and address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a corporation, under the laws of what state the same is incorporated. 
(2)	The fingerprints of the person managing or supervising the business; or in lieu thereof, at least three (3) letters of recommendation from reliable property owners in the County of Washington, Georgia, certifying as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or other evidence which establishes to the satisfaction of the City Administrator or designee the good character and business responsibilities of such person. 
(3)	The place or places in the city where the applicant plans to carry on his business, and the length of time he proposes to conduct the business. 
(4)	The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where the applicant, within the six (6) months preceding the date of application, conducted a transient business, stating the nature thereof and giving the post office and street address of any building or office in or from which such business was conducted. 
(5)	A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by applicant; the invoice value and quality of such goods, wares and merchandise; whether the goods are to be sold from stock in possession or by sample, or at auction, or by direct sale, or by taking orders for future delivery; where the goods or products proposed to be sold are manufactured or produced; and where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed. 
(6)	Whether the person managing or supervising the applicant's business has been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense, and the punishment assessed. 
(7)	Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as a representative. 
(8)	Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the person managing or supervising of applicant's business or the method or plan of doing such business as the City Administrator or designee may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12/5/83, Sec. 4; Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 9-4-4 - Investigation; issuance of license. 
(a)	Upon receipt of such application, the City Administrator or designee shall cause an investigation of the applicant's business responsibility or moral character to be made. 
(1)	If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character and business responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory, the application shall be denied. 
(2)	If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business reputation appear to be satisfactory, the City Administrator or designee shall so certify in writing, and issue a license. 
(b)	The license shall contain the number of the license, the date the license is issued, the nature of the business authorized to be carried on, the amount of the license fee paid, the expiration date of the license, the place where business may be carried on under the license, and the name or names of the person or persons authorized to carry on the business. 
(c)	If the City Administrator or designee denies the license, a written notice setting forth the reasons for the denial shall be mailed to the applicant. The applicant shall have a right to a full hearing before the Mayor and council, if such right is exercised in writing within five (5) days from receipt of the notice. 
(Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 9-4-5 - Records. 
(a)	The City Administrator or designee shall keep a full record in his office of all licenses issued. 
(b)	The City Administrator or designee shall deposit the record of fingerprints of the licensee, together with a license number, with the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall report to the City Administrator or designee any complaints against any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter and any conviction for violation of this chapter. The City Administrator or designee shall keep a record of all complaints and violations. 
(Ord. of 12/5/83, Secs. 5, 11; Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 9-4-6 - Exhibition of license. 
The license issued under this chapter shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business named therein. In the event that such person applying for the license desires to do business in more than one place within the City, separate licenses shall be issued for each place of business, and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business. 
(Ord. of 12/5/83, Sec. 8) 
Sec. 9-4-7 - Transfer of license. 
No license shall be transferred without the written consent of the City Administrator or designee, endorsed on the face of the license, showing to whom the license is transferred and the date of the transfer. 
(Ord. of 12/5/83, Sec. 10; Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 9-4-8 - Revocation of license. 
(a)	The license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the Mayor and council after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)	any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license; 
(2)	any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise; 
(3)	any violation of this chapter; 
(4)	conviction of the licensee of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or 
(5)	conducting the business licensed under this chapter in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)	Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be served on the licensee by handing the same personally to the person in charge of the licensed business, or by mailing the same, postage prepaid, to the licensee, at his last known address, at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(c)	The giving of such notice shall suspend the license pending the outcome of the hearing, and business operations under the license shall cease. 
(Ord. of 12/5/83, Sec. 12) 
Sec. 9-4-9 - Penalty. 
In addition to possible revocation of license as provided in section 9-4-9, any person, firm or corporation failing to comply with the terms of this chapter, or violating any of its provisions, shall be punished as provided by section 1-1-8. 
(Ord. of 12/5/83, Sec. 13) 
CHAPTER 5 - Precious Metals and Gems Dealers 
State Law reference— Dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A., Sec. 43-37-1 et seq.; municipal regulation and licensing authorized, O.C.G.A., Sec. 43-37-5. 

Sec. 9-5-1 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)	Dealer in precious metals or gems: 
a.	Any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems. 
b.	A person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale. 
(2)	Gems. Any precious or semiprecious stone which is cut and polished. 
(3)	Person. An individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
(4)	Precious metals. Gold, silver, or platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver, or platinum. 
Sec. 9-5-2 - License required; fee. 
(a)	No person shall engage in business as a precious metals or gems dealer without first obtaining a business license from the City Administrator or designee. 
(b)	The license fee for a gold, silver and precious metal dealer shall be as fixed from time to time by the Mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 12/1/80, Sec. 6; Ord. of 6/21/04) 
State Law reference— Registration with chief of police required, O.C.G.A., Sec. 43-37-2. 
Sec. 9-5-3 - Records required; content. 
(a)	Every gold, silver and other precious metal or gems dealer shall maintain a book, in permanent form, in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each purchase: 
(1)	the date of the purchase transaction; 
(2)	the name of the person with whom the transaction is conducted; 
(3)	the name, age and address of the customer; 
(4)	a description of the general appearance of the customer, including his weight, height, sex and race, and the number from his driver's license or similar identification card; 
(5)	an identification and description of the purchase goods including, if available, the distinguishing markings, number, monogram, and all identification markings found on the item purchased; 
(6)	the price paid for the item or items, and the number of the check if payment is made by check; and 
(7)	the signature of the customer from whom the items are purchased. 
(b)	The names should be listed in chronological order in ink, with no blank lines left between entries. No obliterations, alterations, or erasures may be made. Corrections may be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book shall be opened to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or at a reasonable time. 
(c)	The record of each purchase transaction as herein provided shall be maintained for a period of not less than four (4) years. 
State Law reference— Additional requirements for conduct and reports are found in O.C.G.A., Sec. 43-37-3 et seq. 
Sec. 9-5-4 - Merchandise purchases to be held; reports. 
A dealer who purchases gold, silver or other precious metals or gems shall be required to hold all merchandise purchased for 10 days from the date of the purchase and submit on a daily basis a list of all items purchased with the records required in this chapter to the chief of police or his designee. 
Sec. 9-5-5 - Violations; penalty. 
Any dealer who buys gold, silver or other precious metals or gems, who shall: 
(1)	fail to make an entry of any item purchased in his permanent record book; 
(2)	make any false entries therein; 
(3)	falsify, obliterate, destroy or remove from his place of business his permanent record book; 
(4)	refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect his permanent record book, or any goods in his possession during the ordinary business hours or at a reasonable time; 
(5)	fail to maintain a record of each purchase for at least four years; 
(6)	fail to hold the gold, silver or precious metal item that he has purchased for a period of 10 days; or 
(7)	fail to provide the daily records as required in this chapter; 
shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8. 
CHAPTER 6 - Taxicabs 

Sec. 9-6-1 - Definition. 
The term "taxicab" as used in this chapter shall mean and include any vehicle used to carry passengers for hire but not operating on a fixed route. 
(Ord. of 2/4/63) 
Sec. 9-6-2 - License required; application procedure. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of operating a taxicab without first having secured a City license. Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the City Administrator or designee, and shall state the name of the applicant, the intended place of business, and the number of cabs to be operated. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the corporate president and secretary shall be given. 
(b)	No person shall drive a taxicab unless he shall have secured a license therefor as herein provided. 
(Ord. of 2/4/63; Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Sec. 9-6-3 - License fee. 
(a)	The annual fee, as fixed from time to time by the Mayor and council, shall be payable in advance. Each taxicab must have a license. 
(b)	The annual fee for a taxicab driver's license shall be as fixed from time to time by the Mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 2/4/63) 
Sec. 9-6-4 - Qualifications of operators. 
No operator's license shall be issued to or held by any person who is not a person of good character or one who has been convicted of a felony. A license shall not be issued to or held by any corporation if any officer thereof would be ineligible for a license for the foregoing reasons. 
(Ord. of 2/4/63) 
Sec. 9-6-5 - Qualifications of drivers. 
A license shall not be issued to any person who is not competent to operate a motor vehicle or who is not familiar with the traffic laws and ordinances. The chief of police shall examine each applicant for a taxicab driver's license to determine competency of the applicant, and no such license shall be issued except on certification of the Chief of Police that the applicant has demonstrated his ability to operate a motor vehicle as required. 
Sec. 9-6-6 - Condition of taxicabs; state tag required. 
(a)	No taxicab shall be operated unless it bears a state license duly issued. 
(b)	No taxicab shall be operated unless it is equipped with proper brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear vision mirror, and windshield wipers in good condition. 
(c)	It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to inspect every taxicab so often as may be necessary to see to the enforcement of this section. 
(d)	Each taxicab, while operating, shall have displayed either on the side or top, the name of the licensee operating it. 
(Ord. of 2/4/63) 
Sec. 9-6-7 - Insurance required. 
No taxicab shall be operated unless it is covered by a public liability insurance policy in an amount as established as minimum coverage by state law for operation of motor vehicles. 
State Law reference— Financial responsibility, O.C.G.A., Sec. 40-9-1 et seq. 
Sec. 9-6-8 - Conduct of drivers. 
(a)	A driver shall obey all traffic rules established by statute or ordinance. 
(b)	No driver shall knowingly permit any taxicab to be used in violation of state or federal laws or local ordinances. 
(c)	A driver shall accept as a passenger any person who seeks to so use the taxicab, provided such person conducts himself in an orderly manner. No person shall be admitted to a taxicab occupied by a passenger without the consent of the passenger. 
(d)	The driver shall take his passenger to his destination by the most direct route available from the place where the passenger enters the cab. 
(e)	A driver of a taxicab, while on duty, shall not drink any intoxicating liquor, or use any profane or obscene language, or shout or call to prospective passengers, or disturb the peace in any way. 
(Ord. of 2/4/63) 
Sec. 9-6-9 - Suspension and revocation of taxicab driver's license. 
(a)	The Chief of Police shall have the right to suspend for a given number of days, or to revoke entirely, following ten (10) days' notice and hearing, any license issued under this chapter when in the opinion of the chief such suspension or revocation is needed to protect the health and welfare of persons and property. Sufficient reasons for suspension or revocation shall include, but not be limited to, the giving of false information on the application to obtain the license, or a renewal thereof; a failure to comply with the Code of Ordinances of the City; or a failure to maintain a record of safe and lawful driving. 
(b)	In addition to other penalties provided in the Charter of the City, this Code of Ordinances, and laws of the state, the Mayor and Council may revoke a taxicab driver's license when the holder thereof is convicted of a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the City relating to traffic or operation of the taxicab or conduct of the business. 
Sec. 9-6-10 - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Section 1-1-8. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. of 2/4/63) 
CHAPTER 7 - Insurers Operating in State 

Sec. 9-7-1 - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Sandersville, Georgia in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). For each separate business location in excess of one (1) not covered by section 9-7-2, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the City of Sandersville, Georgia, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). For the purposes of this chapter, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. Sec. 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 11/7/94) 
Sec. 9-7-2 - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of seventeen dollars and fifty cents ($17.50) per location for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. of 11/7/94) 
Sec. 9-7-3 - Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc. not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by Section 1 hereof in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each such location within the City of Sandersville. 
(Ord. of 11/7/94) 
Sec. 9-7-4 - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. Sec. 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. Sec. 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by Section 9-7-1. 
(Ord. of 11/7/94) 
Sec. 9-7-5 - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter, an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. Sec. 33-3-5, doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half (2½) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. Sec. 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. Sec. 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 9-7-1. 
(Ord. of 11/7/94) 
Sec. 9-7-6 - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in Sections 9-7-1 and 9-7-2 shall be due and payable on the first day of 1995 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. of 11/7/94) 
CHAPTER 8 - Telecommunications Services Franchises and Licenses 

Sec. 9-8-1 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this Section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
"Affiliated person" means each person who falls into one (1) or more of the following categories: 
(1)	Each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the applicant; 
(2)	Each person in which the applicant has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; 
(3)	Each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the applicant; and 
(4)	Each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, the applicant; provided that "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the City or any creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common control with, the applicant. 
"Cable services" means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"), but does not include telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
"Cable system" means any "cable system" as defined in the Cable Act. 
"City" means the City of Sandersville. 
"City Council" means the City Council of the City and its designee or any successor thereto. 
"Control" or "controlling interest" means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the applicant or the telecommunications system in the streets. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more than five percent (5%) of any person (which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or "controlling interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one (1) person or group of persons. 
"Franchise" means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the City in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide telecommunications services. 
"Grantee" means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to: (a) furnish, supply and distribute telecommunications services to any locations or persons in the franchise or license area; (b) provide private telecommunications services along licensed routes pursuant to a license; or (c) transport telecommunications services across the City along licensed routes pursuant to a license without terminating or originating any telecommunications services at or from any person or location in the City. 
"May" is permissive. 
"Ordinance" means this ordinance and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
"Person" means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the City. 
"Private telecommunications services" means the transmission of telecommunications by a person, regardless of the facilities used, for or in connection with the internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person, and shall not mean cable services. 
"Revocable license" means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the City in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, which authorizes the occupation and use of specifically identified streets, provided that a revocable license shall be issued only in the limited circumstances set forth in Section 9-8-2(a)(2) of this ordinance. 
"Shall" is mandatory, not merely directive. 
"Streets" means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the City. 
"Telecommunications" means "telecommunications" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(43) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. 
"Telecommunications service" means "telecommunications service" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. In the event that "telecommunications service" is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable "telecommunications service" shall mean "telecommunications service" as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
"Telecommunications system" means the system in the franchise or license area over which telecommunications service or private telecommunications service is provided, and to be constructed, operated and maintained by a grantee pursuant to a franchise or license ordinance or agreement. 
(Ord. of 11/11/01) 
Sec. 9-8-2 - Granting authority and franchising procedure. 
(a)	Granting authority. 
(1)	No person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications services or private telecommunications services or operate a telecommunications system without a franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. The City intends to exercise its authority to franchise or license persons pursuant to this ordinance to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, including the 1996 Act. 
(2)	A person shall not use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications services or operate a telecommunications system without a franchise, except that such person may use or occupy specific streets without a franchise if the person obtains a revocable license in accordance with the terms of this ordinance. A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to use and occupy specifically identified streets and: (a) may be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is for the sole purpose of providing private telecommunications services; or (b) shall be granted to provide telecommunications services only if the use or occupation of such streets, together with the use or occupation of any streets pursuant to revocable licenses previously granted to such person and affiliated persons, shall not exceed five hundred (500) linear feet; or (c) shall be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is by a telecommunications system that is not used by the grantee or any other person to sell, resell or otherwise provide telecommunications services to any person in the City. In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a person to exceed or fail to comply with the limits specified in this Section 9-8-2(a)(2), then such person must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted. 
(3)	The City Council may grant one (1) or more franchises or revocable licenses in accordance with this ordinance, provided that the City Council reserves the right to modify any provision of this ordinance by amendment hereof. 
(4)	The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the City Council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise or license agreement between the City and the grantee. 
(5)	Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The City specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises or revocable licenses as it deems appropriate, and/or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. 
(6)	A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the City. A revocable license may only be granted for use of specifically identified streets. 
(7)	The grant of franchises and revocable licenses to persons providing telecommunications services by the City shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the 1996 Act, as amended, governing telecommunications franchises and renewals thereof. 
(b)	Franchise applications. 
(1)	Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the City Council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(2)	Any application for a franchise or revocable license shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license and such other information as the City Council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
a.	Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
b.	A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following, and to whatever extent required by the City: 
1.	The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
2.	The names, residence, and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
3.	The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity; 
4.	For purposes of determining whether an applicant has the financial ability to construct and maintain the telecommunications system in a safe manner and in accordance with the City's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and to the extent not prohibited by law, a detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the Council, setting forth the basis for any conclusions by such lending institution or funding source regarding the applicant's financial ability to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system in the City, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system in the City; and 
5.	For purposes of determining whether the applicant will construct, maintain, operate, and repair the telecommunications system in compliance with the policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and in a manner protective of the public health, safety and welfare, the names and addresses for telecommunications systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiaries, and the areas served by such systems. 
c.	In order to permit the City to manage its streets, a detailed description of the proposed plan of construction and maintenance of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.	A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
2.	A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the proposed and actual location of facilities and equipment to be used in the streets by the applicant; and 
3.	For purposes of assisting the City in determining whether the telecommunications system will be constructed in accordance with the City's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets, a detailed statement setting forth the provisions in any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to such person, firm, or corporation constructing, or assisting the applicant with the construction of, the telecommunications system in the streets; and 
d.	To the extent not prohibited by law, any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the Council, or by any other provision of law. 
(3)	Non-refundable application fees for new franchises and revocable licenses. No application for a new franchise or revocable license shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this Section. If a franchise or revocable license is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded, except if required by law. 
a.	Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the City in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
b.	Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the City in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this ordinance, each applicant for a franchise must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Sandersville, and each applicant for a revocable license must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Sandersville. In the event the City's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the City to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. In the event the City's reasonable costs are less than the application amount, the City may reimburse to the applicant the amount in excess of the City's actual cost if required by applicable law. 
(c)	Responsibilities of applicants. It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the City and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(d)	Public availability of applications. To the extent determined by the City Council, applications for franchises or revocable licenses, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated City office during normal business hours. 
(e)	Evaluation criteria. An applicant shall be granted a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services, provided the City Council reasonably determines that the applicant has agreed to or meets the following factors and such terms, conditions and other factors as the City Council deems appropriate and not prohibited by applicable law: 
(1)	The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the City, including the value of any in-kind facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the City; 
(2)	The financial and technical ability of the applicant to construct and maintain a telecommunications system in the streets, and a certificate of public convenience or other authorization from the State or Federal Communications Commission permitting the applicant to provide telecommunications services in the City; 
(3)	The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the City in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)	The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise, the public health, safety and welfare, and the City's management of streets; and 
(5)	To the extent not prohibited by law, any other factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the City for safeguarding the interests of the City and the public. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services and in accordance with applicable law, the City Council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation, the foregoing factors to the extent applicable. 
(f)	Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(1)	The City may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the City Council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises or revocable licenses, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the City Council may seek advice from other City officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one (1) or more reports to be submitted to the City Council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(2)	After considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, the City Council shall set one (1) or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the City Council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) in accordance with applicable law. 
(3)	The City Council may authorize negotiations between City officials and applicants on the terms of the proposed franchise or revocable license. 
(4)	Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the City Council, the City Council shall consider the application for a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services in accordance with this ordinance and applicable law, including 47 U.S.C. § 253, and shall grant the franchise or revocable license, provided that the applicant has agreed to the terms on which the franchise or revocable license is to be granted and meets the evaluation criteria set forth in Subsection 9-8-2(e) of this chapter. The City also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the City may be served thereby or that such waiver is required by applicable law. 
(5)	Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the City Council, the City Council may grant the revocable license to provide private telecommunications services, and may specify the conditions under which the revocable license is granted. Alternatively, the City may reject any and all applications for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services. The City also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the City may be served thereby. 
(g)	Terms and conditions of franchise and revocable license. 
(1)	The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise or revocable license granted pursuant to this ordinance shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or revocable license or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, may address the following subjects, to the extent not prohibited by law: 
a.	The term of the franchise or revocable license, provided, however, that the initial term of the revocable license shall not exceed five (5) years and shall not be renewed for terms exceeding five (5) years; 
b.	The franchise area under the franchise, or the streets that may be used pursuant to the revocable license; 
c.	The compensation to be paid to the City, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
d.	The circumstances upon which the franchise or revocable license may be terminated or cancelled; 
e.	The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise or revocable license; 
f.	The City's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; 
g.	Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; 
h.	The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the City's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
i.	Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
j.	Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable City, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies; 
k.	Provisions to ensure adequate oversight of the grantee by the City; 
l.	Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise or revocable license without the prior written consent of the City; 
m.	Remedies available to the City to protect the City's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise or revocable license; 
n.	Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to, the Federal Communications Commission; 
o.	Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the City from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise or revocable license; 
p.	Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the City are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise or revocable license; and 
q.	Such other provisions as the City determines are necessary or appropriate, to the extent not prohibited by law. 
(h)	Revocation of revocable license. The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the City for cause or, if the revocable license is for the provision of private telecommunications services, for the City's convenience. The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses granted to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not authorize the occupation and use of more than five hundred (500) linear feet of specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of the streets does not involve the offering or provision of telecommunications services by the grantee, any affiliated persons or any other persons to or from any person or location in the City. 
(Ord. of 11/11/01) 
Sec. 9-8-3 - General provisions. 
(a)	Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this ordinance is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect. 
(b)	Delegation. Consistent with applicable law, the City Council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this ordinance to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this ordinance or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or revocable license or grantee. The City Council may also establish and appoint one (1) or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the City Council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this ordinance. 
(c)	Application to existing telecommunications systems and providers of telecommunications services and private telecommunications services. This ordinance shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for the operation of telecommunications systems or to provide telecommunications services existing on the effective date of this ordinance, but shall apply to any renewal or extension of such franchises. 
(d)	Applicability of other ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
(e)	Effective date. This ordinance shall become effective immediately after its passage, approval and publication in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Ord. of 11/11/01) 
CHAPTER 9 - Franchise Fee Applicable to Holders of Cable or Video Franchises Issued by the State 
Sec. 9-9-1    Franchise fee for state-issued cable or video franchise. 
The City hereby requires a franchise fee of five (5) percent of gross revenues generated wihin the City for any cable or video state franchiise issued in its corporate boundaries by the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 1/22/08) 
Sec. 9-9-2    Authorized designee. 
The City hereby authorizes the Mayor, upon reciept of notice ot the City of its right to disgnate a francise fee for an aplicant for or holder of an exixting state franchise, to provide written notice to the Secretary of State and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the City limits of the five (5) percent francise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. of 1/22/08) 
TITLE 10 - Motor Vehicles and Traffic 
CHAPTER 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 10-1-1 - Uniform rules of the road; adopted. 
Pursuant to chapter 6 of title 40, code sections 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, sections 40-6-1 through 40-6-395 (except for code sections 40-6-393 and 40-6-394) of that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Ord. of 12/12/79) 
Sec. 10-1-2 - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police chief may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, who shall violate them shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this code. 
Sec. 10-1-3 - Traffic, speed, truck, parking and other zones, signs and traffic control devices. 
(a)	Upon approval by resolution of the mayor and council, the chief of police is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices: 
(1)	crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway; 
(2)	other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(3)	traffic lanes; 
(4)	speed, parking, truck or other traffic-control zones; 
(5)	stop, yield, one-way and other directionals and devices; and 
(6)	any other sign, marking, device or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. 
(b)	All traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the manual on uniform traffic-control devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this code shall be official traffic-control devices of the city. 
(c)	The city clerk shall keep and maintain an accurate official map or maps setting out all traffic zones, markings, signs and other traffic-control devices. The map or maps and any amendments or changes thereto shall be adopted by resolution of the mayor and council, and the map or maps shall be known as the "Official Traffic-Control Map (or Maps) of the City of Sandersville, Georgia." An official copy thereof shall be kept in the office of the city clerk and shall be available to the public; and copies certified by the city clerk shall be admissible in court as proof of the location of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic-control devices. 
(d)	No person shall be charged with violating a traffic or parking zone, marking, sign or other traffic-control device unless appropriate signs, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on streets involved. 
(e)	Any violation of any traffic or parking zone, marking, sign or other traffic-control device established hereunder shall be a violation of this code. 
Sec. 10-1-4 - Vehicles on sidewalks. 
No person shall drive any automobile or other vehicle of like character upon any city sidewalk or in any park, except on roadways intended for vehicle use. 
Sec. 10-1-5 - Spiked or cleated wheels. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any truck, tractor, or other vehicle, the wheels of which contain cleats, spikes or other similar devices, over any paved city streets. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 318) 
Sec. 10-1-6 - Boarding moving trains. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to board or leave a train, railroad engine, car or cars while same are in motion within the city limits, provided this section shall not apply to employees in the regular discharge of their duties. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 263) 
Sec. 10-1-7 - Impounding of vehicles. 
(a)	Authority to establish vehicle pounds. The chief of police is hereby authorized to create a vehicle pound to which automobiles and other vehicles may be removed by police officers. Such pound shall be located at such places as may be designated by the chief of police. 
(b)	When vehicle may be impounded. Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in any place within the city where parking is not permitted at that time, or whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of the terms of this chapter or any other ordinance relating to traffic, such vehicle may be removed and conveyed by any member of the police department, by means of towing the same, or otherwise, to a vehicle pound. 
(c)	Immediate record of impounding to be made. It shall be the duty of the officer so impounding a vehicle to immediately report the fact of such impounding, together with any other information which will definitely identify the vehicle, to the chief of police, who shall cause a permanent record to be made thereof. 
(d)	Impounding fees, etc. Fees for removal, impounding and storage of vehicles shall be as determined by the mayor and council. 
(e)	Release of impounded vehicles; when fees paid. Any person claiming any impounded vehicle shall produce evidence of his identity and ownership or right of possession to the chief of police and pay to the operator of the pound the fees for removal and storage, for which a receipt shall be given. An order shall then be issued by the chief of police to the operator of a pound to discharge the vehicle and to deliver the same to such person. Thereupon the impounded vehicle shall be surrendered by the operator of the pound who shall take a receipt in duplicate for such impounded vehicle, which receipt shall definitely identify the vehicle, one (1) copy of which become a permanent record of the police department. 
(f)	Same; when payment of fees protested. In case protest is made against the payment of any impounding or storage fee, the chief of police may authorize the person in charge of the impounded vehicle to discharge the vehicle upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)	The person making such protest shall be charged with a violation of this chapter or other traffic ordinance and required to make bond for his appearance and trial before the municipal judge. Thereupon, the chief of police shall authorize the person in charge of the impounded vehicle to deliver it to such person. 
(2)	If such person is convicted of violating this chapter or other traffic ordinance by the municipal judge, in addition to other costs, the judge shall assess as costs the fees for removal and storage which have accumulated in connection with the impounding of such vehicle. 
(g)	Disposition of unclaimed vehicle. In the event any impounded vehicle is not claimed within 60 days from the date it is impounded, the chief of police shall proceed to sell the vehicle as provided by law, and from the proceeds of such sale pay the accrued storage charges and pay the balance, if any, to the city treasury. 
(h)	Pound records generally. If shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep a permanent record of all vehicles committed to the pound, the names and addresses of the owners of such vehicles, the numbers of their state license tags and the nature and circumstances of each violation, as well as the disposition of each case. 
(i)	Impounding not to preclude other prosecution. The impounding of a vehicle shall not prevent or preclude prosecution for violations of the penal provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance relating to traffic. 
State Law reference— Authority to impound illegally parked vehicles, O.C.G.A., Sec. 40-6-206; Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act, O.C.G.A., Sec. 40-11-1 et seq. 
(12)	if the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf; and 
(13)	any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(Ord. of 5/5/75, Sec. 4) 
Sec. 10-2-5 - Standards for issuance. 
The chief of police shall issue a permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)	the conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)	the concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(3)	the conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of fire-fighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(4)	the parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; and 
(5)	the parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Ord. of 5/5/75, Sec. 5) 
Sec. 10-2-6 - Notice of rejection. 
The chief of police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within 48 hours after the filing. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant, within five (5) days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Ord. of 5/5/75, Sec. 6) 
Sec. 10-2-7 - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the mayor and council. The appeal shall be taken within 10 days after notice. The mayor and council shall act upon the appeal within 10 days after its receipt. 
(Ord. of 5/5/75, Sec. 7) 
Sec. 10-2-8 - Alternative permit. 
The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five (5) days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5/5/75, Sec. 8) 
Sec. 10-2-9 - Notice to city officials. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the mayor and fire chief. 
(Ord. of 5/5/75, Sec. 9) 
Sec. 10-2-10 - Contents of permit. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)	starting time; 
(2)	minimum speed; 
(3)	maximum speed; 
(4)	maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(5)	the portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(6)	the maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; and 
(7)	such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5/5/75, Sec. 10) 
Sec. 10-2-11 - Duties of permittee. 
(a)	A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)	The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Ord. of 5/5/75, Sec. 11) 
Sec. 10-2-12 - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)	Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating in or used in a parade. 
(b)	Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)	Parking on parade route. The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5/5/75, Sec. 12) 
Sec. 10-2-13 - Revocation of permit. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon violation of the conditions and directions attached to the permit. 
(Ord. of 5/5/75, Sec. 13) 
Sec. 10-2-14 - Penalty. 
In addition to possible revocation of the parade permit, any person, firm, or corporation violating the terms of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this code. 
(Ord. of 5/5/75, Sec. 14) 
CHAPTER 2 - Parades and Demonstrations 

Sec. 10-2-1 - Definitions. 
Parade . Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city. 
Parade permit . A permit as required by this chapter. 
Person . Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(Ord. of 5/5/75) 
Sec. 10-2-2 - Permit required; exemptions. 
(a)	No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police. 
(b)	This chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)	Funeral processions; 
(2)	Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or 
(3)	A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Ord. of 5/5/75) 
Sec. 10-2-3 - Application; filing. 
(a)	A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by him. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than twenty-one (21) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(Ord. of 2/1/93) 
(b)	The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than twenty-one (21) days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(Ord. of 5/5/75; 2/1/93) 
Sec. 10-2-4 - Application; contents. 
The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)	The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; 
(2)	If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
(3)	The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(4)	The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
(5)	The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
(6)	The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals, and description of the vehicles; 
(7)	The hours when such parade will start and terminate; 
(8)	A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(9)	The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade; 
(10)	The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas; 
(11)	The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade; 
TITLE 11 - Offenses 
CHAPTER 1 - General Provisions[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Municipalities are prohibited by law from enacting ordinances covering matters which have been preempted by general law and are prevented from regulating conduct which has been made a violation of any criminal law of the state. See Ga. Const. of 1983, Art. III, § VI, Para IV; O.C.G.A., § 36-35-6(a) (2). 
State Law reference— Abandonment of airtight containers, O.C.G.A., § 16-11-100; fireworks, O.C.G.A., § 25-10-1 et seq.; disorderly houses, O.C.G.A., § 16-11-44; peeping toms, O.C.G.A., § 16-11-61; gambling, O.C.G.A., § 16-12-20 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A., § 16-12-4; criminal trespass, O.C.G.A., § 16-7-21; abandoned motor vehicle act, O.C.G.A., § 40-11-1 et seq.; damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility companies or municipalities, O.C.G.A., § 16-7-25; obscene publications, O.C.G.A., § 16-12-80 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts over certain marijuana cases, O.C.G.A., § 36-32-6. 
Editor's note— In addition to the offenses identified in this chapter, the City has authority, pursuant to state law, to assume jurisdiction over the following offenses: marijuana possession (one (1) ounce or less), O.C.G.A., § 36-32-6; vehicle operation without insurance, O.C.G.A., § 36-32-7; shoplifting ($100 or less, first or second offense), O.C.G.A., § 36-32-9; furnishing alcoholic beverages to minors, purchasing or possession of such beverages by minors, O.C.G.A., § 36-32-10; driving with license in suspension (except for habitual violators), O.C.G.A., §§ 40-5-121, 40-5-124; general traffic jurisdiction, O.C.G.A., § 40-13-21; operation of vehicles without effective license plate or decal, O.C.G.A., § 40-13-22. 

Sec. 11-1-1 - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person to: 
(1)	Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby a reasonable person would be placed in fear of safety for life or limb; 
(2)	Place the property of another in serious danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)	Use fighting words directed toward another, who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; 
(4)	Violently interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; or 
(5)	Congregate with others to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear the way when ordered by lawful authority to do so. 
State Law reference— Authority to punish disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A., § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 11-1-2 - Public drunkenness. 
Any person who shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition on any public street or highway or within the curtilage of any private residence, not in the exclusive possession of the person so intoxicated, or upon any fairgrounds, ball grounds, show grounds, park or any other place of public gathering or assembly, or private property used by the public, which drunkenness or intoxication may be caused by the excessive use of intoxicating wines, beers, liquors or drugs, and has manifested itself by boisterous or disorderly conduct, or by indecent condition, or acts, or by vulgar, profane or unbecoming language, or loud and violent discourse of the person so intoxicated or drunken, shall be guilty of public drunkenness. 
State Law reference— Authority of City to punish public drunkenness, O.C.G.A., § 16-11-41. 
Cross reference— Open containers, § 11-4-2 of this Code. 
Sec. 11-1-3 - Loitering. 
(a)	Loitering shall mean remaining idle in essentially one (1) location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing, walking about aimlessly, or sitting on cars, trucks, or other vehicles, and shall include the colloquial expression "hanging around." It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter within the City on private or public property in such a manner as to: 
(1)	create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of thepeace; 
(2)	create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
(3)	obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
(4)	obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place; or 
(5)	be at a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances which would warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property within the vicinity. 
(b)	Relocating from one position to another and regrouping or generally "hanging around" shall be prima facie evidence of intent to continue an unlawful act under this section and shall constitute a new offense after having been dispersed or cited for an offense under these provisions. 
State Law reference— Authority of City to proscribe loitering generally, O.C.G.A., Sec. 16-11-36. 
Cross reference— Loitering near businesses, Sec. 11-4-3 of this code. 
Sec. 11-1-4 - Loitering for illegal sexual purpose. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, while a pedestrian or in a motor vehicle, in or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public, parking lots of hotels and motels, in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution, sodomy, masturbation for hire or pandering. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether this purpose is manifested are: that that person is a known prostitute, pimp, sodomist, masturbator for hire or panderer and repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop, or engages passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops, or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, or waving of arms or any bodily gesture for the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution, sodomy, masturbation for hire or pandering. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this subsection unless the arresting officer first affords that person the opportunity to explain his conduct. 
(b)	For the purpose of subsection (a), "known prostitute, pimp, sodomist, panderer or masturbator for hire" is a person who, previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section, had been convicted of a violation of a sexual related law of any City or law of any state defining and punishing acts of soliciting, committing or offering or agreeing to commit prostitution, sodomy, masturbation for hire or pandering. 
(c)	For the purpose of subsection (a), "any person" shall also include panderers or solicitors of sexual acts, commonly referred to as "johns" or "tricks," who loiter in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of participating in, procuring, purchasing or soliciting any sexual act for hire made illegal by state law. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether this purpose is manifested are: that that person, while a pedestrian or in a motor vehicle, repeatedly beckons to, attempts to stop, engages or attempts to engage in conversation with any person by hailing, waving arms or any bodily gesture for the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution, sodomy, masturbation for hire or pandering. 
State Law reference— Authority of City to adopt ordinances proscribing loitering and related acts for purposes of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire, O.C.G.A., Sec. 16-6-24. 
Sec. 11-1-5 - Rock throwing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw upon, shoot in or into any public square, street, alley or sidewalk, of the City, either by hand or with slings, sling shots, flips or other materials, any shot, bullet, brick, stone or other missile of any kind, provided that such instruments may be used in protection of person, habitation or property. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 271) 
Sec. 11-1-6 - Posting handbills. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, print, post or cause to be painted, printed, posted, any bills or other advertising matter on any buildings, sheds or fences, or electric light or telephone poles without first having obtained the consent of the owners or occupants thereof. 
(Code 1941, Sec. 272) 
Sec. 11-1-7 - Junked vehicles. 
(a)	Vehicles on private property: 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, organization or association of any kind in charge or control of any property within the City, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or agent thereof, to permit or allow any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle of any kind or character to remain on such property within the City longer than 15 days. However, such vehicles may be stored in enclosed buildings or on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place or manner when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise. 
(2)	When such vehicles are thus stored, parked or left on any vacant lot, property or premises for a period of more than 15 days, notice shall be served personally by the Chief of Police or other official designated by the mayor to the owner or person in charge of the property or premises by certified U. S. Mail, with an additional notice posted on the vehicle to remove, store or dispose of it within 10 days from the date of the notice. The notice shall set forth the fact that the vehicle is stored or parked in violation of this section and that upon failure to remove, properly store, house or otherwise dispose of the same, that it will be removed, sold or disposed of by the Chief of Police and that any proceeds arising from the vehicle's sale will be applied first to payment of expenses incurred in connection with the removal and sale of the vehicle, with any remaining balance paid to the owner. 
(b)	Vehicles on streets: 
(1)	It shall be unlawful to leave any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street, lane or highway within the City. 
(2)	Upon violation of subsection (b), the Chief of Police or other appropriate official designated by the mayor shall be authorized to have any junked vehicle on City streets or lanes removed, impounded and stored immediately, pending the sale or other disposition thereof as provided in this section. 
(3)	Vehicles removed from the streets or lanes of the City pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall be posted with the notice provided in subsection (a)(2) and a copy thereof sent by certified mail to the owner of the vehicle if known or capable of ascertainment. Any owner claiming a vehicle removed and stored prior to its disposition by the Chief of Police shall present proof of ownership and pay all charges and costs incurred in connection with removal and storage before the vehicle can be returned to the owner. 
(c)	Upon failure of the owner to claim a vehicle within thirty (30) days after it has been impounded by the Chief of Police or other authorized official, it shall be advertised and sold by the Chief of Police. The advertisement shall be published in two (2) consecutive weekly issues of the newspaper in which official City notices are published and shall describe and identify the vehicle to be sold, the fact that it has been impounded by the Chief of Police as a junked vehicle and that it will be sold at the place where stored to the highest bidder for cash on a date ten (10) days after the publication of the last notice unless the vehicle has been claimed by the owner and all costs incurred in connection with the removal, storage and advertisement are paid prior to sale. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate keeping and disposal of junk, O.C.G.A., § 36-60-4. 
Sec. 11-1-8 - Discharging firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm or any air gun, or rifle within the City except in cases of military parade, defense of habitation or property or with a special permit approved by the Chief of Police. 
Sec. 11-1-9 - Obstructing, resisting police officers, City employees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the City: 
(1)	To resist or invite resistance to lawful arrest or lawful orders from any police officer of the City; 
(2)	To hinder, obstruct or impede any police officer or other City employee in the discharge of any duty or to menace or threaten such officers or employees while in the discharge of any duty; 
(3)	To follow any police officer while in charge of a prisoner or prisoners, after he has been commanded to desist, or after any crowd shall have been commanded to disperse. 
Sec. 11-1-10 - Curfew. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any minor sixteen (16) years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll or play in and upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; provided however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the effective hours are between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(a)	When a minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(b)	When the minor is upon an emergency errand by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(c)	When the minor is returning directly home from a school or church activity; 
(d)	When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above referenced places during the prescribed period of time; 
(e)	When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; 
(f)	When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel; 
(g)	When the minor is on the property of or the sidewalk directly adjacent to the building which he or she resides. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit or by inefficient control allow violation of this section by a minor in his/her custody. 
(3)	Violation of any of the above provisions will be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500) and/or sixty (60) days in jail. 
CHAPTER 2 - Nuisances[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A., Title 41. 

Sec. 11-2-1 - Definition. 
The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)	Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)	Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)	The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the City; 
(4)	The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(5)	Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(6)	Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)	Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
(8)	All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)	Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities; 
(10)	Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed; 
(11)	Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; 
(12)	Buildings abandoned and not secured in such manner to prohibit entry and use by unauthorized persons; and 
(13)	Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Ord. of 10/6/08) 
Sec. 11-2-2 - Jurisdiction to try and abate. 
The City of Sandersville may provide for the abatement, control, or removal of vegetation including trees, vines, shrubs, grass, and weeds, etc., garbage, refuse, and other debris that constitute a nuisance. 
(1)	At least fifteen (15) days before providing for the abatement, control, or removal of any vegetation, garbage, refuse, or debris, the code enforcement officer on behalf of the city council of the City of Sandersville shall notify the owner of the land and any holders of liens of record upon the land that: 
a.	The owner is ordered to abate, control, or remove the vegetation, garbage, refuse, or other debris, the owner's maintenance of which has been determined by the code enforcement officer to be a nuisance. 
The following conditions, whether on occupied or unoccupied lands, public or private property, are hereby declared to be and constitute a public nuisance and shall be abated: although, this section shall not be construed to be limiting with regard to enumeration of public nuisances. 
(a)	Weeds or grass allowed to grow to a height greater than twelve (12) inches on the average or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass, or brush, that may provide safe harborage for rats, mice, snakes and/or other vermin. 
(b)	Vegetation that obstructs the safe passage or line-of-site of motorists or pedestrians at an intersection or driveway connection with a public or private street or alley, or along any street or sidewalk. 
b.	If such vegetation, garbage, refuse, or debris is not abated, controlled, or removed, or if provision for its abatement, control, or removal is not made, within fifteen (15) days, the city council shall provide through this ordinance for the abatement, control, or removal, and any expenses incurred by the city in performing that task shall be entered upon the tax duplicate and become a lien upon the land from the date of entry. 
c.	The code enforcement officer shall send the notice to the owner of the land by certified mail if the owner is a resident of the City of Sandersville or is a nonresident whose address is known, and by certified mail to lien holders of recourse; alternatively, if the owner is a resident of the City of Sandersville or is a nonresident whose address is known, the code enforcement officer may give notice to the owner by causing any of its agents or employees to post the notice on the principal structure of the land and to photograph that posted notice with a camera capable of recording the date of the photograph on it. If the owner's address is unknown and cannot reasonably be obtained, it is sufficient to publish the notice once in the legal organ of the city. The owner of the land or holders of liens of record upon the land may enter into an agreement with the city providing for either party to the agreement to perform the abatement, control, or removal before the time the city is required to perform the abatement, control, or removal under subsection (3) of this section. 
(2)	If, within fifteen (15) days after notice is given, the owner of the land fails to abate, control, or remove the vegetation, garbage, refuse, or debris, or no agreement for its abatement, control, or removal is entered into under this subsection (2), the city shall provide for the abatement, control, or removal and may employ the necessary labor, materials, and equipment to perform the task. All expenses incurred which shall include an administrative fee as set from time to time by mayor and council, shall, when approved by the council, be paid out of the city's general fund from monies not otherwise appropriated. 
(3)	The city shall make a written report to the county tax commissioner of the council's action under this section. The city shall include in the report a statement of all expenses incurred in providing for the abatement, control, or removal of any vegetation, garbage, refuse, or debris, as provided in subsection (2) of this section, including the city's charges for its services, notification, the amount paid for the labor, materials, and equipment, and a proper description of the premises. The expenses incurred, when approved, shall be entered upon the tax duplicate, are a lien upon the land from the date of the entry, and shall be collected as other taxes and returned to the city and placed in the city's general fund. 
The municipal court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions of nuisance affecting the public health or welfare, and shall also have jurisdiction to try and, in case of conviction, to punish persons failing to abate nuisances, as prescribed in section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 10/6/08) 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal court to determine existence of nuisance and order its abatement, O.C.G.A., § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 11-2-3 - Complaint of nuisance; hearing. 
(a)	Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the police department, who shall investigate and may place the complaint on the municipal court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. The municipal court after a ten (10) day notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon and upon finding that a nuisance does exist shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control of or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(b)	Animal control officers, license and building inspectors shall and may also receive complaints, investigate the same and place on the court docket such complaints in the same manner as police officers. 
Sec. 11-2-4 - Abatement by city. 
(a)	In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the judge that it must be immediately abated, the judge may issue an order to the chief of police directing the nuisance to be abated. the chief of police in such case, shall keep record of the expenses and cost of abating same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues. 
(b)	Other city departments shall assist the chief of police as is necessary in abating nuisances hereunder. 
Sec. 11-2-5 - Nuisance per se, exception; summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the Mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
Sec. 11-2-6 - Offense; penalty. 
It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
Charter reference— Failure to abate nuisance after order to do so is a state crime, O.C.G.A., § 41-1-6. 
CHAPTER 3 - Animals[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of Aug. 3 1998, repealed the provisions of Title 11, ch. 3, §§ 11-3-1—11-3-34 and restated said chapter to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference— Dead, diseased or dangerous animal as a nuisance, § 11-2-1(2),(5); disposal responsibility for dead animals, § 5-2-8(c). 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A., § 16-12-4. 

ARTICLE A - General Provisions 

Sec. 11-3-1 - Livestock or fowl at large. 
(a)	No person shall allow any livestock or fowl to run loose or at large upon the streets of the City. 
(b)	The Chief of Police or Animal Control Officer shall impound any such animal at large and notify the owner, if known. 
(c)	Should the owner refuse to redeem impounded animals after notice is given, or if the owner is not known, the Chief of Police or Animal Control Officer shall proceed at once to sell the animal at public outcry, after advertising same for two (2) days on the door of the City Hall. 
(d)	The proceeds of the sale shall be paid to the City and placed in the general funds of the City. 
(Code 1941, § 254; Ord. of 6/21/04) 
Secs. 11-3-2—11-3-20 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B - Animals 

Sec. 11-3-21 - Repealed. 
Editor's note— An ordinance of August 1, 1990 repealed the provisions of § 11-3-21 in its entirety. Former § 11-3-21 derived from Code of 1941, § 196 and pertained to license requirements. 
Sec. 11-3-22 - Nuisance. 
Acts deemed to be nuisances shall include, but are not limited to: 
(a)	Maintaining a dangerous animal or fowl. 
(b)	Any animal to enter any place where food is stored, prepared, served, or sold to the public except dogs trained specifically to assist a person with a disability when such dog is actually being used by a disabled person as an aid for that disability. 
(c)	Any dog to chase, run after, or jump at vehicles moving on public streets and alleys. 
(d)	Any dog to attack, bite or injure another animal or person, or to jump upon and otherwise threaten other animals or persons without provocation, unless in defense, protection, or assistance of its master or other persons, except when such person is using the dog in conjunction with a criminal activity. 
(e)	A person shall be responsible to maintain the animals in their custody in such a way as to not unduly disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(f)	Any animal to feed from, turn over, or otherwise disturb garbage containers or bags. 
(g)	Any animal to scratch, dig in, or run through flower beds, gardens, or fields or damage any property other than that of the owners. 
(h)	Any female dog in heat to go upon or have access to streets, roads, or public areas. No owner or custodian of any dog in heat shall permit the dog to roam or run free beyond the limits of his property. 
(i)	Any place, including pens, yards, enclosures, lots, or premises at which animals or fowl are kept shall be maintained in a clean condition free of obnoxious odors and fly-breeding media or attention. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-23 - Confinement to owner's property. 
No person owning, or having in his custody, animals, fowl, or livestock shall permit same to go at large. A dog is to be on a leash or in the immediate control of his owner or his agent or on his property. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-24 - Collar and tags to be worn. 
The owners of all dogs and cats shall cause a collar with the name and address of the owner of such animal to be worn at all times by such animal. It shall be the duty of the owner to cause a tag certifying that the animal has been inoculated against rabies during the current inoculation period, to be attached securely to the collar and kept there at all times during the license period. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-25 - Rabies vaccination. 
The owner or person having custody or control of any cat or dog four (4) months of age or older shall be responsible for having each cat or dog vaccinated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian. When claiming or adopting an animal from an animal shelter, all dogs and cats must have proof of a current rabies vaccination if of age. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-26 - Property owner may impound. 
Any person finding any animal or fowl upon his property to his injury or annoyance may take up same and remove it to the local animal shelter whereupon the animal shelter will take possession of it. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-27 - Officer may impound. 
Any animal that is out of control or unattended or otherwise in violation of this chapter, whether or not the animal is on private or public property, shall be impounded by the Animal Control Officer or any law officer. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-28 - Cruelty to animals. 
No person, whether owner or not, shall cruelly treat or unnecessarily harm any animal in any way. Any person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, poisons, overloads, neglects, or abandons any animal shall be guilty of a violation of this section. Causing one (1) animal to fight with another constitutes a violation of this section. The Animal Control Officer or law officer shall be authorized to remove or cause to be removed to a safe location any animal that appears to be abused or suffering unduly as may be necessary to prevent further suffering. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-29 - Obstruction of officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, interfere, harass, or otherwise obstruct performance of any Animal Control Officer in the official performance of their duties. It shall be unlawful to attempt to or to release any animal captured or impounded. Tampering with traps or other capture devises utilized by an Animal Control Officer is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-30 - Nonliability of officer. 
The Animal Control Officer shall exercise every reasonable care to prevent the injury, illness, death, escape, or pilfering of any animal with which he deals in carrying out the provisions of this ordinance, but he shall not be responsible for any such occurrences. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-31 - Authority to shoot animals. 
In the event any animal subject to being impounded cannot be captured without actual danger to the officer or public, the Animal Control Officer or any law enforcement officer is authorized to shoot such an animal when shooting can be done without endangering persons or property. In the event an animal has been seriously wounded and to move it would cause further suffering, an officer is authorized to shoot the animal to end its suffering. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-32 - Disposition of animals. 
Any animal or fowl not redeemed within three (3) days will be adopted or humanely disposed of. An animal may be disposed of at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer regardless of days impounded. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-33 - Owner to pay board for animal. 
The owner or custodian who redeems an animal or fowl from an animal shelter or designated place of impoundment will pay the board bill in full before taking the animal or fowl off the premises. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-34 - Fee for recovery of impounded animals. 
In addition to board fees, there shall be an impoundment fee assessed against owners who recover their animals or fowl which were impounded. The impoundment fee shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 
(a)	First impoundment ..... $10.00 
(b)	Second impoundment ..... 25.00 
(c)	Each subsequent impoundment within a one-year period ..... 50.00 
(Subsequent impoundment's are levied against the animal owner and not necessarily for the same animal.) 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-35 - Animal bites; quarantine of animals. 
Any animal that is known to have bitten a person shall be confined for the purpose of rabies observation to the animal shelter or to a veterinary facility for a period of not less than ten (10) days and all expenses incurred for such confinement and observation shall be paid by the owner of such animal. The animal may be quarantined at the owner's residence at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer. Every animal suspected of having rabies shall remain in quarantine until its natural death or until its freedom from suspicion of rabies has been established to the satisfaction of the Animal Control Officer. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-36 - Slaughtering animals prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or slaughter any livestock or fowl within the City limits, except by written permit granted by the Mayor and Council. No person shall set up and maintain any butcher pen or slaughterhouse of any place for killing, butchering, or slaughtering any livestock or fowl within the City unless written permit has been previously granted by the Mayor and Council. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-37 - Hogs prohibited. 
No person shall have or keep any hog within the City, either on his own premises or on the premises of another, and whether kept in a pen or otherwise kept or confined on the property. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-38 - Bees. 
It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor any bees or beehives containing bees within the City. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-39 - Bird sanctuary. 
The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the City of Sandersville is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. It shall be unlawful to trap, shoot, hunt, or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird's nests. In the event any federally unprotected species of bird is found to be a nuisance in the opinion of the proper health authorities, said health authorities shall meet with representatives of the Sandersville Police Department, Animal Control Division, and the Washington County Humane Society. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-40 - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined as provided in Section 1-1-8 of the Code. 
(Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-41 - Dangerous animals and potentially dangerous animals. 
(1)	Upon receiving a report of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal within the Animal Control Officer's jurisdiction from a law enforcement agency, animal control agency, rabies control officer or county board of health, the Animal Control Officer shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. Whenever the Animal Control Officer classifies a animal as a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal, or reclassifies a potentially dangerous animal as a dangerous animal, notice shall be given to the animal's owner in writing by certified mail to the owner's last known address of such classification or reclassification. Such notice shall be deemed complete upon its mailing. 
(2)	The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)	The notice shall he in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address; 
(b)	The notice shall include a summary of the Animal Control Officer's finding that formed the basis for the animal's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal; 
(c)	The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within fifteen (15) days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the Animal Control Officer's determination that the animal is a dangerous animal or a potentially dangerous animal before the governing authority; 
(d)	The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the Animal Control Officer's determination that the animal is a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal will become effective for all purposes under this section on the day after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(e)	The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the governing authority and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering said form to the City. 
(3)	When the governing authority receives a request for a hearing it shall schedule such hearing within thirty (30) days after receiving the request. The governing authority shall notify the animal owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the animal shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and in addition thereto the governing authority shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the governing authority may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify or overrule the Animal Control Officer's classification of the animal. Within ten (10) days after the date of the hearing, the governing authority shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the animal is a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal, the notice shall specify it is effective on the third day following the date of receipt by the owner. 
(4)	Subject to the requirements of this section, the Animal Control Officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal if the owner presents to the Animal Control Officer or if the Animal Control Officer finds sufficient evidence of: 
(a)	A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal; 
(b)	The posting of the premises where the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous animal on the premises. The sign required to be posted must substantially conform to the design provided by the department of natural resources. 
In addition, the owner of a dangerous animal shall present evidence to the Animal Control Officer of: 
1.	A policy of insurance in the amount of at least fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) issued by an insurer authorized to transact business within the State of Georgia insuring the owner of the animal against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous animal; or 
2.	A surety bond in the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous animal. 
(5)	Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of an annual renewal of a certificate of registration, an Animal Control Officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this article. 
(6)	Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the local government does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in subparagraph (4) of this section are maintained by the owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
(7)	The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall notify the Animal Control Officer within twenty-four (24) hours if the animal is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the animal has been sold or donated, the owners shall also provide the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the animal. 
(8)	The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall notify the Animal Control Officer if the owner is moving from the Animal Control Officer's jurisdiction. 
(9)	The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal who is a new resident of the State of Georgia shall register the animal in the manner provided by this article within thirty (30) days after becoming a resident. 
(10)	The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal who moves from one (1) jurisdiction to another within the State of Georgia shall register the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal in the manner provided by article within ten (10) days after becoming a resident in the new jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 8/1/90; Ord. of 8/3/98) 
Sec. 11-3-42 - Possession of dangerous or potentially dangerous animal without certification, keeping of animal in violation of conditions of certificate; failure to post clearly visible warning sign; confiscation and impoundment; destruction of animal. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the City a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with § 11-3-32 of this article. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous animal to permit the animal to be outside a proper enclosure unless the animal is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. 
(3)	It shall be unlawful for an owner of a potentially dangerous animal to permit the animal to be outside a proper enclosure unless the animal is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. 
(4)	It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous animal to fail to post a warning sign on the premises where a dangerous animal is located in accordance with Code § 11-3-32 of this article. 
(5)	It shall be the duty of Animal Control Officer, and any person under his employ, to impound the animal if: 
(a)	The owner does not secure a certificate of registration in accordance with § 11-3-32; 
(b)	The owner does not secure liability insurance or meet the bond requirement of § 11-332; 
(c)	The owner does not keep the animal within a proper enclosure or permits the animal to roam or run free. 
(6)	Any animal impounded under the provisions of this section shall be returned to the owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon payment of reasonable impoundment cost, as fixed by a schedule approved by the governing authority, as from time to time amended. Notice of impoundment under this section shall be given the owner, in writing, by certified mail, at his last known address. The notice shall state that if the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within twenty (20) days from receipt of such notice, the animal shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner, provided, however, no animal shall be destroyed under this section unless it has been held a full twenty (20) days, exclusive of the date of giving notice. 
(7)	The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall be solely liable for any injury to or death of a person caused by such animal. Under no circumstances shall the City or any employee or official of the City which enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of this ordinance be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a animal that has been identified as being a dangerous animal or a potentially dangerous animal or by a animal which the City has failed to identify as a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal or by a animal which has been identified as being a dangerous animal but has not been kept or restrained in the manner described in this section or by a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required in this section. 
(Ord. of 8/1/90; Ord. of 8/3/98) 
CHAPTER 4 - Cruising and Public Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages Near Businesses 
Historical Note: The provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise indicated, are derived from Ordinance adopted December 4, 1989. 

Sec. 11-4-1 - Noise control. 
It is unlawful for any person, while on or adjacent to the premises of a business, or upon a public street or parking area used by the public, to race the motor of any car, to suddenly start or stop any car, or to make or cause to be made any other loud or unseemly noise. It is also unlawful for any other person parked on the premises of such business, public street or parking area used by the public to blow or cause to be blown any automobile horn or to play any radio, car stereo or any other device for making music in any manner so as to disturb the public peace at any time while so parked. 
Sec. 11-4-2 - Open containers of alcoholic beverages. 
It is unlawful for any patron or other person on the premises of a business, whether in or out of an automobile, to drink any beer or other intoxicating liquor or to have in his possession any open bottle, can or other receptacle containing beer or alcoholic beverages of any type, nature or description unless the same has been purchased on the premises and the premises consists of a business which has a valid beer and wine pouring license and said alcoholic beverage is consumed inside the building located on the premises. It is unlawful for any person, upon a public street or parking area, whether in or out of an automobile, to drink any beer or other intoxicating liquor or to have in his possession any open bottle, can or other receptacle containing beer or alcoholic beverages of any other type. 
Cross reference— Public drunkenness, Sec. 11-1-2 of this code. 
Sec. 11-4-3 - Loitering. 
It is unlawful for a group of three or more persons to congregate and linger at any location on the premises of any business other than in the restaurant building or in a legally parked motor vehicle. 
Cross reference— Loitering in general, Sec. 11-1-3 of this code. 
Sec. 11-4-4 - Unauthorized use of parking lot by noncustomers. 
It is unlawful for any person to leave any unoccupied motor vehicle on any private business parking lot and to leave the premises thereof except with the knowledge and consent of the operator of the business. 
Sec. 11-4-5 - Signposting of premises. 
It shall be the duty of the business owner who furnishes parking for patrons to post on the premises in a conspicuous location one or more signs bearing the following legend in order for items contained in sections 11-4-2 and 11-4-3 to be enforced: 
CRUISING IN OR CONGREGATING AND LINGERING OUTSIDE OF A MOTOR VEHICLE IS UNLAWFUL. NO UNOCCUPIED VEHICLE MAY BE LEFT ON THESE PREMISES WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF THE BUSINESS OPERATOR. 
Sec. 11-4-6 - Penalty for violation. 
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or 30 days in the City jail. 
CHAPTER 5 - Unfit Buildings and Structures (Ord. of 6/14/93) 

Sec. 11-5-1 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and definitions shall apply: 
"Applicable codes" means: 
(a)	Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the Official Code of Georgia as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(b)	Any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia, including all state minimum standard codes; and 
(c)	Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
"Closing" means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
"Code compliance officer" means the officer or officers who are appointed by the governing authority and authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter relating to the inspection for violations of the chapter's provisions and the issuance of complaints upon determining that a violation has occurred, including the building official and including also the city code enforcement officer. 
"Drug crime" means an act which is a violation of Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
"Dwelling, building, structure, or property" means any building, structure or property, or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwelling, building, structure, or property" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
"Governing authority" means the mayor and city council of the City of Sandersville, Georgia. 
"Interested parties" means: 
(1)	Owner; 
(2)	Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)	Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)	Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)	Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
"Owner" means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
"Person" means any natural person, corporation, partnership (general or limited), limited liability company, estate, trust or other entity or artificial person, or combination thereof. 
"Public authority" means the governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the city. 
"Repair" means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, structure or property. 
"Resident" means any person residing in the City of Sandersville on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 5/5/14) 
Sec. 11-5-2 - Code compliance officer; powers. 
The code compliance officer shall assume all of the duties and exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the abatement of nuisances, as set forth in this chapter, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7-41-2-17, as amended. The powers which may be exercised by the code compliance officer, as the code compliance officer is contemplated by this chapter, in carrying out and effectuating the purpose and provisions of this chapter, pursuant to such statutes, include, without limitation, the following powers in addition to others granted in this chapter: 
(1)	To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)	To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)	To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entry shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)	To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances; 
(5)	To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he may designate; and 
(6)	To issue citations and complaints for violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
The code compliance officer shall also be authorized to request the city attorney or other designated attorney to prepare and file complaints under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 5/5/14) 
Sec. 11-5-3 - Standards for determining unfit buildings and structures. 
A.	Any building or structure that has any of the following conditions (as listed below under subsection B), such that the life, health, property, or safety of its occupants or the general public are endangered, is hereby declared illegal and unfit for human habitation or use (as applicable) and shall be abated by repair or demolition. The complaint and inspection of an unfit building or structure shall be as set forth in section 11-5-4 of this chapter. 
B.	The code compliance officer is authorized to determine that a dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the City of Sandersville. Examples of such conditions include, but are not limited to, the following conditions of any building or structure: 
(1)	Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)	Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)	Dilapidation; 
(4)	Disrepair; 
(5)	Structural defects; 
(6)	Severe uncleanliness, rodent infestation; 
(7)	Damage by fire, flood, wind or other cause to the extent that the structural integrity of the building or structure is less than it was prior to damage and is less than the minimum requirement established by the applicable state minimum standard codes for similar new buildings; 
(8)	Construction or maintenance in violation of a specific requirement of the state minimum standard codes, or of any other applicable building code or ordinance, or of any other applicable state law; 
(9)	Decay, deterioration or dilapidation such that full or partial collapse is likely; 
(10)	The stress in any material, member or portion thereof due to all imposed loads, including dead load, which exceeds the stresses allowed by the applicable state standard minimum code for similar new buildings; 
(11)	The means of egress are not of adequate size or are not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic; or the fire doors, closing devices and similar features are in disrepair or in a dilapidated or non-working condition to render the building or structure unsafe in case of fire or panic; 
(12)	Exterior siding that is inadequate and unsecured, or is not weather, water, and windproof, such that the building would not pass existing state minimum standard codes for similar new buildings; 
(13)	Conditions such that the structure or portion thereof, for whatever reason, is manifestly unsafe or unsanitary for the purpose for which it is being used; 
(14)	The dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation of the code compliance personnel or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed; and 
(15)	Any other condition constituting a public nuisance, including, for example, maintaining stagnant or fetid water on the premises; an accumulation of trash, junk, filth, or other unsanitary and unsafe conditions; the generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of Sandersville; and/or maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl or maintaining such a number of animals in such foul and unsanitary conditions as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 5/5/14) 
Sec. 11-5-4 - Complaint and inspection; in rem procedure. 
A.	Whenever a request is filed with the code compliance officer by a public authority, or by at least five (5) residents of the city, that any dwelling, building, structure, or property: 1) is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; 2) is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 3) constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 4) has an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk , filth, and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions constituting a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity; 5) constitutes a public nuisance; or 6) has one or more of the conditions defined in section 11-5-3 above, the code compliance officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. The code compliance officer may also inspect properties on his own information or determination regarding potential violations of this or other city ordinances. 
B.	The code compliance officer may, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists. The complaint may be filed and prosecuted by the city attorney or city solicitor. The complaint may be filed in the municipal court, pursuant to that court's jurisdiction under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, or in the superior court of the county in which the property where the violation is alleged to exist lies. A summons and the complaint shall be served on all interested parties in such dwelling, building, or structure. 
C.	The complaint shall: 
(1)	Identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; 
(2)	Identify the interested parties; 
(3)	State with particularity the factual basis for the action; and 
(4)	Contain a statement of the action sought by the code compliance officer to abate the alleged nuisance, as well as other relief sought. 
D.	The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction at a date and time certain and at a place as specified, depending on whether the complaint is filed in municipal court or superior court. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
E.	If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; or otherwise constitutes a public nuisance, then the court shall state in writing its findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order stating: 
(1)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, structure, or property can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, structure, or property so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this provision, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
In any action brought to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the City shall be entitled to its reasonable attorney's fees and other litigation costs, such to be a lien against the property, unless the court determines that the failure to comply with this chapter was substantially justified based on the record as a whole. 
F.	If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the code compliance officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed, or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within two hundred seventy (270) days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the two hundred seventy (270) days in which such abatement action must commence. The code compliance officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes, has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
G.	If the code compliance officer has the structure demolished, reasonable efforts shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any sale of such salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The code compliance officer and the governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
H.	Where the abatement action is commenced in municipal court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A § 5-3-29. 
I.	In addition to the procedures and remedies outlined above, the code compliance officer may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, and life safety codes adopted by or applicable in the city, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 5/5/14) 
Sec. 11-5-5 - Service of complaints and orders. 
A.	Complaints initiated under this chapter shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)	At least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing, the code compliance officer or attorney filing the complaint shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable; 
(2)	Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any; and 
(3)	A copy of the complaint shall be posted on the property within three (3) business days of filing the complaint and at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
B.	For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriffs advertisements appear in such county once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
C.	A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
D.	Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this chapter on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 5/5/14) 
Sec. 11-5-6 - Lien established; collection of amount due on lien. 
A.	The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, attorney's fees and expenses awarded by the court, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
B.	The lien provided for in this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection 11-5-5.C. of this chapter. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
C.	Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this chapter, the code compliance officer shall transmit to the tax commissioner of the county in which the property lies a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within ninety (90) days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner or other official who is responsible, or whose duties include the collection of taxes, to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce liens imposed pursuant to this chapter in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 48-5-359.1 and 41-2-9(b). The county tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of Sandersville. 
D.	Enforcement of liens pursuant to this chapter may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner of the final determination of costs in accordance with this chapter. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this chapter. 
E.	The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this chapter shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this chapter together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority or county tax commissioner in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
F.	The governing authority may waive and release such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the City of Sandersville agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 5/5/14) 
CHAPTER 6 - Smoking in City-owned Buildings and Structures 

Sec. 11-6-1 - Purpose. 
Recognizing that the smoking of tobacco or any other product is a danger to health and is a cause of material annoyance and discomfort to those who are present in enclosed spaces, the Mayor and City Council hereby declare that smoking of tobacco or other products are hereby prohibited in any buildings and/or structures owned by the City. 
This chapter applies to any areas that are covered by buildings and/or structures belonging to the City and applies to offices, warehouses, as well as any and all structures and enclosures owned by the City. 
(Ord. of 4/7/97) 
Sec. 11-6-2 - Designation of no smoking areas. 
The City of Sandersville hereby ordains that said buildings shall have signs posted indicating that said areas are non-smoking areas. 
(Ord. of 4/7/97) 
Sec. 11-6-3 - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the police department and enforcement of this chapter can be maintained by the serving of citations on the offending parties. 
(Ord. of 4/7/97) 
Sec. 11-6-4 - Penalties. 
Any individual who violates this chapter shall be liable for a criminal penalty not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00), which said penalty shall be assessed and recovered in an action in the municipal court for the City brought in the name of the City. It is hereby designated that the municipal court for the City is the court of competent jurisdiction to hear violations of the non-smoking ban. 
(Ord. of 4/7/97) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - (References are to section numbers) 
R - Repealed  S - Superseded by  et seq. - And the sections which follow  NC - Not codified 

 
ORDINANCE AND RESOLUTION DISPOSITION TABLE 
NC - Not codified  R - Repealed  S - Superseded by  et seq. - And the sections which follow 

 