Chapter 54 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Solicitation of funds or valuables. 
(a)  No person, firm, or corporation utilizing more than three persons shall solicit citizens of Fulton County or any substantial number or segment thereof for funds or valuables of any kind, without first applying for and obtaining from the business license division a permit to do so. 
(b)  The application for such permit shall state the name and address of the person or organization conducting the solicitation, and shall be signed by the officer in charge of the solicitation or a duly appointed agent thereof. The application shall also state the nature and purpose of the solicitation, the time or period within which the solicitation is to be conducted, and the area within which it shall be conducted. The applicant shall state whether or not the persons actively engaged in solicitation are to be paid and, if paid, whether by salary or by commission. 
(c)  The application shall be filed in duplicate upon forms provided by the division, and one copy thereof shall be furnished to the police department having jurisdiction of the area involved. 
(d)  Whenever an application for a permit to solicit has been filed on behalf of any organization not otherwise licensed to do business in Fulton County, a permit and fee shall be required. Any fee charged shall be according to a fee schedule approved by the board of county commissioners from time to time. 
(e)  All persons engaged in solicitation shall have upon their person a letter or card identifying the person, which document shall be signed by an authorized agent of the person, firm, or corporation conducting the solicitation. 
(f)  Any person conducting a solicitation without the necessary permit or identification, as the case may be, who continues the solicitation after notice by a law enforcement officer to cease and desist, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, as such, punished as provided by the statutes and laws of Georgia for commission of misdemeanors. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-1; Res. No. 11-0075, 1-19-11) 
Secs. 54-2—54-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS, DOOR TO DOOR SALESMEN, ETC. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-36. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Persons, businesses, and organizations exempted from local regulation by operation at state or federal law, or by the Constitution of the United States, or of the State of Georgia, are exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Representatives or agents of charitable or nonprofit organizations which have been recognized as such by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States Treasury Department shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of sections of this article, provided that said organization first supplies proof of said recognized status to the chief of police, or his designee, and has received from said chief, or designee, written confirmation of its exempt status. The organization shall then furnish each of its agents or representatives with a copy of the confirmation letter. The organization shall then furnish the Fulton County Police Department with a list of such agents or representatives, and shall promptly notify said department of changes in the list. 
(c)  The exemption shall remain in effect until December 31 following the date of the confirmation letter. Only one such letter shall be issued to each organization during any calendar year. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-12) 
Sec. 54-37. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person charged with a violation of this article shall be apprehended by the police department or summoned to appear in the State Court of Fulton County and, if found guilty, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-22) 
State Law reference— Punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b). 
Sec. 54-38. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be a violation of this article: 
(1)  For any person, business, partnership, corporation, association, organization, or a group of persons to engage in any of the activities described in this article without first obtaining a permit, unless exempted pursuant to section 54-36 of this article; 
(2)  For any person to violate any of the provisions of this article, or to violate any other county article while engaging in any of the activities described in section 54-76 of this article; 
(3)  For any person to violate any criminal laws of this state, or to violate any state or federal consumer protection law while engaging in any of the conduct described in section 54-76 of this article; for the purpose of this section, "Consumer Protection Law" includes, but is not limited to the Georgia Fair Business Practices Act (O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390 et seq.), the Georgia Home Solicitation Act (O.C.G.A. § 10-1-410 et seq., O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.), dealing with professional fund raising, and the Federal Consumer Credit Protection Act (Truth-in-Lending and Truth-in-Leasing); 
(4)  For any person to lend, rent, or sell, his permit card to another; 
(5)  For any person to engage in any of the conduct described in section 54-76 of this article between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m., according to the standard time in effect at the time the violation is alleged to have occurred; 
(6)  For any person to engage in any of the conduct described in section 54-76 of this article during a period in which his permit is in suspension, or after his permit has been revoked; 
(7)  For more than two individuals to engage in solicitation upon any premises at the same time for the same goods or services, or religious or charitable purposes. Each individual member of a group engaged in solicitation in violation of this section shall be deemed to have violated such section; 
(8)  For any person to make more than one solicitation call at the same premises for identical goods or services or for the same religious or charitable purpose within any consecutive two-week period, without receiving a prior invitation therefor from the occupant of any such premises. This section shall be construed to include solicitation upon the same premises by employees, agents, or representatives of any person more than once during the aforesaid period without a prior invitation as herein provided. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-21) 
Sec. 54-39. - Announced purpose of call. 
At each dwelling, whether it be an apartment unit or private residence, the solicitor shall inform the occupant in unambiguous terms of the purpose of the call and shall not represent that the solicitor is participating in any contest, game, or other competitive endeavor, or that he is offering the occupant an opportunity to participate in any such contest, game, or endeavor. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-18) 
Sec. 54-40. - Posted property. 
No solicitor shall enter a dwelling except at the express invitation of the occupant. No solicitation shall be made at any dwelling or any group of apartments where a conspicuous "no soliciting," "no solicitation," "no peddlers," or other similar signs at or near the main entrance or driveway to the premises. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-19) 
Sec. 54-41. - Decorum required. 
No solicitor shall use vulgar, insulting, or threatening language in the course of any solicitation, nor shall he remain upon the premises after the occupant of the premises has verbally indicated that he or she does not wish to make a purchase or donation. For the purpose of this article, a solicitation shall be deemed to continue until the solicitor has left the premises. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-20) 
Secs. 54-42—54-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 54-76. - Required. 
(a)  Any person engaged in or desiring to engage in any type of selling, soliciting, canvassing, survey making or any other business, occupation, or vocation which by its nature requires going from door to door or house to house in the residential areas of the unincorporated areas of Fulton County, whether on a temporary or a permanent basis, shall first register with the Fulton County Police Department by completing a personal information questionnaire and then obtain a personal identification card from the Fulton County Police Department, which shall be his permit to engage in the activities set out above. 
(b)  Any person who shall solicit orders on behalf of a business, occupation, vocation, or individual, door to door, or house to house, shall be deemed a solicitor. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-11) 
Sec. 54-77. - Contents of application. 
(a)  The police department shall prepare a questionnaire requiring pertinent information regarding the physical description, identity, and background of each applicant for a permit including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Name and social security number of individual; 
(2)  Date of birth; 
(3)  Driver's license number; 
(4)  Race; 
(5)  Sex; 
(6)  Residential address and telephone number; 
(7)  Business address and telephone number; 
(8)  Height and weight; 
(9)  Hair and eye color; 
(10)  Name and address of the organization represented; 
(11)  Name, address, and telephone number of his immediate supervisor in the organization; and 
(12)  A list of any pleas of guilty, convictions, or sentences of probation entered against the applicant in regard to any offenses other than minor traffic violations. 
(b)  The questionnaire form shall also bear the following statement: "O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20 provides it is a felony to knowingly and willfully make a false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of the government of any county of this state." 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-13) 
Sec. 54-78. - Investigation fee and verification of business license. 
The permit application shall be filed with the business license division of the finance department which shall collect a nonrefundable investigation fee according to a fee schedule adopted by the board of commissioners, and shall verify that the organization represented by the applicant has a current Fulton County business license. Such verification shall be endorsed on the application and the applicant shall then file the same with the Fulton County Police Department. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-14; Res. No. 11-0075, 1-19-11) 
Sec. 54-79. - Investigation and issuance. 
The Fulton County Police Department shall then review the application for the purpose of ascertaining whether the applicant has pled to, or has been convicted of, a felony, or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude. After ascertaining that the questionnaire has been properly completed, and that the applicant has not been disqualified by virtue of prior pleas or conviction, the police department shall approve the application and shall photograph the applicant and provide the applicant with a permit bearing the applicant's photograph, name, and organization represented, and identifying the applicant as a solicitor. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-15) 
Sec. 54-80. - Validity and renewal. 
Each permit shall be valid only for solicitation for the organization indicated thereon, and until the expiration of the current business license of such organization. Such permit may be renewed upon payment of a fee according to a fee schedule adopted by the board of commissioners and verification by the finance department that the organization represented has renewed its Fulton County business license for the current year. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-16; Res. No. 11-0075, 1-19-11) 
Sec. 54-81. - Display. 
The police department shall furnish to each permit holder a device suitable for attaching the permit card to the outer clothing of the permit holder. No solicitor shall engage in any of the conduct described in section 54-76 of this article without wearing and displaying his permit in a conspicuous manner. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-17) 
Sec. 54-82. - Surrender. 
Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article for the use of any person is, and shall remain, the property of the county. Each permit holder shall surrender his permit card to the Fulton County Police Department no later than three of the department's business days following the expiration, suspension, or revocation of the permit, or upon the demand of any officer of said department or upon the demand of the chief of police, or his designee, whichever shall first occur. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-24) 
Sec. 54-83. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  No solicitor's permit shall be issued to any person who has been found guilty of a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude any time within five years prior to the date of application, nor shall a permit be issued to any person convicted of a felony, except that a permit may be issued to a convicted felon if it appears that he either has been pardoned, or that he has been free from any legal restrictions for a period of five or more years prior to the date of his application. For the purpose of this article, the terms "conviction" and "found guilty" shall be deemed to include verdicts or pleas of guilty, or pleas of nolo contendere, entered by a court of this state, a court of a sister state, or any federal district court; any permit issued as the result of willful false statements or omissions in the solicitor's application for the permit shall be deemed null and void from the time of its issue. 
(b)  The permit of any solicitor charged with a felony, or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude, shall be deemed suspended from the time of lawful arrest, formal accusation, or indictment, whichever shall first occur; said suspension shall remain in effect until the solicitor is convicted or acquitted, or until the charge is dismissed, "dead-docketed," "nolle prosed," or "no-billed." 
(c)  The permit of any solicitor arrested or served with summons in regard to a violation of any provision of this article, which is alleged to have occurred after the date permit was issued shall be deemed suspended from the time he was arrested or served with summons; said suspension shall remain in effect until the solicitor is acquitted, or the case is dismissed. 
(d)  The permit of any solicitor who is convicted of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or violence, shall be deemed revoked from the time of said conviction. The permit of any solicitor convicted of having violated any provision of this article after issuance of the permit shall be deemed revoked from the time of said conviction. 
(e)  Any suspension or revocation occurring pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be effective by operation of law, whether or not any formal notification to the solicitor is given or received. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-23) 
Chapter 58 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; impact fees, § 58-161 et seq.; planning system for mapping and surveying landmarks, § 102-3; resolutions pertaining to community development, ch. 118; resolutions pertaining to planning, ch. 158; subdivision regulations, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise zoning powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Effect on existing planning and zoning authorization. 
(a)  This chapter shall become effective upon its adoption by the board of commissioners. All powers and authority granted by this chapter to the Fulton County Planning Commission and Fulton County Board of Zoning Appeals shall be cumulative. Such powers and authority shall be in addition to all other powers and authority the planning commission and board of appeals now has or may later have under other laws. 
(b)  Any resolution of the board of commissioners heretofore legally enacted under the authority of any Georgia statute or constitutional provision shall remain in force and effect after this chapter becomes effective until the board of commissioners has brought the resolution into conformity with the provisions of this chapter. However, after this chapter becomes effective, the resolution shall be administered under the provisions of this chapter, and any amendment to any resolution shall be made under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise zoning powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 
Sec. 58-2. - Retention of filing fees. 
The policy for refunds of application fees in zoning matters will be as follows: 
(1)  If the application is accepted and filed with the county as an official document, no part of the application fee will be returned. 
(2)  If the application is merely presented and returned to the applicant at his request, or at the suggestion of the staff, before any entry is made upon any county record, the full amount of the fee will be returned. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-3) 
Sec. 58-3. - Filing fees. 
The fees for filing of a zoning application with the county shall be as fixed from time to time by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-4) 
Sec. 58-4. - Mailing of zoning agendas; charges. 
Subscription charges for mailing of zoning agendas shall be as fixed from time to time by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-5) 
Sec. 58-5. - Violation of chapter; misdemeanor. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be served written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, take all necessary action to correct the violations and shall permanently cease such violations. 
(b)  Any person who intentionally violates any provision of this chapter and who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for the satisfactory correction thereof, and any person who fails to cease all work after a stop order has been issued on a project, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day in which a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished in the manner prescribed by law for misdemeanors, and shall further reimburse the county for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the county by reason of such violation. 
(d)  Persons designated by the director of public works and/or director of inspections and permits are hereby authorized to issue citations or summonses, or both, charging violations under this chapter, returnable to the State Court of Fulton County, or to any other court having the jurisdiction of a commitment court throughout the entire county, for trial. 
(e)  The Magistrate Court of Fulton County and the State Court of Fulton County shall each have jurisdiction to try offenses alleging violations by any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity of this article. Violations of this chapter shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor. Each day any violation of this article shall continue shall be considered a separate offense. Upon conviction, any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity shall be subject to a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the Fulton County Jail for not more than 60 days, or by both this fine and imprisonment for each offense. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-6; Ord. No. 99-0644, § III, 5-5-99) 
State Law reference— Punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b). 
Sec. 58-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Agenda Item # 03-1082, adopted Sept. 3, 2003, superceded the provisions of § 58-6. Formerly, said section pertained to interim design standards for South Fulton Parkway Corridor. The user is directed to App. B, art. 12-K for similar provisions. 
Secs. 58-7—58-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMUNITY ZONING BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-0597, § 1, adopted June 20, 2001, amended the title of article II to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table—Ordinances and Resolutions. 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 

Sec. 58-36. - Membership; composition; appointment; terms; vacancies; removal. 
The county board of commissioners shall appoint seven members to a community zoning board for unincorporated Fulton County. Appointments shall be made as follows: 
Each member of the county board of commissioners shall nominate, for full board approval, a member to the community zoning board. All members shall be residents of the county. The community zoning board shall review and make recommendations to the board of commissioners (as such powers are defined in this chapter) regarding properties located within, and matters affecting, unincorporated Fulton County. Members of the community zoning board will be provided periodic training, as determined by the director of the department of environment and community development. 
From the membership of the community zoning board, the board of commissioners shall appoint a chair and vice-chair, to serve no more than two years. The vice-chair may be appointed to the duties of the chair when deemed necessary by emergency or when the chair is no longer able to perform those duties assigned, as determined by the board of commissioners. The duty of the chair shall be to conduct the meetings in accordance with the procedures set forth herein, and the vice-chair shall conduct the meetings in the chair's absence. The members shall serve a term consistent with that of the member of the board of commissioners making the nomination. Members shall serve no more than two terms, either consecutive or non-consecutive. 
Members of the community zoning board serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners and may be removed upon motion of the nominating commissioner and affirmative vote of a majority of the board of commissioners. No member of the community zoning board shall hold any other appointive or elective public office or position in unincorporated Fulton County during such member's term. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term of such vacancy in the same manner as the original appointment. An appointment to fill any vacancy on the community zoning board shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. Compensation of the members of the community zoning board shall be fixed by the members of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-11; 94-RC-212, 4-20-94; Res. No. 01-0597, § 2, 6-20-01) 
Sec. 58-37. - Organization; rules; staff; officers; finances. 
The community zoning board shall meet at least once each zoning cycle, at the call of the chair, or at such other times as the community zoning board may determine necessary, following, at a minimum, all standards set forth in the Georgia Open Meetings Act. 
In addition to the powers set forth in section 58-38, the community zoning board shall review rezoning and use permit applications for property located within unincorporated Fulton County and, in this regard, shall perform the functions of planning commissions as may be required by state law. Corrected or amended documents, including plans and drawings, to be presented to the community zoning board for consideration during a public hearing must be provided to county staff no later than the close of business ten business days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the community zoning board. Presentation of new documents not processed by staff in the manner described herein shall not be considered by the community zoning board. 
Community zoning board meetings shall include a public hearing on each item, during which both the applicant and any persons opposed to the application may make presentations. Said presentations shall be ten minutes in length for each side, unless otherwise extended by the chair. Rebuttal by either party will be allowed, as will a final statement by the applicant, if the applicants ten minute time allotment permits. In addition, members of the community zoning board may ask questions of any interested person present at the hearing. 
At the close of the public hearing for each item, the chair of the community zoning board shall call the members to order for consideration and voting on the issue currently before them. The vote of the community zoning board shall be for one of the following recommendations to the board of commissioners only: 1) approval as presented by the applicant; 2) approval as recommended by staff; 3) deferral, if such deferral is the recommendation of staff; 4) denial; or 5) conditional approval subject to staff's review of a private agreement between the applicant and adjacent or nearby property owners. The community zoning board shall present a written report to the board of commissioners within 14 business days after its meeting to report its findings and recommendations from said meeting. 
The community zoning board shall adhere to these rules for the transaction of business and keep a record of its transactions, findings, and determinations, which shall be a public record. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-12; Res. No. 01-0597, § 3, 6-20-01) 
Sec. 58-38. - Principal powers and duties. 
It shall be the function and duty of the community zoning board to make recommendation(s) for action by the board of commissioners on the following: All applications for rezonings, applications for use permits, amendments to the text of the county's zoning resolution, and amendments to the text of the county's comprehensive plan and the associated plan map; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the board of commissioners from hereafter assigning other duties to the community zoning board. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-13; Res. No. 01-0597, § 4, 6-20-01) 
Secs. 58-39—58-42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-0597, §§ 5—8, adopted June 20, 2001, repealed §§ 58-39—58-42 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to miscellaneous powers; reports on matters referred to it; comprehensive plan and transfer of functions, respectively, as related to the former planning commission. See the Code Comparative Table—Ordinances and Resolutions. 
Secs. 58-43—58-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference— Conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67-A-1 et seq.; the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; authority to adopt plans and exercise zoning powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

Sec. 58-76. - Grant of power. 
For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, or general welfare of unincorporated Fulton County, the board of commissioners is empowered, and within the unincorporated areas thereof, in accordance with the conditions and the procedure specified in this chapter, to regulate the location, height, bulk, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot which may be occupied, the sizes of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density and distribution of populations, and the uses of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, water supply, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities, and other purposes. These regulations shall be made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and shall be designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. The regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration, among other things, of the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to promoting desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods, protecting property against blight and depreciation, securing economy in governmental expenditures, conserving the value of buildings, and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and other buildings and structures throughout unincorporated Fulton County. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-21) 
Sec. 58-77. - Plan and resolution. 
The board of commissioners may exercise the powers set forth in section 58-76 of this article and, for the purposes therein mentioned, may divide unincorporated Fulton County into districts of any number, shape, and size as it may determine; and within these districts it may regulate the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, and use of buildings and structures and the use of land. The lawful use of any land, building, or structure that was existing and lawful at the time of the enactment or amendment of zoning regulations may, except as hereinafter provided, be continued although such does not conform with the provisions of such regulations or amendments (hereinafter called nonconforming use). The board of commissioners may provide in the zoning resolution for the continuance, restoration, reconstruction, extension, or substitution of a nonconforming use. The board of commissioners may also provide for the termination of any use of a building or structure or land that is not in conformity with the regulations of the district within which it is located either by specifying the period or periods in which the nonconforming use shall be required to cease, or by providing a formula or formulas whereby the compulsory termination of a nonconforming use may be so fixed as to allow for the recovery or amortization of the investment in such nonconforming use. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-22; Res. No. 01-0597, § 9, 6-20-01) 
Sec. 58-78. - Method of procedure. 
Before enacting the zoning resolution the board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be published once a week for at least two weeks in the newspaper in which sheriff's advertisements are published prior to holding of the same. No change in or departure from the text or maps, as certified by the planning commission, shall be made unless such change or departure be first submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. The planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its recommendation. If the planning commission fails to submit a recommendation within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the change or departure. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-23) 
Sec. 58-79. - Zoning amendments. 
The zoning resolution, including the maps, may be amended from time to time, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. The planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its recommendation. If the planning commission fails to submit a recommendation within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. The provisions of section 58-78 relative to public hearings and official notice shall apply equally to all amendments. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-24) 
Sec. 58-80. - Fulton County Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(a)  The board of commissioners hereby creates a board of zoning appeals. 
(b)  The Fulton County Board of Zoning Appeals (or as hereinafter may be called the board) shall consist of seven members appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County. The term of each member shall coincide with that of the district commissioner who appointed the member to serve on the board of zoning appeals. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members shall be removable for cause by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County upon written charges and after public hearing. The members of the board shall be compensated as fixed by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County. None of the members shall hold any other public office or position in Fulton County, except that one member may also be a member of the Fulton County Community Zoning Board. 
(c)  The board of zoning appeals shall elect one of its members chairman, who shall serve for one year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. The director of the department of zoning administration shall be the secretary of the board of zoning appeals. The board of appeals shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or, in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths. The board may compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(d)  Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of Fulton County affected by any decision of the administrative officer. An appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of appeals a notice of appeal specifying the ground thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(e)  An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of appeals after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of zoning appeals or by a court of competent jurisdiction on application, on notice to the officer from who the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
(f)  The board of zoning appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and give due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(g)  The board of zoning appeals shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of any resolution effective pursuant to this section. 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the zoning resolution and maps upon which the board is required to pass under such zoning resolution and maps. 
(3)  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases any variance from the terms of the zoning resolution and maps as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the zoning resolution and maps will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the resolution shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. A variance may be granted in individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of zoning appeals that: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; 
b.  The application of the resolution to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of the resolution; however, no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by the zoning resolution and maps; and 
e.  In exercising the above powers, the board of zoning appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-25; 15-0148, Exh. A, 2-18-15) 
Sec. 58-81. - Enforcement of article and remedies. 
The board of commissioners shall provide for the enforcement of this article or any resolution effective pursuant to the provisions of this article by means of the withholding of building permits and occupancy permits, and for such purposes has established and filled the position of building official. It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, or alter any building or other structure without first obtaining a building permit from the department of inspections and permits or to use such building or structure on any land without first obtaining an occupancy permit from the department of inspections and permits; and the department of inspections and permits shall not issue any permit unless the requirements of this article and of any resolution effective pursuant to it are complied with. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-27) 
Sec. 58-82. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the regulations made under the authority of this article require a greater width or size of yards, courts, or other open spaces, or require a lower height of building or smaller number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other regulation, the regulations effective under authority of this article shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other regulation require more restrictive standards than are required by the regulations made effective under the authority of this article, the provisions of such regulation shall govern. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-28) 
Sec. 58-83. - Zoning regulations incorporated by reference. 
The Fulton County Zoning Resolutions, as adopted by the board of commissioners, as subsequently amended, is hereby incorporated herein by reference. A copy of the current resolution shall be maintained in the office of the clerk of the commission or at a location designated by the clerk, for inspection by the public. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-29) 
Editor's note— The zoning resolution is published in appendix B. 
Secs. 58-84—58-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 58-116. - Intent of article. 
The public health, safety, morals, and general welfare require the harmonious, orderly, and progressive development of land within unincorporated Fulton County. In furtherance of this purpose, regulation of the subdivision of land by the board of commissioners is authorized for the following purposes, among others: 
(1)  To encourage the development of economically sound and stable communities; 
(2)  To ensure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments; 
(3)  To ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments; 
(4)  To ensure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes; and 
(5)  To ensure, in general, the wise development of new areas, in harmony with the Comprehensive Plan of Fulton County. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-36) 
Cross reference— Subdivision regulations, app. A. 
Sec. 58-117. - Platting authority. 
No plat of a subdivision within the unincorporated portion of Fulton County shall be filed or recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton County until it shall have been submitted to and approved by the director of public works and indication of such approval entered in writing on the plat. The clerk of the superior court shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision which does not have an indication of approval. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without the approval of the director of public works as required by this article is hereby declared a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable as provided by law. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-37) 
Sec. 58-118. - Provisions of regulations. 
(a)  The director of public works shall prepare and recommend to the board of commissioners for adoption regulations governing the subdivision of land within the unincorporated portion of Fulton County. This article may provide for the harmonious development of Fulton County; for the coordination of streets within subdivisions with other existing or planned streets or official map streets; for the size of blocks and lots; for the dedication or reservation of land for streets, school sites, and recreation areas and of easements for utilities and other public services and facilities; and for a distribution of population and traffic which will tend to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience, prosperity, or general welfare. 
(b)  The subdivision regulations may include requirements as to the extent to which and the manner in which streets shall be graded, surfaced, and improved, and water, sewers, septic tanks, and other utility mains, piping, connections, or other facilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of the plat. The subdivision regulations may provide that, in lieu of the completion of any work and installations previous to the final approval of a plat, the board of commissioners may accept a bond, in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it, providing for and securing to Fulton County the actual construction and installations of such improvements and utilities within a period specified by the department of public works and expressed in the bond; and the board of commissioners shall enforce the bonds by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. The board of commissioners may adopt and amend any land subdivision regulations after a public hearing thereon, at least 15 days' notice of the time and place of which shall have been published in a newspaper of general circulation in Fulton County. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-38) 
Sec. 58-119. - Effect of plat approval on status of dedications. 
The approval of a final plat by the director of public works shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by Fulton County of the dedication of any street, utility, structure, use or other ground shown upon the plat until such time as the public improvement shown thereon has been accepted by the director of public works. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-39) 
Sec. 58-120. - Penalties for transferring lots in unapproved subdivisions. 
The owner or agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided within Fulton County, who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell this land by reference to or exhibition or by other use of a plat of subdivision of the land before the final plat has been approved by the director of public works and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton County, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by law; and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. Fulton County, through its attorney or other official designated by the board of commissioners, may enjoin any transfer or sale or agreement by appropriate action. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-40) 
State Law reference— Punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b). 
Sec. 58-121. - Acceptance of and improvements in unapproved streets. 
From and after the time when the board of commissioners shall have attached by virtue of the adoption by the planning commission of a major street plan and the adoption by the board of commissioners of a set of land subdivision regulations, the board of commissioners shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any street or lay or authorize the laying of any water mains, sewers, connections, or other facilities or utilities in any street within unincorporated Fulton County unless the street shall have been accepted or opened as, or shall otherwise have received the legal status of, a public street prior to the attachment of the board of commissioners, subdivision jurisdiction, or unless the street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on an approved subdivision plat; however, the board of commissioners may locate and construct or may accept any other street if the resolution or other measure for such approval be first submitted to the department of public works for its review and comment. Such street shall have the status of an approved street as fully as though it had been originally shown on an approved subdivision plat. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-41) 
Sec. 58-122. - Erection of buildings. 
From and after the time when the platting jurisdiction of the board of commissioners shall have attached by virtue of adoption by the planning commission of a major street plan and the adoption by the board of commissioners of a set of land subdivision regulations, no building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot within unincorporated Fulton County unless the street giving access to the lot up which the building is proposed to be placed shall be accepted or opened as, or shall have otherwise received the legal status of a public street prior to that time, or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the director of public works, or with a street located and accepted by the board of commissioners, or as provided for by the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. Any building erected in violation of this section shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the county building official, employees designated by the director of public works, county attorney, or other official designated by the board of commissioners may bring appropriate action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed, or issue a citation to any person who shall erect a building in violation of this article as provided by the procedures set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-1-17. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-42) 
Sec. 58-123. - Incorporated by reference. 
The Fulton County Subdivision Regulations, as adopted by the board of commissioners, and as subsequently amended, is hereby incorporated herein by reference. A copy of the current resolution shall be maintained in the office of the clerk of the commission, or at a location designated by the clerk, for inspection by the public. 
(Code 1983, § 28-1-43) 
Secs. 58-124—58-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IMPACT FEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; ordinances pertaining to parks and recreation, ch. 50; ordinances pertaining to roads and bridges, ch. 62; resolutions pertaining to parks and recreation, ch. 150; resolutions pertaining to roads and bridges, ch. 162; subdivision regulations, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference— Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-161. - Short title of article. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Development Impact Fee Ordinance of Fulton County, Georgia." 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. I, § 1, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-162. - Authority of article. 
This article has been prepared and adopted by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, Georgia, in accordance with the authority provided by Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV, the Constitution of the State of Georgia and the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq.) as that act may be amended in the future. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. I, § 2, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-163. - Interpretation of article. 
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the power of the county to adopt such an ordinance pursuant to any other source of local authority or to use any other methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this article. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. I, § 3, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-164. - Application of article. 
This article shall apply to all unincorporated areas of Fulton County. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. I, § 4, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-165. - Declaration of intent and purpose of article. 
(a)  This article is intended to implement and be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan: Unincorporated Fulton County, Georgia, adopted March 15, 1978, amended by the Fulton 2010 comprehensive plan update on May 4, 1988, and on May 7, 1990, and as it may be amended in accord with O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 70 (O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.) (Growth Strategies) in the future. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to ensure adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development in Fulton County and to regulate the use and development of land so that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve new growth and development. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. II, §§ 1, 2, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-166. - Findings. 
The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, Georgia, finds and declares that: 
(1)  Land development shall not be allowed unless adequate public facilities are available or are ensured; 
(2)  New land development in identified service areas shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities to serve new growth and development; 
(3)  The imposition of impact fees is a preferred method of regulating land development in order to ensure that it bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities necessary to accommodate the new growth and development and to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Fulton County; and 
(4)  Fulton County must expand its public facilities in order to maintain current levels of service if new development and growth is to be accommodated without decreasing the level of service. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. III, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-167. - Effect of article on other regulations. 
This article shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density of development, design, improvements, or any other requirements or aspect of the development of land or provision of capital improvements subject to zoning and subdivision regulations or other regulations of the county. All such other regulations and requirements shall be operative and shall remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all development. Application and imposition of development impact fees is additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the county on the development of land or the issuance of building permits. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 3, art. I, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-168. - Severability. 
If any sentence, section, clause, part, or provision of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the validity of this article as a whole or any other part hereof shall not be affected. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 3, art. III, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-169. - Rules of construction. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise stated in this article, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this article: 
(1)  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
(2)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(3)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(4)  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
(5)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
c.  "Either…or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(6)  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(7)  The paragraph headings used in this article are included solely for convenience and shall not affect, or be used in connection with, the interpretation of this article. 
(8)  The intent of this article in granting credits and/or refunds is to make such grants to persons or entities who actually paid or will pay fees whether they are "developer" or "property owner" or some other entity. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. IV, §§ 1, 2, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-170. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall mean: 
Affordable means the sales price cannot exceed 2½ times the income of people or households of low or moderate income, or the rental price cannot exceed 30 percent of the gross monthly income of people or households of low or moderate income. 
Affordable housing means housing affordable to persons of low or moderate income. 
Building permit means the permit required for new construction pursuant to the Fulton County Building Code. As used herein, the term shall not include permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure, provided there is no increase in gross square feet or number of dwelling units resulting therefrom. 
Capital improvement means an improvement with a useful life of ten years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of a public facility. 
Capital improvements element means that portion of the Comprehensive Plan: Unincorporated Fulton County, Georgia, which sets out projected needs for system improvements during a planning horizon established in the Comprehensive Plan: Unincorporated Fulton County, a schedule of capital improvements that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement. (See the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan.) 
Commencement of construction or commenced construction means expenditure of any funds, whether they be development impact fee funds or not, for a public facilities project, marshalling of forces to undertake a public facilities project, or advertising of bids to undertake a public facilities project, or any action normally found to proceed subsequent to these actions in a typical flow of project construction activities. 
Completion of construction means a project or development has been issued the final certificate of occupancy by the county. The date of completion is the date at which such certificate is issued. 
Comprehensive plan means the Comprehensive Plan: Unincorporated Fulton County, Georgia, adopted March 15, 1978, amended by the Fulton 2010 comprehensive plan updated on May 4, 1988, and on May 7, 1990, and as it may be amended in accord with O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 70 (O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.) (Growth Strategies) in the future. 
County means Fulton County, a legal subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
County manager means the County Manager of Fulton County, Georgia, or the county manager's designee. 
Developer means any person or legal entity undertaking development. 
Development means any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land, any of which creates additional demand and need for public facilities. 
Development approval means written authorization, such as issuance of a building permit, or other forms of development approval as required by other Fulton County codes, which authorizes commencement of construction. 
Development impact fee means a payment of money imposed upon development as a condition of development approval to pay for a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve new growth and development. 
Encumber means to legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of the county. 
Excess capacity means capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities which is beyond that necessary to provide service at a specified level of service. 
Feepayor means that person or entity who pays a development impact fee or his/her successor in interest with the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees which is required by this article and which has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. In the absence of an express transfer or assignment or entitlement to any refund or previously paid development impact fees, the right or entitlement shall be deemed "not to run with the land." 
Fulton County median income means the median income of all residents of Fulton County, Georgia, incorporated and unincorporated, as documented in the most recent applicable report published by the U.S. Bureau of the Census. 
Individual assessment determination means a finding that an individual assessment study does or does not meet the requirements for such a study and, if requirements are met, the fee calculated from an individual assessment study. 
Individual assessment study means the engineering and/or economic documentation prepared by a feepayor to allow determination of a development impact fee other than by use of an applicable fee schedule, as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-4(g). 
Level of service means a measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for public facilities in terms of demand to capacity ratios or the comfort and convenience of use or service of public facilities, or both. 
Low income means persons or households with income equal to or less than 50 percent of the median income of Fulton County according to the most recent data published from time to time by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Moderate income means persons or households with income equal to or less than 80 percent of the median income of Fulton County according to the most recent data published from time to time by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Present value means the current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions, or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money. 
Project means a particular development on an identified parcel of land or as may be identified by a particular zoning petition. 
Project improvements means site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project and that are not system improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a project improvement or a system improvement and the physical location of the improvement onsite or offsite shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a project improvement or a system improvement. If an improvement or facility provides or will provide more than incidental service or facilities capacity to persons other than users or occupants of a particular project, the improvement or facility is a system improvement and shall not be considered a project improvement. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities approved by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners shall be considered a project improvement. 
Property owner means that person or entity which holds title to property. 
Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements which is reasonably related to the service demands and needs of the project. 
Public facilities means: 
(1)  Water supply production, treatment, and distribution facilities; 
(2)  Wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal facilities; 
(3)  Roads, streets, and bridges, including rights-of-way, traffic signals, landscaping, and any local components of state or federal highways; 
(4)  Stormwater collection, retention, detention, treatment, and disposal facilities, flood control facilities, and bank and shore protection and enhancement improvements; 
(5)  Parks, open space, and recreation areas and related facilities; 
(6)  Public safety facilities, including police, fire, emergency medical, and rescue facilities; and 
(7)  Libraries and related facilities. 
Rental housing means a dwelling unit for which periodic payments are paid by a tenant to a landlord for its use or occupation. 
Rents affordable to low income families means that the sum of the utility allowance and the rent payable monthly to the owner with respect to a unit is at or below the fair market rent published annually by HUD. In case of cooperative or mutual housing, rent means the occupancy charges under the occupancy agreement between the members and the cooperative. 
Sales housing means a dwelling unit that is to be transferred from one person to another called, respectively, the seller (or vendor) and the buyer (or purchaser), by which the former, in consideration of the payment or promise of payment of a certain price in money, transfers to the latter the title and the possession of property. 
Service area means geographically defined areas of the county, designated in the Comprehensive Plan: Unincorporated Fulton County, or a component thereof, or designated by intergovernmental agreement, as areas in which a defined set of public facilities provide service to development within the area and/or in which development potential creates the need for the imposition of development impact fees. 
System improvement costs means costs incurred to provide additional public facilities capacity needed to serve new growth and development for planning, design, and construction, land acquisition, land improvement, design, and engineering related thereto, including the cost of constructing or reconstructing system improvements or facility expansions including, but not limited to, the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvement element, and administrative costs, provided that such administrative costs shall not exceed three percent of the total amount of the costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued by or on behalf of Fulton County to finance the capital improvements element but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
System improvements means capital improvements that are public facilities designed to provide service to the community at large, in contrast to project improvements. 
Unit of development means the standard incremental measure of land development activity for a specific type of land use upon which the rate of demand for public service and facilities is based. As an illustration, the standard unit of measurement for most types of housing development is dwelling unit, whereas the standard unit of development for office development is gross square footage of floor area. 
Unused or excess impact fee means any individual impact fee payment paid to the county from which no amount of money has been encumbered or expended according to the requirements of section 58-174(d) herein within the time specified in section 58-176(a) herein. 
Utility allowance means the amount for the cost of utilities (except telephones) and other housing services that is not included in the rent payable to the owner, but is the responsibility of the family occupying the unit. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. V, 5-18-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-171. - Imposition of development impact fees. 
(a)  Any person who after the effective date of this article engages in development shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. 
(b)  Payment of a development impact fee shall be deemed to be in compliance with this article in regard to the system improvements for which the development impact fee was paid. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this article shall not be subject to development impact fees pursuant to this article so long as the building permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided herein, no development impact fee shall be collected earlier than the time of issuance of a building permit. 
(e)  Development impact fees for stormwater collection, retention, detention, treatment, and disposal facilities, flood control facilities, and bank and shore protection and enhancement improvements shall be collected at the time of issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. VI, §§ 1—5, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-172. - Calculation of development impact fees. 
(a)  Any development impact fee imposed pursuant to this article shall not exceed a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements. 
(b)  Development impact fees shall be calculated on the basis of service areas as provided in the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Development impact fees shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities adopted in the comprehensive plan that are applicable to existing development as well as the new growth and development. 
(d)  A developer shall have the right to elect to pay a project's proportionate share of system improvement costs by payment of development impact fees according to the applicable fee schedule as full and complete payment of the development project's proportionate share of system improvement costs. 
(e)  At their option, applicants for development approval shall be permitted individual assessments of development impact fees under section 58-173 of this article regarding individual assessment determinations. 
(f)  Upon application to the county manager, a developer may receive a certified schedule of development impact fees or a certified individual assessment (section 58-173) for a particular project. Such certified fees shall establish the development impact fee for a period no less than one year from date of certification, even if new or revised rate schedules have been adopted. In the event that, after one year, new or revised rate schedules have not been adopted, the certification shall continue until such time as new or revised fee schedules are adopted. 
(g)  In addition to the cost of "to be built" new expanded system improvements needed to serve new development, the cost basis of a development impact fee shall also include the proportionate cost of existing system improvements in appropriate service areas to the extent that such public facilities have current excess service capacity and new development will be served by such facilities. 
(h)  When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has been made includes two or more buildings, structures, or other land uses in any combination, including two or more uses within a building or structure, the total development impact fee shall be the sum of the fees for each and every building, structure, or other use, including each and every use within a building or structure, unless otherwise provided for in this article. 
(i)  In the event that either Fulton County or an applicant contends that the land use for which the building permit is proposed is not within specified land use categories or fits within a different category, then: 
(1)  The county manager shall make a determination as to the appropriate land use designation. Such determination may be appealed to the Fulton County Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(2)  If any land use designation is not in a category contained in any facility development impact fee ordinance, then an appropriate new category may be added to the various facility impact fee ordinances following submission to the board of commissioners. In addition, either Fulton County or the applicant can propose actual studies or surveys to calculate the most appropriate fee rates for a new land use category. 
(j)  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. VII, 5-18-94) 
State Law reference— Imposition of impact fee, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-3. 
Sec. 58-173. - Individual assessment determinations. 
(a)  Individual assessments of development impact fees may be established as follows: 
(1)  In the event that a developer elects an individual assessment, the developer shall submit an individual assessment study. Any such study is to be presented to the county manager. If the county manager finds that the data, information, and assumptions used in such an individual assessment study satisfy the requirements of this article, then that study shall be used to calculate the individual assessment for that project. 
(2)  Each individual assessment study must: 
a.  Be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source of engineering or planning data; or 
b.  Be based on actual, relevant, and credible studies or surveys of facility demand conducted in the Atlanta Metropolitan Statistical Area carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to accepted methodology. 
c.  Any other specifications required in other parts of this article. 
(b)  Any fee calculated in accordance with this section shall have standing for one year following the date of a formal response from the county manager to the applicant. Following such a period, a new application must be made. 
(c)  A determination by the county manager that any individual assessment study does not satisfy the requirements of this article may be appealed by the applicant to the Fulton County Board of Zoning Appeals, subject to the procedures, rules, and regulations set forth in section 58-204 of this article. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. VIII, 5-18-94) 
State Law reference— Calculation of impact fees, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-4. 
Sec. 58-174. - Deposit and expenditure of fees. 
(a)  All development impact fee funds shall be maintained in one or more interest-bearing accounts. Restrictions on the investment of such funds shall be the same that apply to investment of all county funds generally. 
(b)  Accounting records shall be maintained for each category of system improvements and the service area in which fees are collected. 
(c)  Interest earned on development impact fees shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact fees under this article. 
(d)  Expenditures of development impact fees shall be made only for the category of system improvements and in the service area for which the development impact fee was imposed as shown by the capital improvement element and as authorized by this article. 
(e)  Development impact fees shall not be used to pay for any purpose that does not involve system improvements that create additional services available to serve new growth and development. 
(f)  The county manager shall prepare an annual report describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and used during the preceding year by category of public facility and service area. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. IX, §§ 1—6, 5-18-94) 
State Law reference— Deposit and expenditure of fee, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-8. 
Sec. 58-175. - Credits. 
(a)  Credit shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements or construction or dedication of land or money required or accepted by Fulton County from a developer or his/her predecessor in title or interest for system improvements of the category for which a development impact fee is being collected. Credits shall not be given for any construction of improvements or contribution or dedication of land or money which occurred more than ten years prior to the effective date of this article. 
(b)  Calculation of development impact fees shall include credits for the present value of revenues reasonably expected, on the basis of historic funding patterns, to be generated by new growth and development insofar as such revenues are expected to be available to pay for system improvements (see Appendix A: Credit for Property Tax Revenue, attached hereto as section 58-239). 
(c)  Credits under subsection (a) of this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: 
(1)  For the present value of the construction of any system improvements required or accepted, in conjunction with the project for which approval is being sought, by the county from the developer or predecessor in title or interest for the category of system improvements in the service area for which the development impact fee is being collected, the county will utilize a standard construction cost as established by the department of public works for the assessment of applicable credits. Should unusual circumstances such as difficult topography or wetlands cause the standard costs to be restrictive, a developer may present documentation to the county demonstrating such circumstances for consideration in the calculation of credits. 
(2)  For the present value of any contribution or dedication of land required or accepted for system improvements, in conjunction with the project for which approval is being sought, by the county from the developer or predecessor in title or interest for the category of system improvements in the service area for which the development impact fee is being collected, the value of contributed land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the current validated Fulton County tax appraisal at the time of dedication; present value shall be calculated from time of dedication using the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent). 
(3)  For the present value of any contribution or dedication of money required or accepted, in conjunction with the project for which approval is being sought, by the county from the developer or predecessor in title or interest for the system improvements in the service area for which the development impact fee is being collected, the value of contributed money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution or dedication; present value shall be calculated from time of contribution or dedication using the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent). 
(4)  In the event a developer is issued a building permit for a land use which is determined by the county to result in a reduction in demand for system improvements from an existing land use on the property in the service area for which the development impact fee is being collected, the developer or predecessor in title or interest shall be given a credit for the difference which shall be applied against that parcel of land for which the development impact fee was or will be paid; present value shall be calculated from time of contribution or dedication using the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent). 
(d)  In the event a building permit is abandoned, for the present value of any previously paid development impact fee for the system improvements in the service area for which the development impact fee is being collected, credit shall be in the amount of the development impact fee paid inflated from the date of payment using the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent) and shall be applied against that parcel of land for which the development impact fee was paid. 
(e)  In the event that a developer enters into an agreement with the county to construct, fund, or contribute system improvements such that the amount of credit created by such construction, funding, or contribution exceeds the development impact fee calculated for the project, the developer shall be compensated for such excess contribution by the county or, at the county's option, from development impact fees paid by other development located in the service area benefitted by such improvements. The present value of any such construction or contribution shall be established by: 
(1)  Use of documented prices actually paid by the developer for the system improvements with such prices inflated by use of the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent); or 
(2)  Use of documented prices which would have been paid by the county for such system improvements with such prices inflated by use of the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent), whichever is less. 
(3)  The county is under no obligation to make immediate compensation, but will make compensation as funds are available. 
(f)  Except as provided in subsection (g) of this section, no credit shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of this article, nor shall credit be given for system improvements or funds for system improvements constructed, contributed, or dedicated after the effective date of this article if an agreement to do so was entered into before the effective date of this article for projects which have already received a building permit. 
(g)  In the event that a feepayor has, under previously established conditions of zoning, constructed, contributed, or dedicated system improvements or funds when receiving permits to proceed with only a portion or phase of a project as defined by a particular zoning case, but the construction, contribution, or dedication is in excess of that required by the portion or phase permitted, the excess construction, contribution, or dedication shall be credited against future development impact fees which shall be required as additional portions or phases of the zoned project seek building permits. 
(h)  In no event shall credit be given for project improvements. 
(i)  The developer must present evidence of the cost and age of the improvement from which present value may be calculated using the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent) estimates of inflation and depreciation. 
(j)  Credits required under subsection (b) herein shall be automatically given at the time of fee imposition. Any other credits shall be given only upon request of the developer to the county manager. To receive consideration for such other credits a developer must present evidence or proposals for creditable activities and evidence of value to the county manager at or before the time of application for building permit. 
(k)  The county manager shall review all claims for allowance and valuation of credits and make determinations regarding: 
(1)  Allowance of any claimed credit. 
(2)  Value of any allowed credit. 
(l)  Any credit shall be acknowledged in writing and calculated at the time of imposition of the development impact fee. 
(1)  Any credit shall be acknowledged in writing and calculated at the time of imposition of the development impact fee. 
(2)  A developer may appeal any such determination under the provisions of this article dealing with appeals. 
(m)  Approved credits which are in excess of impact fees due for a particular project may be transferred to another project located within the same service area and shall apply only to the same public facility category for which the credits were originally approved. Such transfers of approved credits shall follow those procedures established by the county manager. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. X, §§ 1—12, 5-18-94; Ord. No. 98-0846, § 1, 7-1-98) 
State Law reference— Credits, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-7. 
Sec. 58-176. - Refunds. 
(a)  Upon the request of an owner of property on which a development impact fee has been paid, the county shall refund the development impact fee if: 
(1)  Capacity is available and service is denied; or 
(2)  If the county, after collecting the fee, has failed to encumber the development impact fee or commence construction within six years after the date the fee was collected. 
(b)  In determining whether development impact fees have been encumbered, development impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
(c)  When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber development impact fees, the county shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the feepayor who paid the development impact fee at the address on the application for development approval or to a successor in interest who has given notice to the county of a transfer or assignment of the right to entitlement to a refund and who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published in the legal organ of the county wherein the sheriff's notices are published within 30 days after the expiration of the six-year period after the date that the development impact fees were collected and shall contain a heading "Notice of Entitlement to Development Impact Fee Refund." 
(d)  All requests for refunds shall be made in writing to the county manager within one year of the time the refund becomes payable under subsections (a) and (b) or (c) of this section or within one year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund under subsection (c) of this section, whichever is later. 
(e)  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess impact fee collected. 
(f)  All refunds shall be made to the feepayor within 60 days after it is determined by the county that a sufficient proof of claim for refund has been made. 
(g)  The feepayor shall have standing to sue for a refund under the provisions of this article if there has been a timely and complete application (including, but not necessarily limited to, proof that a development impact fee has been paid, proof that the applicant for the refund is the feepayor entitled to the refund, and that the conditions specified in subsection (a) of this section have been met) for refund and the refund has been denied or has not been made within one year of submission of the application for refund to the county. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. XI, §§ 1—7, 5-18-94) 
State Law reference— Refunds, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-9. 
Sec. 58-177. - Private agreements. 
(a)  In accord with the provisions of this section and any more specific provisions which may be contained in this article, any developer or property owner or group of developers and/or property owners may propose to enter into a private agreement with the county in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements and providing for credits or reimbursement for system improvement costs incurred by a developer including interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project costs which are used or shared by more than one development project. 
(b)  A private agreement may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions which: 
(1)  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of impact fees, provided that any such agreement allows the county to assess additional development impact fees after completion of construction according to schedules set forth in this article. 
(2)  Permit construction of, dedication of property for, or other in-kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which a development impact fee would be imposed in lieu of or with a credit against applicable development impact fees. 
(3)  Permit a schedule and method of payment of imposed fees in a manner appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this article, provided that security acceptable to the county is posted ensuring payment of the development impact fees. Forms of security which may be acceptable to the county include a cash bond, a surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, negotiable certificate of deposit or escrow account, or lien or mortgage on lands to be covered by the building permit. 
(c)  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the county manager for review, negotiation, and submission to the board of commissioners. Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the board of commissioners prior to the issuance of a building permit. Any such agreement shall provide for execution by mortgagees, lienholders, or contract purchasers in addition to the landowner. The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County shall approve such an agreement only if it finds that the agreement will apportion the burden of expenditure for new facilities proportionately, consistent with the principles set forth in O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 71 (O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq.) and this article. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. XII, §§ 1—3, 5-18-94) 
State Law reference— Private agreements, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-13. 
Sec. 58-178. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-4(1), the public policies expressed in the comprehensive plan, and in accordance with the policies of the Fulton County Board of Commissioners, the following development projects are found to promote affordable housing and shall be exempt from the payment of development impact fees as provided herein. 
(b)  The proportionate share of any systems improvements costs foregone from exempted projects shall be funded from a revenue source other than development impact fees. 
(c)  Affordable housing shall be exempt from development impact fees as follows: 
(1)  For "sales housing," all development impact fees which may be incident on a given project in a specific service area or combination of service areas shall be exempted for each unit of affordable housing included in a development according to the following schedule of sales prices: 
Sales price equal to or less than 80 percent Fulton County Median Income times 2½: 25 percent of fees exempted, and an additional 2.5 percent exemption for each additional reduction of sales price equal to one percent Fulton County Median Income times 2½. For example: 
Sales price equal to or less than 70 percent Fulton County Median Income times 2½: 50 percent of fees exempted. 
Sales price equal to or less than 60 percent Fulton County Median Income times 2½: 75 percent of fees exempted. 
Sales price equal to or less than 50 percent Fulton County Median Income times 2½: 100 percent of fees exempted. 
(2)  For "rental housing," all development impact fees which may be incident on a given project in a specific service area or combination of service areas shall be exempted for each unit of affordable housing included in a development according to the following schedule of rental rates: 
Monthly rent equal to or less than 80 percent Fulton County Median Income times 30 percent/12: 25 percent of fees exempted, and an additional 2.5 percent exemption for each additional reduction of monthly rent equal to one percent Fulton County Median Income times 30 percent/12. For example: 
Monthly rent equal to or less than 70 percent Fulton County Median Income times 30 percent/12: 50 percent of fees exempted. 
Monthly rent equal to or less than 60 percent Fulton County Median Income times 30 percent/12: 75 percent of fees exempted. 
Monthly rent equal to or less than 50 percent Fulton County Median Income times 30 percent/12: 100 percent of fees exempted. 
(d)  Credits given under section 58-175(a), (b), shall be reduced in proportion to the exemption. 
(e)  To be eligible for an exemption, a developer must file an application for exemptions with the county manager before the time development impact fees are imposed. The application for exemption must contain documentation acceptable to the county manager showing that the criteria for exemptions will be met. 
(1)  The county may assess additional development impact fees on exempted rental housing if, two years after completion of construction, the development has not, in fact, met the criteria for exemptions and/or if, five years following completion of construction, the development has not, in fact, maintained adherence to the criteria. 
(2)  Any developer of rental housing receiving an exemption under this section must report to the county manager the status of the project relative to the criteria for exemption on the second and fifth anniversaries of completion of construction. Failure to report may result in assessment of additional development impact fees. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. XIII, §§ 1—5, 5-18-94) 
Secs. 58-179—58-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 58-201. - Enforcement generally. 
The enforcement of this article will be the responsibility of the county manager and such county personnel as the county manager may designate from time to time. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. XVII, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-202. - Effective date. 
(a)  This article shall take effect on November 30, 1992. 
(b)  For any development subject to development impact fees under this article, the following shall apply: 
(1)  For any development which has a currently approved zoning that imposes, as conditions of zoning, requirements for dedication, contribution, and/or construction of funds, land, or system improvements with at least a requirement to contribute funds into an offsite transportation improvement fund, the feepayor may elect to: 
a.  Proceed with the project under the existing conditions of zoning by entering into a private agreement (section 58-177 and section 58-236). If the feepayor chooses to proceed under the existing conditions of zoning, none of the provisions of this article shall apply, including those provisions related to credits. If a building permit is requested prior to the approval of said private agreement by the board of commissioners, the county manager can waive some or all of the impact fee otherwise due, as appropriate, pursuant to the owner's binding agreement to pay any additional fees that may be necessary after formal approval of the private agreement. 
b.  Proceed with the project under the provisions of this article, in which case: 
1.  Any development for which a valid application for a building permit has been received by the county prior to the effective date of this article, may proceed to issuance of a building permit without payment of fees otherwise imposed by this article, provided that: 
i.  All fees for system improvements imposed by conditions of zoning approval or any code or regulation in effect prior to the effective date of this article shall be or have been paid in full; and 
ii.  Said building permit is or can be issued within 120 calendar days of the effective date of this article, exclusive of delays caused by the county's normal review process. 
2.  For any development for which a land disturbance permit (LDP) has been issued prior to the effective date of this article, but not an associated building permit, said building permit shall be issued only under the terms and conditions of this article, provided further that: 
i.  Any fees, contributions, or dedications attributable to system improvements paid at the time of issuance of the LDP shall be credited in full against the development impact fees due under this article for issuance of said building permit. 
ii.  In the case of multibuilding projects, such as a subdivision or a multifamily complex, the credit shall be prorated among the various buildings in proportion to their floor area or number of dwelling units. 
iii.  In all such cases, the feepayor may elect to receive a refund of prior payments in lieu of credit for prior payments. 
(2)  For any development for which a valid application for a building permit has been received by the county prior to the effective date of this article may proceed to issuance of a building permit without payment of fees otherwise imposed by this article, provided that: 
a.  All fees for system improvements imposed by conditions of zoning approval, if applicable, or any code or regulation in effect prior to the effective date of this article shall be or have been paid in full; and 
b.  Said building permit is or can be issued within 120 calendar days of the effective date of this article, exclusive of delays caused by the county's normal review process. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 3, art. IV, §§ 1, 2, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-203. - Review. 
(a)  As part of its annual capital improvement program process, or as part of any other planning process which causes the county to evaluate development potential in any area, the county may review the development potential of any area within the county, whether it be a previously designated service area or not, or the county as a whole. Based on such review of development potential, the county may adjust boundaries of service areas or create new service areas. 
(b)  As part of its annual capital improvement program process, or as part of any other planning process which causes the county to evaluate development potential in any area, the county may review capital facilities plans in service areas and modify such plans as a result of development occurring in the previous year and/or requests for permission to develop, e.g. applications for rezoning, applications for land disturbance permits, and applications for building permits. Plans may also be modified as a result of: 
(1)  Capital facilities actually constructed. 
(2)  Changes in capital facility needs and/or standards. 
(3)  Revised cost estimates for capital facilities. 
(4)  Changes in availability of other funds applicable to public facility projects. 
(5)  Other relevant factors. 
(c)  As a result of modifications to service area boundaries and/or capital facilities plans, the county may modify development impact fee schedules, as appropriate, and adopt such revised schedules through official action of the board of commissioners. 
(d)  As part of its annual comprehensive plan review process, or as part of any other planning process which causes the county to evaluate the housing market, the county may revise the provisions specified in section 58-178. 
(e)  Failure of the county to undertake such a review shall result in the continued use and application of the existing fee schedule and other data. The failure to review such structure shall not invalidate this article. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. XIV, §§ 1—5, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-204. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any administrative determination made under this article, or by the application of any provision of this article, may appeal such determination or provision under this section. 
(b)  The applicant or feepayor must file a notice of appeal with the central impact fee office within 30 days following the receipt of written determination of the amount of the development impact fee to be paid or entitlement to a refund, credit, or exemption. 
(c)  All appeals shall be made to the Fulton County Board of Zoning Appeals through the zoning administrator's office following the county manager's decision on the applicability or amount of the development impact fee, or eligibility for or amount of a refund, credit, or exemption. No additional filing fee shall be charged to the applicant. The cost of processing the appeal shall be covered under the three percent administrative cost inherent in the impact fee schedule as permitted by the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(18). Upon filing of an appeal, the county manager shall transmit to the Fulton County Board of Zoning Appeals all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed is taken. The zoning administrator shall thereafter establish a reasonable date and time for a hearing on the appeal, give notice thereof to the parties in interest, and the board of zoning appeals shall decide the same within a reasonable time following the hearing. Any party taking an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. Under article XXIII, section 22.9 of the Fulton County Zoning Resolution, any action by the board of zoning appeals is a final action. Therefore, if any person is aggrieved by a decision of the Fulton County Board of Zoning Appeals, they may take an appeal to the Superior Court of Fulton County within 30 days after the decision by the Fulton County Board of Zoning Appeals is rendered. 
(d)  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a building permit, and by making such payment shall not be estopped from exercising this right of appeal or receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been illegally collected. 
(e)  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to issuance of development approval or a building permit. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. XV, §§ 1—5, 5-18-94) 
State Law reference— Appeals, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-10. 
Sec. 58-205. - Violations and penalty. 
(a)  A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law. However, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution, Fulton County shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil court to enforce this article. Recourse to such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article, including injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of this article and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the implementation of specific corrective actions. 
(b)  To knowingly furnish false information to the county on any matter relating to the administration of this article shall constitute a violation thereof. 
(c)  The county manager may withhold the issuance of any building permit or other development permits if the provisions of this article have been violated by the owner or his/her assigns, on any property within unincorporated Fulton County until the provisions of this article, including the conditions on any permit issued thereunder, have been fully met. 
(d)  The county manager shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this article and shall have the right to issue cease and desist orders and citations for violations. Refusal of written notice of violation under this article shall constitute legal notice of service. 
(e)  For any violation, the county manager shall have the authority to issue a citation. The citation shall be in the form of a written official notice issued in person or by certified mail to the owner of the property, or to his/her agent, or to the person performing the work. The receipt of a citation shall require that corrective action be taken within 30 working days unless otherwise extended at the discretion of the county manager. If the required corrective action is not taken within the time allowed, the county manager may use any available civil or criminal remedies to secure compliance, including revoking a permit. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 1, art. XVI, §§ 1—5, 5-18-94) 
State Law reference— Punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b). 
Secs. 58-206—58-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRANSPORTATION 

Sec. 58-231. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following words and terms are defined, in addition to those terms and words included in division 1 of this article: 
Access improvements means the transportation improvements necessary to provide safe and adequate ingress and egress and for efficient traffic operations. Access improvements include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Rights-of-way and easements; 
(2)  Left and right turn lanes; 
(3)  Acceleration and deceleration lanes; 
(4)  Traffic control devices, signage, and markings; 
(5)  Drainage and utility relocation; and 
(6)  Sidewalks. 
Access road means a street or road that runs generally parallel to an arterial or collector road and is the primary access to abutting properties. The access road may separate abutting properties from arterial or collector road rights-of-way and, if so, this type of facility shall be known as a frontage road. 
Capacity means the traffic-carrying ability of road segments or intersections. 
Capacity intersection means the maximum number of vehicles for a given time which a given intersection can safely and efficiently carry at a specified level of service. 
Capacity per lane means the maximum number of vehicles in a one-mile segment of roadway for a given time period which a typical new lane can safely and efficiently carry at a specified level of service. 
Development generating traffic means any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use; any change in use of a building or structure; or any change in the use of land any of which attracts or produces additional vehicular trips. 
Direct access improvements are always project improvements, not system improvements. Direct access improvements include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Site driveways and roads exclusively serving traffic destined for or produced by the development generating traffic on the site; 
(2)  Median cuts made necessary by those driveways and/or roads; 
(3)  Turn lanes, acceleration lanes and/or deceleration lanes leading to or from those driveways and/or roads; 
(4)  Traffic control measures for those driveways and/or roads; 
(5)  Access or frontage roads that are not shown as planned publicly built and/or publicly owned roads in the county's comprehensive plan or in any official State of Georgia highway planning document; 
(6)  Roads or intersection improvements whose primary purpose at the time of construction is to provide direct access to a development project generating traffic; and 
(7)  Necessary right-of-way dedications for such project improvements. 
Diverted traffic or passerby traffic means traffic which is already on the transportation network which is attracted by the new land development and which may be diverted from another route. 
Expansion means road and intersection design capacity enhancements which include, but are not limited to, extensions, widenings, intersection improvements, upgrading signalization, and improving pavement conditions. 
Impact means the incremental effect of additional vehicles on a roadway segment. 
Intersection level of service means the sum of volume capacity ratios, the actual rate of flow on an intersection approach divided by the capacity of that approach and used in conjunction with the delay factor per vehicle. This ratio is expressed as a level of service and is determined by methods of analysis described in the Transportation Research Board's, "Highway Capacity Manual," Special Report 209, 1985. 
Level of service or LOS means, in addition to the general definition in section 58-170, for transportation, a qualitative measure describing the collective factors of speed, travel time, traffic interruption, freedom to maneuver, safety, driving comfort and convenience and operating costs provided by a transportation facility under a particular volume condition. Levels of service vary from A to F. Level of service classifications shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Transportation Research Board's "Highway Capacity Manual," Special Report 209, 1985. 
Link level of service for the purposes of the fee calculation shall be determined by the volume to capacity ratios as defined in the county's transportation model. 
LOS goal means the performance standard the county proposes to meet. 
Public transit means public mass transportation services along with capital improvements, equipment, and operations provided by agencies and/or authorities chartered by the State of Georgia to provide such services in Fulton County. 
Road or roadway means arterial or collector streets or roads which have been designated in the transportation element of the comprehensive plan and/or the capital improvements program element of the comprehensive plan, together with all necessary appurtenances including, but not limited to, bridges and traffic control improvements. 
Sidewalk shall be considered a project improvement. 
Transportation facility means roads, streets, and bridges, including rights-of-way, traffic signals, landscaping, sidewalks, other related appurtenances, and any local components of state and/or federal highways. 
Transportation network means the interconnecting system of streets, roads, highways, and other public ways open to vehicular traffic by the public generally and dedicated to the public use. The transportation network includes existing public transportation facilities, planned extensions and expansions to existing public transportation facilities, and planned new transportation facilities. 
Trip means a one-way movement of vehicular travel from an origin (one trip end) to a destination (the other trip end). For the purposes of this division, the term "trip" shall have the meaning which it has in commonly accepted traffic engineering practice. 
Trip generation means the attraction or production of trips attributed to the use or activity associated with a given type or classification of land development. 
Trip rate or trip generation rate means the number of vehicle trip ends which can be attributed to a specific type of land development activity per unit of development per day as documented in the most current Institute of Transportation Engineers (I.T.E.) "Trip Generation Manual." 
(94-RM-121, pt. 2, art. I, 5-18-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-232. - Imposition of impact fee. 
(a)  Any person who after the effective date of this article engages in development activity generating traffic shall pay a transportation impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this division. 
(b)  No building permit for any land development activity generating traffic requiring payment of a transportation impact fee pursuant to this article shall be issued by the county unless and until the required transportation impact fee has been paid. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 2, art. II, §§ 1, 2, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-233. - Determination of fees. 
The transportation impact fee for any land development activity generating traffic shall be determined by using one of the following methods: 
(1)  The fee rate schedule referenced in section 58-234 of this division; 
(2)  The individual method of calculation set forth in section 58-173 and section 58-235 of this article; or 
(3)  Any applicant may propose to enter into a private agreement with the county as set forth in section 58-177 and section 58-236 of this article to establish just and equitable transportation impact fees or their equivalent which are appropriate to the specific circumstances of the land development activity generating traffic. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 2, art. III, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-234. - Impact fee rate schedule. 
(a)  In accordance with section 58-172 of this article, the following fee rate schedule is included as table 1, table 2 and table 3 supplements (revised), and made a part hereof to be used to directly calculate fees. The fee rates have been calculated using the following method of calculation and described in greater detail in the "Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan," November 4, 1992, using recognized accepted trip generation rates. Figure 1 (Sandy Springs) and figure 2 (North Fulton County) are graphic illustrations of the transportation service areas (revised). 
(1)  Gross transportation impact fee calculation is as follows: 
a.  Cost Per Trip by TSA (CPT) 
Improvement costs for new capacity (construction and right-of-way)/total projected new vehicle trips = Cost Per Trip 
b.  Trip Generation Factor (TGF) 
ITE Trip Generation × New Trips Factor (if applicable) × unit of development = Trip Generation Factor 
c.  Total Discount (TD) 
Tax Discount + ROW + System improvements made = Total Discount (TD) 
d.  Fee calculation 
CPT × TGF = GIF (Gross Impact Fee) 
GIF - TD = Net Impact Fee 
(2)  The gross transportation impact fee calculated using table 2 and table 3 supplements include several potential credits: 
a.  Credit for future property tax revenue shall be subtracted from all applicable gross impact fee calculations using the methodology outlined in Appendix A, Development Impact Fee: Credit for Property Tax Revenue. 
b.  Credit for previous contribution or dedication of land for system improvements or the construction of system improvements as described in section 58-175(c)(1) and (c)(2) of this article shall be subtracted from the gross impact fee calculation. 
c.  Credit for previous contribution or dedication of money as described in section 58-175(c)(3) of this article shall be subtracted from the gross impact fee calculation. 
d.  Other credits as described in section 58-175 of this article shall be subtracted from the gross impact fee calculation. 
(b)  If there is an application to permit development of a land use not included in the fee rate schedule, the county manager shall cause a fee to be established based on the trip generation rates for that land use as published in the most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (I.T.E.) "Trip Generation Manual," or in the methods described in the "Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan," November 4, 1992. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 2, art. IV, § 1, 2, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-235. - Individual transportation assessment determinations. 
(a)  In the event that an applicant elects, in accord with O.C.G.A. § 36-71-4(g) and in accord with section 58-173 of this article, an applicant may apply for an individual transportation assessment determination. If it is found that the data, information, and assumptions used by the applicant to calculate the individual transportation assessment determination satisfy the requirements of section 58-173 of this article and the requirements of this section, the individual transportation assessment determination shall be deemed the transportation impact fee due and owing for the proposed development. 
(b)  In addition to meeting the requirement of section 58-173 of this article, the applicant shall show the basis of the individual transportation assessment determination including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Traffic engineering studies: 
a.  Documentation of trip generation rates appropriate to the specific development activity proposed. 
b.  Documentation of potential credits attributable to the specific development activity proposed, i.e., the nature and extent of each credit as well as the appraised value of each such potential credit, which can be expected to replace the portion of the service volume used by the traffic generated by the specific proposed development activity. 
(c)  All documentation shall be prepared and presented by qualified professionals in their respective fields and shall follow best professional practices and methodologies. 
(d)  A developer may request a preapplication conference with the county manager. 
(e)  The county manager shall provide the developer with an individual assessment determination within 15 working days of the formal submittal of a complete application for an individual assessment determination including an individual assessment study. 
(f)  All other requirements being met, nothing in this division shall prevent a developer from receiving a building permit upon payment of fees as calculated in section 58-172 and section 58-233(1) and proceeding while awaiting an individual fee assessment determination. When an individual fee assessment is established, any excess payments shall be refunded. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 2, art. V, §§ 1—6, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-236. - Private transportation agreements. 
(a)  In accord with the general provisions of section 58-177 of this article and the more specific provisions below, any applicant or group of applicants may propose to enter into a private agreement with the county designed to establish proportional share system improvements appropriate to the circumstances of the specific development or developments proposed. 
(b)  Such an agreement may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions which: 
(1)  Modify the presumption of trip generation set forth in the most current Institute of Transportation Engineers (I.T.E.) "Trip Generation Manual" and provide an impact fee which may differ from that set forth in section 58-234 of this article by specifying the nature of the proposed development for purposes of computing actual trips, provided that the agreement shall establish legally enforceable means for ensuring that the actual number of trips generated will not exceed the agreed upon estimated trips generated by the development. The agreement must contain language acceptable to the county manager showing that the assumptions of trip generation will be met. Further, language must be included in the agreement to allow the county to assess additional impact fees if, two years after completion of construction, the development has not, in fact, met the reduced assumptions of trip generation and/or if, five years following completion of construction, the development has not, in fact, maintained such reduced trip generation. The agreement must also contain language requiring the developer to report to the county manager the status of the project relative to assumptions of reduced trip generation on the second and fifth anniversaries of completion of construction. Figures to be reported shall include both actual trip generation figures and trip generation as a factor of the project's occupancy rate. Failure to report may result in assessment of additional impact fees. 
(2)  Permit the construction of specific transportation improvements in lieu of or with a credit against the transportation impact fee assessable. 
(3)  Permit a schedule and method for the payment of fees in a manner appropriate to the particular and unique circumstances of the proposed development in lieu of the requirements for payment of the fees as set forth in section 58-171 and section 58-232(b) of this article, provided that security is posted ensuring payment of the fees, in a form acceptable to the county, which security may be in the form of a cash bond, surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, negotiable certificate of deposit or escrow account, or lien or mortgage on lands to be covered by the building permit. 
(4)  Permit the substitution of public transit related projects in lieu of or with a credit against the transportation impact fee assessable. Public transit related projects may include: 
a.  Dedication of parking spaces for use by public transit users who would park their cars in the dedicated area and ride public transit to their final destinations. 
b.  Dedication of land for use as a transit terminal and transfer point. 
c.  Construction of bus shelters or other capital improvements including, but not limited to, pedestrian enhancements, which encourage the use of public transit. 
d.  Participation by the primary employer or group of employers in an employee transit subsidy program. 
e.  Participation of the employer or group of employers in ride sharing programs for its employees. 
For subsection (b)(4) of this section, the applicant must describe the extent of the program and expected usage by employees. The county may assess an additional impact fee if the program does not result in the anticipated automobile trip reduction within two years. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 2, art. VI, §§ 1, 2, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-237. - Transportation service areas established. 
Transportation service areas, as they are defined and established from time to time in the comprehensive plan are incorporated herein and made a part hereof. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 2, art. VII, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-238. - Review. 
In addition to or as a part of the review described in section 58-203 of this article, a review of the construction and right-of-way acquisition costs and transportation impact fee rates and other applicable items set forth in this article shall be undertaken annually by the board of commissioners. 
(94-RM-121, pt. 2, art. VIII, § 1, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 58-239. - Credit for property tax revenue. 
(a)  O.C.G.A. § 36-71-4(r) requires that development impact fees shall be calculated on a basis which is net of credits for the present value of revenues that will be generated by new growth and development based on historic funding patterns and that are anticipated to be available to pay for system improvements, including taxes, assessments, user fees, and intergovernmental transfers. 
(b)  The following sets out assumptions, analysis, and a draft calculation of a credit intended to meet the above requirements for a transportation impact fee. 
(1)  Assumptions. The assumptions are as follows: 
a.  Four funding sources have been explored for historically significant contributions to capital investment in transportation system improvements: 
1.  General fund bonded debt retirement funds. Each year the county floats a $3,000,000.00 G.O. bond, a variable portion of which is devoted to transportation capital items each year. The history of monies paid each year for the past ten years to retire debt incurred for transportation items has been calculated. Additionally, the amount of money spent each year has been compared to the total county tax base and converted to an equivalent millage rate. For the purpose of calculating the required credit, it is assumed that: 
i.  This history of payments is the best information available upon which to base future projections. 
ii.  Payments made to retire debt associated with two large referendum bond issues, 1957 and 1963, have been excluded from the calculation on the notion that passage of a referendum bond issue in the foreseeable future is unlikely. 
iii.  The use of a calculated equivalent millage rate fairly reflects the relative impact of transportation capital investment relative to the value of property. 
iv.  The $3,000,000.00 cap on the annual bond issue will not increase and the portion historically devoted to transportation will not change, but the total assessment will grow at the historic trend. 
v.  That the average life of a bond is 20 years and that is the time over which the credit should be calculated. 
2.  Operating funds. Various operating funds are spent annually on transportation system items. For the purpose of calculating the required credit, it is assumed that: 
i.  The majority of the funds so expended are spent on pure day-to-day operations and need not be considered in any tally of capital investment. 
ii.  The remainder are spent on renewal and extension type items and should not be counted as transportation capital investment, especially for system improvements. 
Therefore, it is assumed that no operating funds need be calculated into the credit. 
3.  Capital improvement fund. From time to time the county transfers monies from various sources (e.g. general fund, state grants, etc.) for expenditure on capital projects. The history of such expenditures for transportation projects over the past ten years has been totaled, with discounts from the total of monies that did not originate from county taxpayers, e.g. state funds, exaction funds, etc. These funds have also been included in the equivalent millage rate calculation discussed in subsection (b)(1)a.1 of this section. 
4.  Transfer payments from state and federal governments. Regarding state and federal expenditures on transportation system improvements in Fulton County, it is assumed that: 
i.  Amounts of money from intergovernmental transfers are forecast for each project in the CIP. Therefore, "total cost to the county," the cost upon which a development impact fee is calculated, already contains a discount for all intergovernmental transfers. 
ii.  Recent history indicates that fewer and fewer intergovernmental transfer dollars will be available in the future. Therefore, the CIP most likely overstates the "built-in" credit for this item. 
In summary, for transportation system improvements, the required credit calculated here will be based only on debt retirement associated with the county's $3,000,000.00 annual bond issue with additional funds added based on expenditures from the capital improvement fund; so far as all such expenditures are for transportation projects. 
b.  Credits to be given for tax payments should reflect tax payments spent on the same projects being funded by impact fees. Not all future tax payments associated with transportation improvements should be credited to each private development paying impact fees; only those taxes paying for transportation improvements in the same TSA should receive credit. 
1.  It is assumed that tax payments used to fund transportation improvements are distributed in equal proportions to all transportation projects as they may be planned throughout the county. 
2.  It is assumed that the transportation projects listed in the CIP represent the best estimate available of expenditures, and their distribution, for transportation projects. 
3.  For analytic purposes, all planned transportation expenditures for the next ten years have been taken from the CIP and the proportion of such expenditures by TSA has been derived. This proportion is applied to the derived millage rate to estimate an equitable future tax credit. These proportions are: 

 
(2)  Analysis. The analysis is as follows: 
a.  The combined expenditures for transportation from both the bond sinking fund and the capital improvement fund were plotted from 1981 through 1990. 
b.  Expenditures were projected 20 years using least squares projection method (see attachment A). 
c.  The ten-year history of the value of one mill against the unincorporated Fulton County tax base was plotted as in step one. 
d.  The value of one mill was projected as in step two. 
e.  The actual expenditures and projected expenditures were converted to mill equivalents by dividing expenditures by the value of one mill for each year. 
f.  Results of the analysis are both: 
1.  A projection of capital expenditures from normal revenue sources for transportation projects, based on a ten-year history. 
2.  A projection of a millage equivalents applied to transportation capital projects based on a ten-year history. 
See attachment B. 
g.  All transportation projects for the period 1992—2002 were listed by TSA from the CIP along with total projected expenditures per year. 
h.  Five-year expenditures per TSA were calculated as a percentage of total planned expenditures. 
(3)  Application. The resultant millage equivalent multiplied by the TSA's proportional expenditure is applied to the average value of development types in the target area in which the finished project will be located to yield the credit. For instance, in TSA 4101, current Fulton County tax records indicate the average single-family home has a current market value of $163,930.00. This figure is used as the basis for tax credits for single-family homes in TSA 4101. 
Note 1: The average millage rate over the projected period is 0.2045. A millage rate of 0.21 has been used to be conservative. 
Note 2: The millage rate has been applied for a 20-year period to reflect life of bonds, even though some funds in the calculation basis are not used to pay bonds. This is done for the sake of being conservative. 
Example 1: A sales house (assumed to be owner-occupied) in TSA 4101: 
$163,930.00 (average in TSA 4101) × 40 percent = $65,572.00 
$65,675.00 - $2,000.00 homestead exemption = $63,572.00 
$63,572.00/1,000 = $63.57 
0.21 mills × 55.50 percent = 0.1189 mills 
$63.57 × 0.1189 mills = $7.56 
$7.56 × 20 years (average bond life) = $151.20 credit 
Example 2: A 100,000 square foot office building TSA 4101. Average value $154.11/square foot land and building; value = $15,411,000.00. 
$15,411,000.00 × 40 percent = $6,164,400.00 
$6,164,400.00/1,000 = $6,164,400.00 
0.21 mills × 55.50 percent = 0.1189 mills 
$6,614.40 × 0.1189 mills = $786.45 
$786.45 × 20 years (average bond life) = $15,729.00 
(94-RM-121, app. A, 5-18-94) 
ARTICLE VI. - TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS 
DIVISION 1. - CHATTAHOOCHEE HILL COUNTRY 

Sec. 58-240. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this division to provide for the transfer of development rights (the maximum development that would be allowed on a parcel under its current zoning) from one property to another to promote the conservation of natural, agricultural, environmental, historical and cultural resources and encourage smart growth in appropriate areas. Further this division provides a means to achieve the visions and goals of the South Fulton 2015 Comprehensive Land Use Plan and the Chattahoochee Hill Country Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. 03-0492, 4-2-03) 
Sec. 58-241. - Applicability of regulations. 
The provisions of this division apply only to the Chattahoochee Hill Country, which is that portion of South Fulton County bordered to the west by the Chattahoochee River, to the south by Coweta County, and to the east by Cascade-Palmetto Highway (SR 154), as illustrated on the attached map. Compliance with all other applicable Fulton County ordinances, regulations and resolutions is required; however, when in conflict, the provisions of this division shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 03-0492, 4-2-03) 
Sec. 58-242. - Transfer of development rights. 
The transfer of development rights is a method for permanently conserving and protecting land by transferring the rights to develop from one property (sending area) to another (receiving area). 
(Ord. No. 03-0492, 4-2-03) 
Sec. 58-243. - Sending area. 
Sending areas are those properties from which development rights may be transferred to a receiving area. Sending areas may be any properties in the Chattahoochee Hill Country except those areas designated as receiving areas or as otherwise prohibited by this division. Additional sending areas may be designated through the amendment process as set forth in Section XXVIII of the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County and the procedures and requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-66A-2. 
(Ord. No. 03-0492, 4-2-03) 
Sec. 58-244. - Receiving area. 
Receiving areas are those properties which may receive development rights from a sending area. Receiving areas are those properties intended for mixed-use development, specifically the three Living Working Areas in the Chattahoochee Hill Country designated on the South Fulton 2015 Land Use Plan. Additional receiving areas may be designated through the amendment process as set forth in Section XXVIII of the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County and the procedures and requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-66A-2. 
(Ord. No. 03-0492, 4-2-03) 
Sec. 58-245. - Eligibility. 
Landowners or representatives with the authority to transfer fee simple ownership of any parcel in the Chattahoochee Hill Country (except as noted below) may apply for a transfer of development rights certificate. Parcels not eligible are as follows: 
(1)  Any parcel from which all development rights have previously been sold or transferred; 
(2)  Any parcel on which a conservation easement (legally binding agreement between a property owner and a governmental body or charitable organization qualified under O.C.G.A. § 44-10-2(2) that restricts the type and amount of development and use that may take place on a property) or other permanent deed restriction has been previously granted; 
(3)  Any parcel fully developed based on its existing zoning; 
(4)  Any parcel or portion of a parcel that has been designated as open space (land on which no additional development associated with residential, industrial or commercial purposes is allowed, except in compliance with this division and other Fulton County Zoning and Planning Regulations) in a hamlet or conservation subdivision; 
(5)  Any publicly owned parcel; and 
(6)  Any land within riparian buffers mandated by state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 03-0492, 4-2-03) 
Sec. 58-246. - Application requirements for a transfer of development rights certificate. 
An eligible landowner or authorized representative must provide the following: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of applicant and applicant's agent, if any; 
(2)  Proof of ownership of the sending property; 
(3)  Metes and bounds written legal description and plat prepared within 90 days of the date of application by a licensed surveyor; 
(4)  Written description of the physical characteristics of the property; 
(5)  Site plan which illustrates existing or proposed dwellings, historic structures, easements or other encumbrances; and 
(6)  The processing fee as established by the department of environment and community development ("the department"). 
(Ord. No. 03-0492, 4-2-03) 
Sec. 58-247. - Calculation of development rights. 
Within 95 days of the receipt of a complete application for a transfer of development rights certificate, the department shall certify the number of transferable development rights, assign serial numbers accordingly, and issue a transfer of development rights certificate. Development rights shall be calculated in accordance with the formula included in the South Fulton 2015 Land Use Plan on a gross acreage basis. For each eligible gross acre of the sending area, one development right (TDR) will be issued. The area of a parcel with fractional acreage will be calculated by rounding the total acreage down to the nearest whole number and issuing one TDR per acre. 
(Ord. No. 03-0492, 4-2-03) 
Sec. 58-248. - Calculation methods for acquisition of development rights. 
The following formulas shall be used to compute the amount of land that must be preserved in the sending areas to develop a receiving area: 
(1)  Residential: 
Total number of proposed residential units in the receiving area (living working) minus the total gross acreage of the area to be developed (excluding the acreage required for the 300-foot rural protection development setback) = Total number of acres to be preserved in the sending areas 
Example #1: 
Suppose 500 acres in a living working area are to be developed at 14 units per acre (the maximum residential density permitted in a living working area). Therefore, 500 acres x 14 units per acre = 7,000 units to be developed. 
7,000 units minus 500 acres (acreage of living working area to be developed) = 6,500 acres to be preserved in the sending areas 
1 TDR = 1 acre. Therefore, 6,500 TDRs must be transferred to the receiving area. 
(2)  Commercial: 
Total square feet of commercial space in the receiving area divided by 2,000 = Total number of acres to be preserved in the sending area 
Example #1: 
Suppose 30,000 square feet of commercial uses are proposed to be developed in a receiving area: 30,000/2,000 = 15 TDRs 
1 TDR = 1 acre. Therefore, 15 TDRs must be transferred to the receiving area. 
(Ord. No. 03-0492, 4-2-03) 
Sec. 58-249. - Appeal of calculation. 
Any landowner or authorized representative aggrieved by a final decision of the department related to the certification of transfer of development rights may appeal such final decision to the board of zoning appeals by filing, in writing, setting forth plainly and fully why the calculation is in error. Such appeal shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date of the department's final decision. 
(Ord. No. 03-0492, 4-2-03) 
Sec. 58-250. - Approval of transfer of development rights and appeal process. 
Any proposed transfer of development rights shall be subject to the notice, hearing and approval requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-66A-2. A transfer of development rights shall be approved by the board of commissioners if it meets the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 03-0492, 4-2-03) 
Sec. 58-251. - Appeal of transfer decision. 
Any appeal or other legal challenge to the board of commissioners' final decision regarding a transfer of development rights shall be pursued by petition for writ of certiorari filed with the Superior Court of Fulton County within 30 days of the date of the board of commissioners' decision. The applicant's petition and all other initial filings with the Superior Court shall be served upon the named defendants/respondents in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 9-11-4. 
Upon filing such appeal, the Clerk of Superior Court shall give immediate notice thereof to the director of the department. Within 30 days of such notice, the director shall cause to be filed with the Clerk of the Superior Court a certified copy of the proceedings before the commission and the decision of the commission. 
Upon appeal there is a presumption of correctness of the commission's decision which must be overcome by the appealing party. 
(Ord. No. 03-0492, 4-2-03) 
Sec. 58-252. - Recordation of transfer of development rights transactions (sending areas). 
(a)  Deed of transfer. A deed of transfer shall be required to convey development rights from a sending parcel to a purchaser. The deed shall be valid only if it is signed by the owner or authorized representative of the sending parcel, complies with all legal requirements for the transfer of real estate, contains provisions established by the department and is recorded in the chain of title after the conservation easement is secured against the sending parcel. 
A deed of transfer shall contain a metes and bounds written legal description and a plat prepare by a licensed surveyor, the names and addresses of the grantor and the grantee of the development rights, the serial numbers of the TDRs being conveyed along with a copy of the TDR certificate issued by the department and proof of the execution and recordation of a conservation easement on the sending parcel. 
(b)  Conservation easement. To convey the certified development rights on a sending area, a conservation easement between the owner of the sending area and an organization authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia to accept, hold and administer conservation easements, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act must be signed and recorded with the Fulton County Clerk, prior to the deed of transfer. Conservation easements established pursuant to this section may not be released or nullified by any party. 
The department may develop a model conservation easement form and require it be used to fulfill the requirements of this section. 
In addition to the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, each conservation easement shall contain: 
(1)  A metes and bounds written legal description and plat prepared by a licensed surveyor; 
(2)  Prohibitions against the use and development of the sending area property which are inconsistent with open space as defined in subsection 58-245(4); 
(3)  Assurances that prohibitions will run with the land and bind the landowner and every successor in interest to include a statement that the easement shall survive any merger of the easement interest and the fee simple interest of the property; 
(4)  The serial numbers of the TDRs being transferred in the deed of transfer from the sending area property subject to the conservation easement; and 
(5)  A statement that nothing in the easement shall be construed to convey to the public a right of access or use of the property and that the owner of the property, his heirs, successors and assignees will retain exclusive right to such access or use subject to the terms of the easement. 
(c)  Sufficiency of documents. Prior to the recordation of the deed of transfer and the conservation easement, parties to the transaction must obtain an opinion from a licensed Georgia attorney that the deed and easement have been executed by all necessary parties and is perpetual and binding on the property owner and every successor in interest. A copy of this document shall be provided to Fulton County. 
(d)  Re-issuance of TDR certificates. In the event of the transfer of fewer than all of a landowner's development rights, the landowner must return the original TDR certificate to the department upon the recordation of the conservation easement and deed of transfer. The landowner must provide a copy of the deed of transfer that contains the serial numbers of the development rights transferred. 
Within 95 days of the receipt of the complete TDR certificate, the department shall reissue a certificate to the landowner reflecting the remaining TDRs and the corresponding serial numbers. 
(Ord. No. 03-0492, 4-2-03) 
Sec. 58-253. - Recordation of transfer of development rights transactions (receiving areas). 
The following information shall be recorded on the face of any plat for property which receives development rights under the provisions of this division: 
(1)  A statement that the development rights used in the plat have been transferred in accordance with the deed of transfer, prescribed in section 58-252. 
(2)  The serial numbers of the TDRs conveyed along with a copy of the TDR certificate issued by the department. 
(Ord. No. 03-0492, 4-2-03) 
Sec. 58-254. - Transfer of development rights bank. 
Subsequent to the adoption of this division, Fulton County may create a transfer of development rights bank ("the bank") to encourage the exchange of development rights in the private market and encourage the preservation of land. The bank will facilitate the exchange by purchasing and selling development rights. Also for the purposes of conserving land, the Bank may hold TDRs for any length of time to include in perpetuity. 
(Ord. No. 03-0492, 4-2-03) 
Sec. 58-255. - Organization of the bank. 
The bank shall be directed and managed by a bank board to consist of five members who shall be residents of Fulton County, nominated by the department and approved by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners. Specifically, one member shall be experienced in the banking or financial industry, one member shall be a private landowner in the CHC area, one member shall be experienced in the legal industry, one member shall represent a conservation organization, and one member shall be a representative from the real estate development industry. The terms of office for the bank board members shall be four years and staggered. 
Three members shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote shall be required for any action before the bank board. 
The bank board may adopt procedural and substantive rules to govern its powers, duties and functions. Staff support shall be provided by the department. 
(1)  Empowerments. The bank board shall be empowered to: 
a.  Enter into agreements for professional services, e.g. consulting, appraising, accounting, subject to available funding; 
b.  Apply for and accept grants or loans for the bank board's authorized purposes; 
c.  Purchase, receive, sell or hold TDRs; 
d.  Purchase properties in fee simple to preserve them through conservation easements and resell the restricted properties at fair market value; and 
e.  Do all other things necessary to carry out the functions and operations of the bank. 
(2)  Authority and compensation. The members of the bank board shall receive no compensation from the bank except reimbursement for expenses incurred for the performance of their duties as board members. 
(3)  Registry of TDRs. For the purposes of tracking and marketing transfer of development rights, a central registry of available transfer of development rights certificates shall be established by the bank or the department in the event the bank is not established. 
(4)  Acquisition priorities. The following priorities shall be considered by the bank board for purchasing TDRs: 
a.  Properties adjacent to the living working areas (outside the 300-foot rural protection setback); 
b.  Properties that border the Chattahoochee River, its tributaries, and any associated water features such as wetlands. 
c.  Development pressures on the land; 
d.  Price of the development rights; 
e.  Pre-existing perpetual restrictions against development; 
f.  Proximity to other properties with easement restrictions for the purpose of creating large, contiguous tracts of conserved land; 
g.  Environmental assessments; and 
h.  Other factors of public interest determined by the bank board. 
(5)  Purchase, sale and value of TDRs. To determine purchase and/or sales price of development rights, the bank board may negotiate, use a competitive bid process, or any other method deemed fair and equitable by the bank board. 
Purchase and sale prices must be supported by an appraisal paid for by the bank board. 
Any eligible landowner may approach the bank board with an offer to sell TDRs. The bank board shall have 60 days to consider and respond to such offers. 
Landowners shall follow the procedures and requirements for certification of TDRs as prescribed by this division. 
All transactions through the bank board must follow the recordation requirements prescribed by this division. 
The bank board may, as a preservation measure, acquire fee simple interest in sending area parcels on a competitive basis in the open market. 
The intent of a purchase is to place a perpetual conservation easement on a property and then resell the restricted parcel for fair market value. 
Purchase and resale of sending area parcels is limited to those parcels where development pressures or the prospects of a change of the use of the property are high and/or whose location and/or quality are such that the property's preservation is important to the continued viability of the Chattahoochee Hill Country. 
(6)  Right of first refusal. The bank board shall have the authority to enter into right of first refusal agreements with sending area landowners for the purchase of either TDRs or property in fee simple. 
The right of first refusal agreement is an instrument that is recorded in the chain of title for the subject property, and is to be effective concurrent with the ownership of the signer(s) of the agreement and to be renewed by immediate family members who may become successive owners. 
In the event that all or a portion of the TDRs or property may be sold to someone other than an immediate family member or developed or subdivided, notification by the landowner to the bank board shall be required. 
Within 90 days of notification, the bank board may exercise the right of first refusal by acquiring either the development rights or the property in fee simple at a price which is equal to any bona fide offer which has been tendered to the landowner or the appraised fair market value, if an offer has not been tendered, plus $1.00. 
(Ord. No. 03-0492, 4-2-03) 
DIVISION 2. - CEDAR GROVE AGRICULTURAL AREA 

Sec. 58-256. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this division to provide for the transfer of development rights (the maximum development that would be allowed on a parcel under its current zoning) from one property to another to promote the conservation of natural, agricultural, environmental, historical and cultural resources and encourage smart growth in appropriate areas. Further this division provides a means to achieve the visions and goals of the Fulton County 2025 Comprehensive Plan. 
(Res. No. 07-0912, 4-2-08) 
Sec. 58-257. - Applicability of regulations. 
The provisions of this division apply only to that portion of unincorporated South Fulton County bordered to the west by the Chattahoochee River, to the south by Coweta County, and to the east by Cascade-Palmetto Highway (SR 154). Compliance with all other applicable Fulton County ordinances, regulations and resolutions is required; however, when in conflict, the provisions of this division shall prevail. 
(Res. No. 07-0912, 4-2-08) 
Sec. 58-258. - Transfer of development rights. 
The transfer of development rights is a method for permanently conserving and protecting land by transferring the rights to develop from one property (sending area) to another (receiving area). 
(Res. No. 07-0912, 4-2-08) 
Sec. 58-259. - Sending areas. 
Sending areas are those properties from which development rights may be transferred to a receiving area. Sending areas may be any properties in the Cedar Grove Agricultural Area except those areas designated as receiving areas or as otherwise prohibited by this division. Additional sending areas may be designated through the amendment process as set forth in Section XXVIII of the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County and the procedures and requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-66A-2. 
(Res. No. 07-0912, 4-2-08) 
Sec. 58-260. - Receiving areas. 
Receiving areas are those properties which may receive development rights from a sending area. Receiving areas are those properties intended for mixed-use development, specifically the regional living working area on the South Fulton 2025 Land Use Plan Map. Additional receiving areas may be designated through the amendment process as set forth in Section XXVIII of the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County and the procedures and requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-66A-2. 
(Res. No. 07-0912, 4-2-08) 
Sec. 58-261. - Eligibility. 
Landowners or representatives with the authority to transfer fee simple ownership of any parcel in the Cedar Grove Agricultural Area (except as noted below) may apply for a transfer of development rights certificate. Parcels not eligible are as follows: 
(1)  Any parcel from which all development rights have previously been sold or transferred; 
(2)  Any parcel on which a conservation easement (legally binding agreement between a property owner and a governmental body or charitable organization qualified under O.C.G.A. § 44-10-2(2) that restricts the type and amount of development and use that may take place on a property) or other permanent deed restriction has been previously granted; 
(3)  Any parcel fully developed based on its existing zoning; 
(4)  Any parcel or portion of a parcel that has been designated as open space (land on which no additional development associated with residential, industrial or commercial purposes is allowed, except in compliance with this division and other Fulton County zoning and planning regulations) in a hamlet or conservation subdivision; 
(5)  Any publicly owned parcel; and 
(6)  Any land within riparian buffers mandated by state or local law. 
(Res. No. 07-0912, 4-2-08) 
Sec. 58-262. - Application requirements for a transfer of development rights certificate. 
An eligible landowner or authorized representative must provide the following: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of applicant and applicant's agent, if any; 
(2)  Proof of ownership of the sending property; 
(3)  Metes and bounds written legal description and plat prepared within 90 days of the date of application by a licensed surveyor; 
(4)  Written description of the physical characteristics of the property; 
(5)  Site plan which illustrates existing or proposed dwellings, historic structures, easements or other encumbrances; and 
(6)  The processing fee as established by the department of environment and community development ("the department"). 
(Res. No. 07-0912, 4-2-08) 
Sec. 58-263. - Calculation of development rights. 
Within 95 days of the receipt of a complete application for a transfer of development rights certificate, the department shall certify the number of transferable development rights, assign serial numbers accordingly, and issue a transfer of development rights certificate. Development rights shall be calculated in accordance with the formula included in the Fulton County 2025 Comprehensive Plan on a gross acreage basis. For each eligible gross acre of the sending area, one development right (TDR) will be issued. The area of a parcel with fractional acreage will be calculated by rounding the total acreage down to the nearest whole number and issuing one TDR per acre. 
(Res. No. 07-0912, 4-2-08) 
Sec. 58-264. - Calculation methods for acquisition of development rights. 
The following formulas shall be used to compute the amount of land that must be preserved in the sending areas to develop a receiving area: 
(1)  Residential: 
Total number of proposed residential units in the receiving area (living working) minus the total gross acreage of the area to be developed (excluding the acreage required for the 300-foot rural protection development setback) = Total number of acres to be preserved in the sending areas 
Example #1: 
Suppose 500 acres in a living working area are to be developed at 14 units per acre (the maximum residential density permitted in a living working area). Therefore, 500 acres × 14 units per acre = 7,000 units to be developed. 
7,000 units minus 500 acres (acreage of living working area to be developed) = 6,500 acres to be preserved in the sending areas 
One TDR = one acre. Therefore, 6,500 TDRs must be transferred to the receiving area. 
(2)  Commercial: 
Total square feet of commercial space in the receiving area divided by 2,000 = Total number of acres to be preserved in the sending area 
Example #1: 
Suppose 30,000 square feet of commercial uses are proposed to be developed in a receiving area: 30,000/2,000 = 15 TDRs 
One TDR = one acre. Therefore, 15 TDRs must be transferred to the receiving area. 
(Res. No. 07-0912, 4-2-08) 
Sec. 58-265. - Appeal of calculation. 
Any landowner or authorized representative aggrieved by a final decision of the Department related to the certification of transfer of development rights may appeal such final decision to the board of zoning appeals by filing, in writing, setting forth plainly and fully why the calculation is in error. Such appeal shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date of the department's final decision. 
(Res. No. 07-0912, 4-2-08) 
Sec. 58-266. - Approval of transfer of development rights and appeal process. 
Any proposed transfer of development rights shall be subject to the notice, hearing and approval requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-66A-2. A transfer of development rights shall be approved by the board of commissioners if it meets the requirements of this division. 
(Res. No. 07-0912, 4-2-08) 
Sec. 58-267. - Appeal of transfer decision. 
Any appeal or other legal challenge to the board of commissioners' final decision regarding a transfer of development rights shall be pursued by petition for writ of certiorari filed with the Superior Court of Fulton County within 30 days of the date of the board of commissioners' decision. the applicant's petition and all other initial filings with the superior court shall be served upon the named defendants/respondents in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 9-11-4. 
Upon filing such appeal, the clerk of superior court shall give immediate notice thereof to the director of the department. Within 30 days of such notice, the director shall cause to be filed with the clerk of the superior court a certified copy of the proceedings before the commission and the decision of the commission. 
Upon appeal there is a presumption of correctness of the commission's decision which must be overcome by the appealing party. 
(Res. No. 07-0912, 4-2-08) 
Sec. 58-268. - Recordation of transfer of development rights transactions (sending areas). 
(a)  Deed of transfer. A deed of transfer shall be required to convey development rights from a sending parcel to a purchaser. The deed shall be valid only if it is signed by the owner or authorized representative of the sending parcel, complies with all legal requirements for the transfer of real estate, contains provisions established by the department and is recorded in the chain of title after the conservation easement is secured against the sending parcel. 
A deed of transfer shall contain a metes and bounds written legal description and a plat prepare by a licensed surveyor, the names and addresses of the grantor and the grantee of the development rights, the serial numbers of the TDRs being conveyed along with a copy of the TDR certificate issued by the department and proof of the execution and recordation of a conservation easement on the sending parcel. 
(b)  Conservation easement. To convey the certified development rights on a sending area, a conservation easement between the owner of the sending area and an organization authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia to accept, hold and administer conservation easements, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act must be signed and recorded with the Fulton County Clerk, prior to the deed of transfer. Conservation easements established pursuant to this section may not be released or nullified by any party. 
The department may develop a model conservation easement form and require it be used to fulfill the requirements of this section. 
In addition to the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, each conservation easement shall contain: 
(1)  A metes and bounds written legal description and plat prepared by a licensed surveyor; 
(2)  Prohibitions against the use and development of the sending area property which are inconsistent with open space as defined in section 58-261(d); 
(3)  Assurances that prohibitions will run with the land and bind the landowner and every successor in interest to include a statement that the easement shall survive any merger of the easement interest and the fee simple interest of the property; 
(4)  The serial numbers of the TDRs being transferred in the deed of transfer from the sending area property subject to the conservation easement; and 
(5)  A statement that nothing in the easement shall be construed to convey to the public a right of access or use of the property and that the owner of the property, his heirs, successors and assignees will retain exclusive right to such access or use subject to the terms of the easement. 
(c)  Sufficiency of documents. Prior to the recordation of the deed of transfer and the conservation easement, parties to the transaction must obtain an opinion from a licensed Georgia attorney that the deed and easement have been executed by all necessary parties and is perpetual and binding on the property owner and every successor in interest. A copy of this document shall be provided to Fulton County. 
(d)  Re-issuance of TDR certificates. In the event of the transfer of fewer than all of a landowner's development rights, the landowner must return the original TDR certificate to the department upon the recordation of the conservation easement and deed of transfer. The landowner must provide a copy of the deed of transfer that contains the serial numbers of the development rights transferred. 
Within 95 days of the receipt of the complete TDR certificate, the department shall reissue a certificate to the landowner reflecting the remaining TDRs and the corresponding serial numbers. 
(Res. No. 07-0912, 4-2-08) 
Sec. 58-269. - Recordation of transfer of development rights transactions (receiving areas). 
The following information shall be recorded on the face of any plat for property which receives development rights under the provisions of this division: 
(1)  A statement that the development rights used in the plat have been transferred in accordance with the deed of transfer, prescribed in section 58-268. 
(2)  The serial numbers of the TDRs conveyed along with a copy of the TDR certificate issued by the department. 
(Res. No. 07-0912, 4-2-08) 
Sec. 58-270. - Transfer of development rights bank. 
Subsequent to the adoption of this division, Fulton County may create a transfer of development rights bank ("the bank") to encourage the exchange of development rights in the private market and encourage the preservation of land. The bank will facilitate the exchange by purchasing and selling development rights. Also for the purposes of conserving land, the bank may hold TDRs for any length of time to include in perpetuity. 
(Res. No. 07-0912, 4-2-08) 
Sec. 58-271. - Organization of the bank. 
The bank shall be directed and managed by a bank board to consist of five members who shall be residents of Fulton County, nominated by the department and approved by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners. Specifically, one member shall be experienced in the banking or financial industry, one member shall be a private landowner in the Cedar Grove Agricultural Area, one member shall be experienced in the legal industry, one member shall represent a conservation organization, and one member shall be a representative from the real estate development industry. The terms of office for the bank board members shall be four years and staggered. 
Three members shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote shall be required for any action before the bank board. 
The bank board may adopt procedural and substantive rules to govern its powers, duties and functions. Staff support shall be provided by the department. 
(1)  Empowerments. The bank board shall be empowered to: 
a.  Enter into agreements for professional services, e.g. consulting, appraising, accounting, subject to available funding; 
b.  Apply for and accept grants or loans for the bank board's authorized purposes; 
c.  Purchase, receive, sell or hold TDRs; 
d.  Purchase properties in fee simple to preserve them through conservation easements and resell the restricted properties at fair market value; and 
e.  Do all other things necessary to carry out the functions and operations of the Bank. 
(2)  Authority and compensation. The members of the bank board shall receive no compensation from the bank except reimbursement for expenses incurred for the performance of their duties as board members. 
(3)  Registry of TDRs. For the purposes of tracking and marketing transfer of development rights, a central registry of available transfer of development rights certificates shall be established by the bank or the department in the event the bank is not established. 
(4)  Acquisition priorities. The following priorities shall be considered by the bank board for purchasing TDRs: 
a.  Properties adjacent to the living working area (outside the 300-foot rural protection setback); 
b.  Properties that border the Chattahoochee River, its tributaries, and any associated water features such as wetlands. 
c.  Development pressures on the land; 
d.  Price of the development rights; 
e.  Pre-existing perpetual restrictions against development; 
f.  Proximity to other properties with easement restrictions for the purpose of creating large, contiguous tracts of conserved land; 
g.  Environmental assessments; and 
h.  Other factors of public interest determined by the bank board. 
(5)  Purchase, sale and value of TDRs. To determine purchase and/or sales price of development rights, the bank board may negotiate, use a competitive bid process, or any other method deemed fair and equitable by the bank board. 
Purchase and sale prices must be supported by an appraisal paid for by the bank board. 
Any eligible landowner may approach the bank board with an offer to sell TDRs. The bank board shall have 60 days to consider and respond to such offers. 
Landowners shall follow the procedures and requirements for certification of TDRs as prescribed by this division. 
All transactions through the bank board must follow the recordation requirements prescribed by this division. 
The bank board may, as a preservation measure, acquire fee simple interest in sending area parcels on a competitive basis in the open market. 
The intent of a purchase is to place a perpetual conservation easement on a property and then resell the restricted parcel for fair market value. Purchase and resale of sending area parcels is limited to those parcels where development pressures or the prospects of a change of the use of the property are high and/or whose location and/or quality are such that the property's preservation is important to the continued viability of the Cedar Grove Agricultural Area. 
(6)  Right of first refusal. The bank board shall have the authority to enter into right of first refusal agreements with sending area landowners for the purchase of either TDRs or property in fee simple. 
The right of first refusal agreement is an instrument that is recorded in the chain of title for the subject property, and is to be effective concurrent with the ownership of the signer(s) of the agreement and to be renewed by immediate family members who may become successive owners. 
In the event that all or a portion of the TDRs or property may be sold to someone other than an immediate family member or developed or subdivided, notification by the landowner to the bank board shall be required. 
Within 90 days of notification, the bank board may exercise the right of first refusal by acquiring either the development rights or the property in fee simple at a price which is equal to any bona fide offer which has been tendered to the landowner or the appraised fair market value, if an offer has not been tendered, plus $1.00. 
(Res. No. 07-0912, 4-2-08) 
TABLE 1 
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE CALCULATION 

 
 * Adjusted cost per trip represents a fee reduction to insure the fee remains competitive. 
** ;hg;Estimated costs for Medlock Bridge Road and Old Alabama Road widenings incorporate a reduction to account for the portion of the project that serves existing deficiencies, or is already widened, respectively. 
TABLE 2: GROSS TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE RATE SCHEDULE 
FEES (IN DOLLARS) PER  DEVELOPMENT UNIT  TRANSPORTATION SERVICE AREA 

 
TABLE 3: SUPPLEMENT COMMERCIAL AND OFFICE IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE: PER SQUARE FOOT  5/18/94 

 
NOTE: This table is for illustration of specific size projects.  Exact calculations will be made for each application using the formulas below.  ITE 5TH EDITION: TRIPS FOR OFFICE BUILDINGS AND SHOPPING CENTERS 

 
TABLE 3: SUPPLEMENT COMMERCIAL AND OFFICE IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE: TOTALS  5-18-94 

 
NOTE: This table is for illustration of specific size projects.  Exact calculations will be made for each application using the formulas below.  ITE 5TH EDITION: TRIPS FOR OFFICE BUILDINGS AND SHOPPING CENTERS 

 
SUPPLEMENTAL RETAIL GROSS IMPACT FEES 
FEES (IN DOLLARS) PER  DEVELOPMENT UNIT  TRANSPORTATION SERVICE AREA 

 
Source: Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip  Generation Rate Manual, 5th Edition 
Pick up ms 3420 
Pick up ms 3421 
Pick up ms 3422 
ATTACHMENT A 
Pick up ms 3466 
ATTACHMENT B 
CALCULATED AND PROJECTED MILLAGE EQUIVALENTS OF EXPENDITURES FOR TRANSPORTATION 

 
Chapter 62 - ROADS AND BRIDGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Moving of buildings, § 14-176 et seq.; impact fees, § 58-161 et seq.; ordinances pertaining to traffic and vehicles, ch. 78; resolutions pertaining to roads and bridges, ch. 162; resolutions pertaining to traffic and vehicles, ch. 174. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Roads and bridges, ch. 42. 
State Law reference— State, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Installation of irrigation system in county rights-of-way; permit required; indemnity agreements; content and form of agreements. 
(a)  All persons or entities seeking to install an irrigation system to serve their private interests and to have the components of such irrigation system located within the boundaries of Fulton County owned rights-of-way must do so by permit as issued by Fulton County's Public Works Department. 
(b)  The location of such irrigation system's components is an encroachment upon Fulton County's rights-of-way by private parties, and said private party is to completely indemnify Fulton County and hold it harmless from all damages, injuries, lawsuits, or claims of any character caused by the construction and/or maintenance of this encroachment. 
_____
(c)  Such irrigation system components' encroachment is to fully satisfy all the terms and conditions of indemnity agreements set forth by Fulton County's Public Works Department, which agreement shall include provisions in substantially the following form: 
The applicant shall reimburse the public works department for any cost incurred as a result of public works' department performing such repairs. 
The public works department reserves the right to terminate this indemnification agreement at any time upon ten days' written notice to the applicant. Upon receipt of such notice and as may be specified by the public works department, the applicant, at his/her own expense, shall be responsible for removing any objects from the encroachment and returning the area to its original condition or an acceptable substituted condition. 
The term of the indemnity agreement shall be for a period of 50 years, commencing upon execution hereof by the public works department, subject to any rights of termination as are hereinabove set forth. 
The covenants herein contained shall, except as otherwise provided, accrue to the benefit of and be binding upon the successors and assigns of the parties hereto. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this agreement, individually or through their authorized officers, agents or attorney-in-fact as the case may be, causing their respective seals to be affixed hereto the day and year first above written. 

 
(91-RC-234, 5-15-91) 
_____
Secs. 62-2—62-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM ROADWAY ADDRESSING SYSTEM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 05-0584, §§ 1—16, adopted May 18, 2005, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 01-0582, §§ 1—14, approved May 16, 2001. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of amendment. 

Sec. 62-36. - Title. 
This article may be cited and referred to as "The Fulton County Uniform Roadway Addressing, Street Naming and Project Identification Ordinance". 
(Res. No. 05-0584, § 1, 5-18-05) 
Sec. 62-37. - Purpose and intent. 
The Fulton County Board of Commissioners finds that the efficient and prompt provision of emergency services is essential to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Fulton County. The board of commissioners further finds that inadequate, duplicative and or incorrect address numbers and street names pose a real and substantial threat to the provision of such emergency services. In order to improve the provision of emergency services, the board of commissioners hereby creates the following system for uniformly assigning roadway names and property addresses within unincorporated Fulton County. 
(Res. No. 05-0584, § 2, 5-18-05) 
Sec. 62-38. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Access" shall mean point of or means of entry. 
"Department" shall mean the Fulton County Department of Environment and Community Development, or any successor to that department. 
"Building" shall mean the dominant building or buildings on a parcel of land. "Principal building" shall not include accessory structures such as sheds, cabanas or garages (provided that any such garage is not used, in whole or in part, for residential, commercial, office or institutional purposes). 
"Corner lots" (AKA lot, corner) shall mean a multiple frontage lot adjoining two streets at their intersection. 
"Cul-de-sac" shall mean a street having only one connection to another street, and is terminated by a vehicular turn around. The maximum depth of a cul-de-sac shall be 600 feet, as measured from the intersection of the center line with the center line of the intersecting street to the back of curb of the cul-de-sac. 
"Driveway" shall mean a roadway (or driveway) owned and maintained by a private entity and used for access and circulation internal to a property. 
"Entrance way" shall mean the main access to the building or structure. 
"Entrance roadway" shall mean the roadway from which access to a property or principle structure located upon said property is obtained. 
"Gated communities" shall mean an enclave of homes with a unique identity, surrounded by walls, often with security guards, containing privately owned and maintained roadways under the management and responsibility of an established homeowner's association. 
"Lot frontage" shall mean the shortest of any property line adjoining a street or, for lots requiring no street frontages, oriented toward a street. A property line adjoining a stub street shall not be considered as frontage unless it is proposed for access or is the only street frontage. Front yard requirements shall be measured from this property line. In situations where a multiple frontage lot has equal distance on street frontages, the director of the department of environment and community development shall determine the legal lot frontage. 
"Private street" shall mean a roadway constructed to Fulton County Standards but owned and maintained by a private entity. Necessary easements for ingress and egress for police, fire, emergency vehicles and all operating utilities shall be provided. 
"Public street" shall mean a roadway owned and maintained by the federal, state, or local government. 
"Privately owned communities". See gated communities. 
"Project" shall mean an organized undertaking to develop a property pursuant to a permit from Fulton County, issued pursuant to an approved plan found to be consistent with the rules, regulations and standards of State, Federal and local regulatory agencies. 
"Roadway" shall mean and include, but not be limited to, any and all roads, drives, streets, highways, or routes (regardless of designation) for vehicular traffic in unincorporated Fulton County, whether public or private, accepted or unaccepted. "Roadway" shall not include private driveways that serve only one principal building. 
(Res. No. 05-0584, § 3, 5-18-05) 
Sec. 62-39. - Address numbers. 
All residential, commercial, office, industrial and other tracts of land in unincorporated Fulton County on which a principal building is or will be located are required to be issued an address by the department or its successor department. Each such address shall be posted by the owner on or about the tract in accordance with the following guidelines: 
(1)  Except as permitted in subsection 62-39(1) of this article, all addresses shall contain (in addition to the roadway name) numbers only. Alphanumeric or lettered addresses shall not be permitted. Each address shall conform to the following rules: 
a.  Multi-tenant or multi-occupant commercial, office or institutional developments shall have only one address and shall be assigned a building address for each principal building and individual suite or unit numbers by the department. Once a systematic pattern of address has been established, it shall be maintained for the entire project. Alternatively, such commercial, office or institutional developments shall seek approval of names of internal streets within the development, in which case the department shall assign addresses on such internal streets. Multi-family residential developments (including apartments, townhouses and condominiums) shall have building addresses and/or letter for each principal building and numbers for each individual unit as approved by the department. Condominiums and/or town homes to be occupied by independent owners may be assigned individual addresses for each separate unit as long as said units are not stacked one over the other. 
b.  For non-single family residential properties, all principal buildings which are 50 feet or less from the edge of the roadway shall have affixed to the building the address number(s) directly over or on the main entrance door(s). Such address numbers shall be at least six inches and not more than 12 inches in height and shall be of a color which contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway. (2000 International Fire Code, Section 505). Each building number shall be prominently displayed on each side of said building that is visible from the main access or parking area serving the project or complex in which the building is located. Such building number shall be at least 12 inches in height and shall be of a color which contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway.) 
c.  For non-single family residential properties, all principal buildings which are more than 50 feet from the edge of the roadway shall have affixed to the building or structure the address number(s) directly over or on the main entrance door(s). Such address numbers shall be at least eight inches and no more than 16 inches in height and shall be of a color that contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway. (2000 International Fire Code, Section 505). Each building number shall be prominently displayed on each side of said building that is visible from the main access or parking area serving the project or complex in which the building is located. Such building number shall be at least 12 inches in height and shall be of a color which contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway.) 
d.  For all commercial, office, industrial or multi-family residential developments that contain multiple addresses and/or building numbers, the range of addresses and/or building numbers shall also be posted on the main sign or identification monument at the main entrance and shall be readily identifiable from the edge of the roadway. Directions to other buildings within such a development shall be clearly posted at each internal roadway intersection. For multi-family residential developments, directional signs indicating the location of individual units shall be placed on each floor at the primary point of ingress and egress (e.g., at the elevator or main stairwell). 
e.  For all commercial, office, industrial or multi-family residential developments any entrance way or principal building that is not readily visible from the roadway, address numbers shall also be posted at the main entrance or driveway to the principal building. Such address numbers shall be at least six inches and not more than 12 inches in height and shall be of a color which contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway. (2000 International Fire Code, Section 505). 
f.  For properties whose primary access is different from their lot frontage, address number shall be assigned and posted from the access point. 
g.  Each residential one- or two-family dwelling shall have its address number posted on a mailbox or addressing post located at or near the main entrance or vehicle access point to the property. Such address numbers shall have a minimum stroke height of three inches and shall be of a color that contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway. 
h.  Notwithstanding any other provisions in this article, all properties shall be identified by a property number of a minimum size as identified in this section. All signs, including temporary signs and identification monuments on properties which have been assigned a property number (street number) shall display the numbers and/or letters with characters that are at least four inches tall for signs located along limited access, arterial and major collector streets, and three inches tall along minor collector and local streets. 
i.  If access to any principal building is by way of a roadway different from the principal building's address roadway, the address number shall be posted on the address roadway. In such cases, the address roadway and address number shall also be posted on each entrance roadway at the intersection of the access point and the entrance roadway. 
j.  Each roadway, including state and federal highways, shall contain address numbers that are consistently sequenced throughout its length. 
k.  Address numbers shall be assigned such that, traveling from lower address numbers to higher address numbers, odd-numbered addresses are on the right side of the roadway and even-numbered addresses are on the left side of the roadway. 
l.  Each property owner shall keep all address numbers in good repair and shall not allow such numbers to be obscured as viewed from the roadway. 
m.  To the extent not in conflict with the provisions of this article, Fulton County shall follow the guidelines set forth in the Proposed Property Numbering System for Metropolitan Atlanta promulgated by the Atlanta Region Metropolitan Planning Commission (1963), except for culs-de-sac. Culs-de-sac shall be addressed in three digits numbers (100, 110, etc). Culs-de-sac shall comply with the remaining provisions of this section and this article. 
n.  The property owner shall have the responsibility of ensuring compliance with the requirements of this section, regardless of whether the premises are leased or owner-occupied. 
(Res. No. 05-0584, § 4, 5-18-05) 
Sec. 62-40. - Subdivisions and other new developments. 
(a)  All project names for and roadway names and addresses within subdivisions and other new developments shall be reviewed and approved by the department during the minor subdivision plat or land disturbance permit (LDP) approval process. Prior to the release of a LDP, all street names must be approved for use within the subdivision. Once a project name has been approved, it shall not be changed without written permission by the director of the department. For continuity, the LDP number assigned to the project, regardless of the project name used at the time of submittal, must appear on the face of all referenced documents, including, but not limited to, all LDP drawings, studies, plans and plats. 
(b)  A temporary sign bearing the name of the project and the approved LDP number shall be installed within 24-hours of the beginning of any activity on the subject property, clearly visible in both directions from the main thoroughfare serving as access to the project. This sign must be updated within 24-hours should there be any change of the name approved by the director of the department and shall be maintained until a permanent identification sign or monument is installed. 
(c)  Each application for a land disturbance permit for a multi-family development shall include a concept plan identifying all proposed roadways with the proposed names for said roadways. Any subsequent request for roadway name or address changes by the subdivider or developer will require submission of a new preliminary plat (or concept plan, as applicable) for review by the department. 
(d)  Once an LDP is approved, no lot number, street name or address shall be changed by the re-recording of a plat without the prior expressed written consent of the department. No application for a permit on said lot thus affected will be considered until approved by the department. Each request submitted for the re-recordation of a plat shall be charged a processing fee as established by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. No. 05-0584, § 5, 5-18-05) 
Sec. 62-41. - Exceptions. 
When the director of the department finds that adherence to the address numbering standards, set forth in this article would pose a threat to public safety, deviations from the standard address numbering policies and procedures may be allowed. 
(Res. No. 05-0584, § 6, 5-18-05) 
Sec. 62-42. - Project names. 
No new project names may be recorded, used or posted unless and until approved by the department. Duplication of project names is prohibited. The use of a project name that is a homonym, sounds like or may otherwise be confused with a project name that is already in use within the Fulton County Emergency Services Territory is prohibited. 
(Res. No. 05-0584, § 7, 5-18-05) 
Sec. 62-43. - Roadway names. 
No new roadway name may be posted or used in an address unless and until approved by the department. 
(1)  Roadway names must be reserved for use prior to the release of the land disturbance permit or minor plat. 
(2)  Roadway names, once approved, shall be held in reservation for use by the owner/developer for a period not to exceed 36-months. 
(Res. No. 05-0584, § 8, 5-18-05) 
Sec. 62-44. - Standards for roadway names. 
(a)  Duplication of roadway names is prohibited. No roadway name shall contain a number (e.g., 5th Street), and, except for suffixes, there shall be no punctuation or abbreviation allowed in any roadway name. 
(b)  The use of the same roadway name that is already in use within the Fulton County Emergency Services Territory is prohibited. 
(c)  Except to the extent that the department assigns a quadrant designation for inclusion in an address (e.g., "S.W."), the use of directions or compass points in roadway names is prohibited. 
(d)  The use of a roadway name that is a homonym, sounds like or may otherwise be confused with a roadway name that is already in use within the Fulton County Emergency Services Territory is prohibited. Duplicate names with different suffixes should be limited within the same project whenever possible, subject to the review and approval of the department. 
(e)  Each roadway, regardless of length, shall have only one name designation throughout its length. Each new roadway that is in alignment with an existing roadway shall bear the same name as said existing roadway. 
(f)  No roadway shall be assigned the proper name, including first and last, of any person, living or dead, and/or assigned honorary names in such a way as to expressly violating standards of the Fulton County Ethics Ordinance without the consent and approval of the Fulton County Board of Commissioners. 
(g)  No roadway name, including spaces between words and suffix, may be more than 12 letters in length, unless approved by the Fulton County Department of Public Works. 
(h)  To the greatest extent feasible, roadways that cross into other jurisdictions shall be named and addressed consistently with the names and addresses assigned by such other jurisdictions. 
(i)  Street signs, including street name signs, must be installed before any building permits are issued within a development, except that a bond may be offered to cover the costs of the signage, with an additional ten percent for administrative fees, and temporary signs erected to release building permits. Permanent signs must be installed prior to the release of any certificate of occupancy within the development. 
(Res. No. 05-0584, § 9, 5-18-05) 
Sec. 62-45. - Private roadway naming. 
The following procedures and regulations are established for the mandatory and voluntary naming of private roadways, easements and drives. 
(1)  A private roadway, easement or drive serving residential properties shall be required to be named and addressed if there are more than two principal buildings that are not part of a single tract of land which derive access from such private roadway, easement or drive. 
(2)  If a private roadway, easement or drive requires naming pursuant to subsection (a), above, a petition, containing the signatures of at least 90 percent of the owners of all real property along such private roadway, easement or drive, must be submitted to the department. In addition to a request for approval, the petition shall include the proposed name for the private roadway, easement or drive that is acceptable to the petitioners. The proposed name shall conform to the other requirements of this article. The petition shall be accompanied by a general location map and the land lot(s), district, and section within which such private roadway, easement or drive is located. 
(3)  Upon approval of a name for the private roadway, easement or drive, and prior to the issuance of any building permits or additional permits the petitioners, shall cause a roadway sign conforming to Fulton County Guidelines from the Sign Installation Policy in New Subdivision approved by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners on August 12, 2004, to be erected and maintained at each intersection of such private roadway, easement or drive and any adjacent Fulton County or state right-of-way. Maintenance of such roadway signs and private roadways, easements or drives shall be the responsibility of the owners of the real property situated along such private roadways, easements or drives; Fulton County shall have no responsibility for the erection and/or maintenance of these items. 
(4)  In the event that the owners of the real property situated along a private roadway, easement or drive that requires a name, as set forth above, fail to initiate, respond to or participate in the naming procedure set forth above, the department, after due notice and a minimum 30-day grace period, shall recommend to the board of commissioners a name and address numbers for the private roadway, easement or drive and all real property located thereon. The property owners along such private roadway, easement or drive shall be responsible for the erection and maintenance of roadway signs, as set forth in subsection (3), above. 
(Res. No. 05-0584, § 10, 5-18-05) 
Sec. 62-46. - Changing of existing roadway names and addresses. 
(a)  In any instance where the Fulton County Board of Commissioners, upon recommendation of the director of the department, determines that an existing road name may poses a threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the board of commissioners on its own motion may change such roadway name after notice is given and a public hearing is held. 
(1)  Notice of the proposed change and hearing date shall be given at least 25 days, but no more than 45 days, prior to the scheduled date of the board of commissioners hearing on the proposed change. 
(2)  The director of the department shall post a sign at approximately one mile intervals throughout the length of the roadway for which a name change is proposed and shall give notice by regular mail to the owners (according to the tax records of Fulton County) of each property which bears an address on the roadway for which a name change is proposed. 
(3)  Such signs and notices shall contain the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing, as well as a statement of the beginning and ending points of the segment of the roadway for which the name change is proposed. Notice shall not be considered inadequate if the signs are removed or mail is not delivered. 
(b)  Where the Fulton County Board of Commissioners, upon recommendation from the director of the department, determines that the existing address numbering on a particular roadway poses a threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the board of commissioners may change such address numbering after notice. 
(1)  Notice of the change shall be given by regular mail to the owners (according to the tax records of Fulton County) of each property that bears an address on the roadway for which an address numbering change will occur. 
(2)  Such notice shall contain the existing full address, the new address, the reason for the change, and the effective date of the change. 
(3)  The effective date shall be no less than 30 or no more than 60 days following the date on which the matter is scheduled for decision by the board of commissioners. Notice shall not be considered inadequate if mail is not delivered. 
(c)  When no more than ten percent of the existing addresses along a public or private roadway are deemed to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the director of the department may approve the change of such address numbering after notice is given by regular mail to the owners (according to the tax records of Fulton County) of each property that bears an address on the roadway for which an address numbering change will occur. 
(1)  Such notice shall contain the existing full address, the new address, the reason for the change, and the effective date of the change. 
(2)  These changes shall be considered effective at the time of the approval by the director, and shall be presented for ratification to the board of commissioners at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(3)  The effective date shall be no less than 30 or no more than 60 days following the date on which the matter is scheduled for decision by the board of commissioners. Notice shall not be considered inadequate if mail is not delivered. 
(d)  No name of any commercial, office, industrial or residential development or subdivision shall be changed unless a request for such a change is first submitted to and approved by the department. In determining the acceptability of such a name change, the department shall seek to avoid confusion from similarly named developments. 
(Res. No. 05-0584, § 11, 5-18-05) 
Sec. 62-47. - Roadway and thoroughfare designation suffixes. 
Any suffix accepted within the standards of the United States Postal Service, reflected in part in the lists provided by the National Emergency Number Association (NENA), shall be acceptable for naming roadways and thoroughfares within Fulton County. The following are examples of the most commonly used permitted suffixes in the naming of private and public roadways: 
(1)  Avenue (to be abbreviated "Ave") 
(2)  Bend (to be abbreviated "Bnd") 
(3)  Boulevard (to be abbreviated "Blvd") 
(4)  Circle (to be abbreviated "Cir") 
(5)  Court (to be abbreviated "Ct") 
(6)  Cove (to be abbreviated "Cv") 
(7)  Drive (to be abbreviated "Dr") 
(8)  Grove (to be abbreviated "Grv") 
(9)  Hall (no abbreviation) 
(10)  Highway (to be abbreviated "Hwy") 
(11)  Hill (to be abbreviated "Hl") 
(12)  Lane (to be abbreviated "Ln") 
(13)  Loop (no abbreviation) 
(14)  Parkway (to be abbreviated ("Pkwy") 
(15)  Pass (no abbreviation) 
(16)  Place (to be abbreviated ("Pl") 
(17)  Point (to be abbreviated "Pt") 
(18)  Ridge (to be abbreviated "Rdg") 
(19)  Road (to be abbreviated "Rd") 
(20)  Square (to be abbreviated "Sq") 
(21)  Street (to be abbreviated "St") 
(22)  Terrace (to be abbreviated "Ter") 
(23)  Trace (to be abbreviated "Trce") 
(24)  Trail (to be abbreviated "Trl") 
(25)  View (to be abbreviated "Vw") 
(26)  Walk (no abbreviation) 
(27)  Way (no abbreviation) 
(Res. No. 05-0584, § 12, 5-18-05) 
Sec. 62-48. - Street signs. 
(a)  Each roadway intersection shall have a minimum of one street sign indicating the names of each roadway. 
(b)  At each intersection of an arterial or major collector roadway and another roadway, the required sign(s) may also include numbering indicating addresses on the arterial or major collector roadway in the vicinity of the intersection. 
(c)  Public streets shall be identified by a sign bearing white retro-reflective letters and a green retro-reflective background. 
(d)  Private streets shall be identified by a sign bearing white retro-reflective letters and a blue retro-reflective background. 
(e)  Private signage on a public street shall be allowed in accordance to the standards as established by the public works department pursuant to the completion and approval of an application entitled "Permit to Erect and Maintain Custom Street Signs on Fulton County's Right-of-Way". 
(Res. No. 05-0584, § 13, 5-18-05) 
Sec. 62-49. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be administered and enforced by the Fulton County Department of Environment and Community Development, with the assistance of the Fulton County Fire Department, the public works department, and the department of emergency services/911. 
(b)  The director of the department of environment and community department the Fulton County Fire Chief, the director of the department of emergency services/911, and their representatives shall have the right to periodically inspect property within Fulton County for compliance with this article. If, through inspection, it is determined that a particular property is not in compliance with any provision of this article, the director of the department of environment and community development shall notify the owner (according to the tax records of Fulton County) of the property by regular mail of such violation and shall further give the owner a reasonable time (not less than 120 days) within which to cause the property to be brought into compliance with this article. In the event that such compliance is not effected within the time period set forth in the above notice, the owner shall be deemed in violation of this article. If any person other than the owner removes or damages an address number that is otherwise in compliance with this article without the permission of the property owner, or if any person removes or damages any public or private street sign, said person shall be deemed to have violated this article. 
(c)  Only the director of the department of environment and community development, the director of the department of public works, and their representatives shall have the right to require that signs are installed and maintained on public roadways. Individuals or entities seeking to erect a sign for a private roadway shall obtain a custom sign permit from the department of public works engineering division. 
(d)  The director of the department of environment and community development, the Fulton County Fire Chief, the director of the department of emergency services/911, and their representatives shall have the power to conduct such investigations as they may deem reasonably necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purposes of investigation and inspecting such property for compliance with any or all provisions of this article. 
(e)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of Fulton County who requests entry for the purposes of investigation and inspection and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, or interfere with such representative or agent while he or she is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the contents of this article, the director may establish additional procedures or requirements as may be deemed necessary when to do so is determined to be in the best interest of the community and the provision of the general safety and welfare of the public. 
(Res. No. 05-0584, § 14, 5-18-05) 
Sec. 62-50. - Appeals. 
Unless otherwise stated, all appeals to the standards as established herein shall be subject to the review and approval of the director of the environment and community development. The director may confer with the public works department or the department of emergency services/911 for consideration of the ramification such a waiver may have upon public safety. 
(Res. No. 05-0584, § 15, 5-18-05) 
Sec. 62-51. - Penalties. 
(a)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the director of the department, work that is being done on any subdivision, new development or other project (1) contrary to the provisions of this article, (2) without having first obtained approved roadway names and addresses from Fulton County, or (3) not in compliance with such approved roadways or addresses shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall (1) be in writing, (2) shall be given to the owner of the property, his or her authorized agent, or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property, and (3) shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. 
(b)  Violations. For purposes of enforcing the provisions of this article, the Magistrate Court of Fulton County, any other court of competent jurisdiction hearing cases brought as violations of the provisions of this article, or the Fulton County Board of Code Enforcement shall be authorized to impose penalties or fines not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation. Each day during which a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Lien power. In the event a property owner fails or refuses to correct a violation of this article within the time set forth in the written notice provided for in subsection 62-48(b) of this article, Fulton County shall be entitled to take such remedial action as it deems necessary to ensure compliance, whereupon the property owner shall reimburse Fulton County for any cost or expense associated with such compliance efforts. In the event that the property owner fails or refuses to make such reimbursement, Fulton County shall be entitled to place a lien on the property to secure payment and reimbursement for such costs and expenses. 
(d)  Citation power. Persons designated by the director of the department and by the director of the department of public works are hereby authorized to issue citations or summons or both, charging violations under this article, returnable to the Magistrate Court of Fulton County or to any other court of competent jurisdiction, or to the Fulton County Board of Code Enforcement. 
(Res. No. 05-0584, § 16, 5-18-05) 
Secs. 62-52—62-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CURB CUTS 

Sec. 62-71. - Violations of article; misdemeanor. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, take all necessary action to correct the violation and shall permanently cease such violations. 
(b)  Any person who intentionally violates any provision of this article and who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for the satisfactory correction thereof, and any person who fails to cease all work after a stop order has been issued on a project, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day in which a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be punished in the manner prescribed by law for misdemeanors, and shall further reimburse the county for any expenses, loss, or damage occasioned the county by reason of such violation. 
(d)  Persons designated by the director of public works and/or director of inspections and permits are hereby authorized to issue citations or summonses, or both, charging violations under this article, returnable to the State Court of Fulton County, or to any other court having the jurisdiction of a commitment court throughout the entire county, for trial. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-47) 
Sec. 62-72. - Inclusiveness of article regulations. 
This article shall cover the location, width, frequency, and type of commercial and residential driveway entrances to Fulton County roadways. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-41) 
Sec. 62-73. - Variances. 
Whenever a property owner or developer can show that in every case strict application of this article would cause unnecessary or unreasonable hardship due to some unique requirement of the structure or activity made accessible by the proposed curb cuts, exceptions to this article may be granted by the public works department, provided: 
(1)  The public interest, and particularly public safety, will not be violated; and 
(2)  The rights of adjacent property owners or tenants will not be adversely affected. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-45) 
Sec. 62-74. - Permit required. 
No curb shall be cut, removed, or altered in any way for the purpose of constructing a driveway, nor may any driveway be constructed to the curbline, without first obtaining a permit to do so from the department of public works. The permit shall be issued only to the owner of the premises or his authorized agent. In all cases where the driveway is to be used by the public as in a business or commercial establishment, a plat or plan showing the proposed driveway shall be submitted to the public works department for examination and approval prior to issuing the permit. The plat shall be accurately drawn to scale, with all principal dimensions shown. The plat shall show the location of all existing curbs, sidewalks, storm drain inlets and pipes, sewer lines, streetlights, and all other public service and utility equipment, and trees and shrubs, in the right-of-way abutting the property. It shall also show the proposed location of all buildings, tanks, pump islands, and all other structures the applicant proposes to construct on the property, their dimensions, and their location relative to the street and property lines. The public works department may require any changes in the plan as may be necessary to conform with county specifications. When any provision of the resolution is in conflict with the provision of another county resolution, the more restrictive of the two shall control. The public works department may refuse to issue the permit in any case when the proposed curb cut clearly opposes the public interest. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-42) 
Sec. 62-75. - Frequency, size and location. 
(a)  Business and commercial. 
(1)  The frequency and location of driveways for business and commercial establishments shall conform to the standards set forth in Fulton County's modifications to the GDOT Driveway Manual. 
(2)  Curb cuts shall be not less than ten feet nor more than 30 feet in width at the right-of-way line. The curb cut for any one driveway shall not exceed 40 feet at the curbline. 
(3)  The near side of a driveway shall in no case be less than five feet from the side property line at the right-of-way line. 
(b)  Residential. Curb cuts in residential areas shall be installed according to the following guidelines for frequency, size, and location: 
(1)  Not more than two private curb cuts may be located on any one street frontage for any one dwelling. Not more than one private curb cut may be located on any one street frontage for any one dwelling where the street is classified as a collector or higher order street. 
(2)  If a lot has access to more than one frontage, it may not have any private curb cuts on a street that is classified as a collector or higher order street. If both frontages are classified as collector or higher order streets, then the curb cut may be on the frontage with the lowest classification, or as designated by the public works department. 
(3)  Private curb cuts shall measure not less than 14 feet for single driveways and not more than 18 feet for driveways measured at the right-of-way line. When there are two curb cuts on any one street frontage, there shall be a safety zone between the cuts not less than ten feet, as measured along the curbline. In no case shall the curb cut be less than five feet from the side property line as measured along the right-of-way line. The curb cut shall not encroach upon the radius of the curb at a street corner. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-43; Res. No. 05-0596, 5-18-05) 
Sec. 62-76. - Construction specifications. 
(a)  For the construction of curb cuts, all types of curbs shall be cut to the edge of the pavement. No driveways shall be constructed over any type of curb. In no case shall any obstruction or material be placed in the gutter for use as a ramp, whether the cut be of a permanent or temporary type. 
(b)  The angle of intersection of the axis of the driveway and the street shall not be less than 30 degrees. 
(c)  Curb cuts shall be constructed with a five-foot flare as measured along the curbline of the street. The elevation of the pavement of the curb cut at the right-of-way line shall be four inches higher than the top of the curb, and the stub shall be on a uniform grade to the gutter line. If there is a paved sidewalk in place, the walkway shall be adjusted to meet the grade of the curb cut. The curb cut flares at the curbline shall be raised and contoured to blend smoothly into the street curb. All curb cut stubs shall be paved back at least as far as the right-of-way line to protect the street pavement. The pavement shall be of a rough or grainy surface for the safety of pedestrians. 
(d)  The curb cut stub from the street pavement to the right-of-way line shall be either: 
(1)  A minimum of six inches in depth of 3,000 psi concrete; 
(2)  Six inches of crusher run base and one inch of plant mix asphalt topping; and 
(3)  Six inches of black base and one inch of plant mix asphalt topping. 
(e)  Whenever there is a public sidewalk adjacent to property upon which there is a proposed business establishment that will provide parking or drive-in service of any type, there shall be installed upon the property a curb not less than six inches high and six inches wide, located so as to prevent driving or stopping on the sidewalk by vehicles, and such that no part of a parked vehicle shall extend beyond the right-of-way line. 
(f)  Equipment and construction shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the right-of-way line. All equipment and construction shall be located so that no vehicle will be parked on the sidewalk or street at any time while being serviced. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-44) 
Sec. 62-77. - Repair of improvements. 
The owner of the property being improved or the applicant for the permit shall be responsible for the repair of and restoration of any county installation damaged during the process of the construction. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-46) 
Secs. 62-78, 62-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RIGHTS-OF-WAY UTILIZATION AND ACCOMMODATION ORDINANCE 

Sec. 62-80. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Fulton County Rights-of-Way Utilization and Accommodation Ordinance", and as Article IV, Chapter 62, Roads and Bridges, of the Code of Ordinances of Fulton County. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-81. - Enactment authority. 
This article is enacted under the authority of Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 1 (Home Rule for Counties) and Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph III (Supplementary Powers) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia, as amended; O.C.G.A. § 32-4-41 et seq.; O.C.G.A. § 32-5-22.1; O.C.G.A. § 32-6-170 et seq.; O.C.G.A. § 32-9-2; and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-82. - Purpose. 
Fulton County desires to protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizen by ensuring that digging activities within county rights-of-way and public roads are conducted in the safest possible manner, and that utility contractors performing excavation or construction activities on behalf of utility facility operators or owners, or on behalf of any other entity: (1) Have sufficient bonding and insurance in place to fully cover all damages to county properties and other utilities, (2) provide conspicuous signage at the site of the individuals to contact in case of problems, (3) return the roads and rights-of-way to the equivalent pre-digging conditions, (4) encourage the coordination of digging activities with other utility contractors to minimize the number of excavation activities at the same location, (5) reimburse the county for any extraordinary inspection costs, and (6) provide other assurances. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-83. - Scope of ordinance. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to unincorporated county and any other area within the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-84. - Non-application of this article; exceptions. 
Nothing in this article is intended to repeal or affect the validity of chapter 76, "Telecommunications", or other regulations pertaining to cable systems, that are contained in the Fulton County Code of Ordinances. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person, firm, or entity that is franchised by the board of commissioners to own and operate a cable television system under chapter 76 of the Fulton County Code of Ordinances. Such person, firm or entity granted a franchise by the county under chapter 76, as same is defined therein, shall be governed by chapter 76, and not by this article. However, where chapter 76 makes reference to the applicability of matters governed by this article, the provisions of this article shall control, but only to the extent of such reference. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-85. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Authorized contractor means a person fully registered with the department of public works as meeting all requirements to conduct excavation or construction activity within the public right-of-way or public road. 
Applicant means a person submitting all required information necessary for the department of public works to consider issuance of a permit to conduct excavation or construction activity within the public right-of-way or public road. 
Business days means Monday through Friday, excluding the following holidays: New Year's Day, Birthday of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and the following Friday, Christmas Eve, and Christmas Day. Any such holiday that falls on a Saturday shall be observed on the preceding Friday. Any such holiday that falls on a Sunday shall be observed on the following Monday. 
Business hours means the time from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. local time on business days. 
Construction means the planning, location, surveying, designing, supervising, inspecting, paving, striping, modifying, grading, relocating, fixing, and the actual installation of a utility facility within the public road or public right-of-way. 
County means the unincorporated areas of Fulton County, Georgia, and any division, department, agency, authority, instrumentality, or branch thereof, or the county governing authority, that is, the board of commissioners, county commissioner, county manager, director of public works or other county officers in charge of the roads, bridges, and revenues of the county. 
Damage means any impact or exposure that results in the need to repair a utility facility due to the weakening or the partial or complete destruction of the facility including, but not limited to, the protective coating, lateral support, cathodic protection, or the housing for the line, device, or facility. 
Director or director of public works means the county's director of public works or designee or authorized representative, and the department of public works 
Emergency means a sudden or unforeseen occurrence involving a clear and imminent danger to life, health, or property; the interruption of utility services; or repairs to transportation facilities that require immediate action. 
Emergency notice means a communication to the utilities protection center to alert the involved facility owners or operators of the need to excavate due to an emergency that requires immediate excavation. 
Excavating means any operation by which the level or grade of land is changed or earth, rock, or other material below existing grade is moved and includes, without limitation, grading, trenching, digging, ditching, augering, scraping, directional boring, and pile driving. Such term, however, does not include routine road surface scraping maintenance. "Excavating" shall not mean routine roadway maintenance activities carried out by employees of the Georgia Department of Transportation and the county department of public works, acting within the scope of their employment, provided such activities occur entirely within the right-of-way of a public road, street, or highway of the state are carried out with reasonable care so as to protect any utility facilities placed in the right-of-way by permit are carried out within the limits of any original excavation on the traveled way, shoulders, or drainage features of a public road, street, or highway, and do not exceed 18 inches in depth below the grade existing prior to such activities and, if involving the replacement of existing structures, replace such structures in their previous locations and at their previous depth. 
Excavator means any person engaged in excavating as defined in this section. 
Extraordinary circumstances means circumstances other than normal operating conditions which exist and make it impractical or impossible for a facility owner or operator to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Such extraordinary circumstances may include, but shall not be limited to, hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, ice and snow, and acts of God. 
Governing authority means Fulton County ("county"), its board of commissioners, and where delegated by the board of commissioners, the directors of the county's department of public works, and the county's police department. 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within the public right-of-way, and which is subject to the conditions set forth in this article and the permit document. 
Permittee means any person who is issued a valid permit by the county public works director or his designee. 
Person means an individual, firm, joint venture, partnership, association, municipality, political subdivision, state, or other governmental unit, authority, department, agency, or a corporation and shall include any trustee, receiver, assignee, employee, agent, or personal representative thereof. 
Private road means a privately owned road or way, including any bridge thereon, which is only open for the benefit of one or more individuals and not for the general public. This term also means a road which lies on privately owned land. 
Protective devices means cones, flashing light signals, and similar devices or combinations thereof, together with necessary appurtenances, to be placed or in operation at a work site and which comply with the safety standards determined by the department as being adequate at that time for the protection of traffic. 
Public road means a highway, road, street, avenue, toll road, tollway, drive, detour, or other way open to the public and intended or used for its enjoyment and for the passage of vehicles in the county, including but not limited to the following public rights, structures, sidewalks, facilities, and appurtenances incidental to the construction, maintenance, and enjoyment of such rights-of-way: (a) Surface, shoulders, and sides; (b) bridges; (c) causeways; (d) viaducts; (e) overpasses; (f) underpasses; (g) railroad grade crossings; (h) tunnels; (i) signs, signals, markings, or other traffic control devices; (j) wayside parks; (k) parking facilities; (l) drainage ditches; (m) canals and culverts; and (n) scenic easements and easements of light, air, view, and access. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway. 
Public right-of-way means generally property or any interest therein, whether or not in the form of a strip, which is acquired for or devoted to a public road. 
Residential area means adjacent property along a public road or public right-of-way that is being used primarily for residential purposes. 
Scenic easement means a servitude devised to permit land to remain in private ownership for its normal agricultural, residential, or other use consistent with public road purposes, but at the same time placing a control over the future uses of the area to maintain its scenic landscape, sightly, or safety values for the public road which the land adjoins. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a railway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
Utility means any publicly, privately, or cooperatively owned line, facility, or system for producing, transmitting, or distributing communications, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil products, water, steam, clay, waste, stormwater not connected with highway drainage, and other similar services and commodities, including publicly owned fire and police traffic signals and street lighting systems, which directly or indirectly serve the public. This term also means a person, municipal corporation, county, state agency, or public authority which owns, manages or operate a utility as defined in this paragraph. 
Utility facility owner or operator means any person or entity who owns, operates, or controls the operation of a utility facility, as defined in this article. 
Utilities protection center or center means the corporation or other organization formed by facility owners or operators to provide a joint telephone number notification service for the purpose of receiving advance notification from persons planning to blast or excavate and distributing such notifications to its affected facility owner or operator members. 
Utility facility means an underground or submerged conductor, pipe, or structure used in providing electric or communications service, or an underground or submerged pipe used in carrying, providing, or gathering gas, oil or oil products, sewage, wastewater, storm drainage, water or other liquids, and appurtenances thereto. This does not include utility facilities owned by a homeowner for service at the homeowner's residence. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-86. - Fulton County utility accommodations guidelines and procedures manual. 
Through passage of this ordinance, the board of commissioners adopts the "Fulton County Utility Accommodations Guidelines and Procedures Manual", (the "manual") and all rules, regulations, procedures, plans and specifications contained therein. The director of public works shall be responsible for the promulgation of the manual and its contents. The manual shall be reviewed, at least annually, and updated as necessary to reflect the most current rules, regulations and practices and shall conform to the state's 1988 Utility Accommodation Policy Standards Manual, promulgated by the State Department of Transportation, as same may be amended from time to time by the state, in order to reflect changes in acceptable design standards and materials, and to reflect current construction costs. The director of public works will ensure that the contents of the manual are equivalent to, but is not more restrictive than the regulations promulgated by Georgia Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards, 1988 edition, as same may be amended from time to time. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-87. - Permits required for installation or excavation in rights-of-way and roads; no property interest in location of utility facility. 
Before installing or relocating any utility facility which may occupy or encroach on the right-of-way acquired for county projects, or which is part of the county road system, the utility owner and/or contractor must obtain authorization from the county department of public works. For all initial installation a written permit will be executed. Also, for relocation or adjustment of utility facilities for which a written permit has not previously been issued, and which are not covered by an indemnity agreement, a permit will be executed. Except as may be provided by state or federal laws, placement of a utility facility within the public rights-of-way or public roads shall not be deemed to give any person a property or other interest in any particular location within the public rights-of-way or public roads, or any preference over any other person issued a permit to utilize the public rights-of-way or public roads. The county reserves the right to designate where a particular utility facility may be located for the purposes of protecting current or future use of its public roads to promote the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-88. - Permittee's adherence to other applicable laws. 
The provisions of this article are in addition to those set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq., as same may be amended from time to time. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-89. - Authority to issue and regulate permits delegated to the director of public works. 
The authority to issue and regulate permits for installation or excavation activities within public rights-of-way and public roads are hereby delegated to the director of public works or his designee. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-90. - Permits for installation or excavation in rights-of-way and roads; exception for state projects. 
Permit required. All utility owners shall apply for and obtain a written permit from the department of public works before installing or making substantial changes to any utility facility located within the public right-of-way or within a public road or sidewalk. Such utility owner shall make application for a permit to the director of public works. The director of public works shall have the authority to impose such permit terms and conditions necessary to protect the public health and safety, and the permittee shall comply with all terms and conditions imposed by the director of public works including the right to maintain a register of authorized contractors. Only authorized contractors shall engage in permitted activities in the rights-of-way. However, where the Georgia Department of Transportation has primary permitting authority over a particular installation or construction activity, the permittee may show a copy of the GDOT permit and shall not be required to obtain a permit from the county. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-91. - Issuance of permit; allocation of costs; time limits. 
(a)  Issuance. All applications for all permits for installation, or excavation pursuant to this article shall be reviewed by the department of public works, and if the application is complete and the permittee is in compliance with all requirements of this article, to the extent practicable, the county shall issue a permit within 20 days of receipt of the last application and notice to all parties; provided that all joint application permits for installation or excavation by two or more persons shall be expedited, and if in compliance with all requirements of this article, shall if practicable, be approved by the director of public works within ten days of receipt of such applications. No permit shall issue unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of roadway traffic is not unduly impaired and the utility installation does not prevent the county from reasonably maintaining the roads, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and do not jeopardize the traffic or roadway structure or the maintenance thereof. 
(b)  Denial of a permit; option to require cash bond or letter of credit. 
(1)  Person conducting work. The director of public works shall grant no permit where the applicant has failed to comply with the terms of a prior permit or conducted prior work without a permit, and where such failure was previously documented in writing and delivered to the violator. It shall be within the reasonable discretion of the director of public works to decline a permit to any person who shall have failed to carry out any prior order or instruction of the director of public works in connection with the opening of a public road or sidewalk at any time. It shall be within the director's reasonable discretion to consider mitigation factors submitted by the applicant pertaining to past conduct or omission. In exercising his discretion whether to grant a permit to a company which had conducted prior construction activity without a permit or a company that violated the terms of a prior permit, the director may require cash deposit or an irrevocable letter of credit from a qualified financial institution, securing the compliance of the terms of this article and the faithful performance of the obligations of the party conducting construction or excavation activities within the public right-of-way or public road. The amount of irrevocable letter of credit or cash deposit shall be determined by the director in an amount deemed best protect the public safety and welfare. The deposit shall be placed in an interest bearing account. The letter of credit or cash deposit is in addition to the performance bond and insurance required by this article. The director of public works may demand payment from the institution that issued the letter of credit for a violating party or make deductions from the cash deposit, as applicable to offset the costs of, among other things, the repair, excavations or work performed by the department of public works, or to pay any assessed penalties or costs associated with violations of this article. Where practicable, the county shall provide the permittee with ten days advance written notice of a deduction from the deposit. The letter of credit or cash deposit shall be maintained until satisfactory completion of permitted activity. 
(2)  Person on whose behalf work is being conducted. The director of public works may, in the director's discretion, decline to grant a permit if the director determines that the permit will not be in the public interest, with such factor to be considered to include, but not limited to, whether space is available for the utility. The responsibility shall be upon the director of public works to see that no permit is granted to any person to open any public road or sidewalk where the results to be accomplished under the permit will unreasonably interfere with the use of the public road or sidewalk. 
(3)  Reason for denial must be provided. If the permit is denied, the reason for the denial shall be furnished in writing to the applicant, as soon as possible, but no later than 20 days upon submittal of the application. 
(c)  Appeals from denial of permit issuance; judicial review. A person may appeal the denial of a permit to the county manager. The person shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard and to offer evidence in support of the appeal. The county manager shall act on the appeal and issue a final decision within 30 days of receipt of the written appeal. The decision of the county manager shall be final. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the county manager's denial of a permit, after having pursued the appeal process of this subsection, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(d)  No permit fee; reimbursement costs only. There shall be no charge for the issuance of the permit. The applicant shall reimburse the county for any reasonable and necessary expense, including, but not limited to, extraordinary inspection services incurred by county in connection with the utility or work authorized by the permit. The reimbursement to the county shall be made by the applicant within 30 days after receiving a invoice or statement from the director. The applicant, upon notification in writing by the director, shall pay a reasonable market price for any material removed from the right-of-way or public road or destroyed as a result of the work authorized by the permit. Such payment shall be within 30 days of receipt of the statement from the director. 
(e)  Cost of permitted work. The entire cost of installing, maintaining, repairing, operating, using the utility, or any other expense whatsoever incidental to the work authorized by the permit, shall be borne by the applicant. All costs associated with conducting excavation or construction activities within the public right-of-way or public road, including the making and refilling any opening or replacing any permanent improvement shall, be borne by the utility facility operator or owner at whose request such opening is made. If work is performed by the county on behalf of or at the request of a utility facility owner or operator, all charges therefore shall be in such amounts as may be fixed by the director of public works, subject to the approval of the board of commissioners, except in emergency or unusual circumstances in order to protect the health and safety of the public or county or other public facilities, and with such cost to be fully reimbursed to the county. The director of public works shall, likewise in each case, estimate the cost of replacing permanent improvements and shall have authority to replace or require the replacement of all of a sidewalk or public road when it is necessary to put the sidewalk or public road in as good condition using materials of equal or better quality as before the excavation or opening. All such cost, whether computed from a schedule fixed by the director of public works or embodied in an estimate made under this article by the director of public works, shall be paid before the work is done by the county or the permit is granted, except in emergency circumstances. 
(f)  Permit maintained on-site. The permit granted by the director of public works to conduct activities within the public rights-of-way or public road or sidewalk, shall be maintained on the work site and displayed to any official of the department of public works, police, or other county official upon request. 
(g)  Signage. In order to identify the work during installation, the permittee shall place a card, or signs, on the public road near the work before beginning the work authorized by the permit. The sign shall be visible from the traveled way and shall be placed not less that six feet above the ground and at least one per mile. The sign or signs will be furnished to the applicant by the department of public works along with the approved permit. 
(h)  Effective period of permit. If work begins within 12 months after issuance, and unless otherwise provided in the manual, the permit shall be in effect for an indefinite period of time from and after the date issued, unless sooner revoked by mutual consent or by the director for failure of the applicant to abide by the terms and conditions of the permit or by operation of law. A permit is automatically revoked when the activity for which the permit is issued ceases or is abandoned. 
(i)  Notice of work beginning. Permittee shall notify the department of public works in writing at least 24 hours before starting any work under the permit. Permittee must present its work schedule and plan for traffic control for approval of the director or designee. 
(j)  Notice of work completion. Permittee shall notify the department of public works when the work authorized by the permit is completed so that an inspection can be made by the department of public works to ensure that the provisions of the permit have been met and that all areas within the right-of-way or public road have been adequately restored. 
(k)  Time limit on beginning work. If the applicant fails to commence installation of the utility facility or other miscellaneous activity covered by the permit within 12 months from the date the permit is issued, said permit shall be deemed null and void and all privileges thereunder forfeited, unless a written extension is obtained from the director. 
(l)  Working without a permit. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article to perform any of the activities relegated by this article within the public rights-of-way or public roads, without complying with the permit requirements promulgated by the department of public works or of this article. If any person commences any excavation or construction work, excluding emergencies as defined in this article, within the public rights-of-way or public roads without a permit, the person shall be in violation of this article and subject to all remedies available to the county, including, but not limited to, to the immediate cessation of all activities and removal of all equipment for the public road or right-of-way. 
(m)  Signed application/indemnification agreement required. The director of public works shall not grant any permit to conduct construction or installation activities within the public right-of-way or for an excavation underneath sidewalks or public roads for any purpose, unless the application for that use in each instance is signed by the utility facility operator or owner of the proposed utility facility, who shall enter into an indemnification agreement with the county binding the utility facility operator or owner and the operator or owner's successor in title. The utility facility operator or owner shall agree to indemnify the county, it officers, employees and agents from any and all claims, litigation or damages to either persons or property, both public and private, caused by the installation, construction or maintenance of the excavation or opening and shall agree that the director of public works shall have the right to have said excavation closed and filled at any time the director of public works determines and the owner and/or its excavator/agent shall vacate the area beneath the public right-of-way, public road, or sidewalk when requested to do so by the county without cost to the county. 
(n)  Supervision of work. All such excavations or openings, except as provided in this article for emergency work, shall be made and refilled and permanent improvements removed shall be replaced by or under the supervision of the director of public works or his/her designee. The work in each instance shall be done under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the director of public works. Any person violating this section shall be required to close the excavation or opening and remove any obstructions upon the direction of the director of public works. If such notice is not complied with, such encroachment shall be removed by the director of public works at the utility facility operator's or owner's expense. 
(o)  Conditions of maintaining a permit. 
(1)  The director of public works is authorized to establish and publish a list of conditions and requirements for all construction, repair, maintenance, and other activities within the public right-of-way and public road, including, among other things, the power to establish, from time-to-time the reasonable cost of reimbursable fees not inconsistent with this article. Said conditions shall contain, but shall not be limited to: 
a.  Utility operator's or owner's providing a notice of any other known utility facilities at the described location which may be impacted by the work proposed under the permit and the date of the proposed work; 
b.  Traffic protection plan; 
c.  Emergency plan; 
d.  Clear identification of all construction and maintenance sites, vehicles, metal plates and other obstacles with the name and phone number of the utility owner and the person performing the work; 
e.  Construction plans to show length of cut, construction activity to install the equipment, size, type and location of utilities in the rights-of-way and technical specifications for road rehabilitation; 
f.  Placement of warning signs identifying construction and excavation-site; 
g.  Replacement of decorative sidewalk style and material; 
h.  Coordination of excavation and paving activities between and among any persons; 
i.  Placement and removal of paint markings for utility locations; 
j.  Bonds, insurance and other financial protection for the county; 
k.  As-built plans and drawings in a form specified by the department of public works. Permittee shall not be required to supply proprietary or trade secret information. No person shall artificially underestimate the size of their proposed system to evade the purpose of this article; 
l.  Permittee shall provide to the department of public works a list identifying all subcontractors used by a permittee on a construction or excavation project. The list shall include the name and telephone number of the subcontractors; and 
m.  Any other requirements, limitations, or conditions that the director of public works may deem necessarily and proper. 
(p)  Maintenance work. Permittee shall at all times keep utility facilities authorized by the permit in a good state of repair from the standpoint of both structure and appearance. The director may revoke the permit and order removal of any utility facilities which become a hazard to the public or the roadway due to improper maintenance. The utility shall give 24-hours advance notice to the department of public works before undertaking any of the following maintenance activities within the county's right-of-way or public road: 
(1)  Any work which requires the blocking of one or more traffic lanes for a period of time in excess of two hours. 
(2)  Installation of any temporary structures which are to remain on the right-of-way. 
(3)  The cutting, trimming or spraying of any trees or shrubs within the right-of-way. 
(4)  Making any pavement cut except in an emergency. 
(5)  Making any excavation within the roadbed which may remain open overnight. 
(q)  Restoration of the right-of-way and public road. Upon the determination by the director of public works that all construction and excavation activity in the right-of-way or public road has ceased, within 48 hours of such determination, the utility facility operator or owner or their agent shall begin to restore the right-of-way or public road to its pre-construction condition, or to the condition determined by the public works director to meet county specification. The restoration of the right-of-way or public road shall include: The repaving of all roads and sidewalks, removal of temporary utility markings, the removal of all barricades, metal plates, temporary devices, obstructions, surplus excavation material and the restoration of the appropriate vegetation. However, trees and shrubs should be planted during the appropriate season, and reasonable accommodations shall be made for such, including payment to the county in an amount sufficient to replace the trees and shrubs. All restoration shall be completed within 15 business days after the end of construction or excavation activity. Failure to comply with this section will subject all persons to the maximum penalties as set forth in section 62-104 of this article. 
(r)  Safety barriers; notice. It shall be the duty of all persons doing any kind of non-emergency work in the public roads of the county, such as paving, laying sewers, sidewalks and curbing, moving buildings or any other work that in any way obstructs free passage thereon to notify the director of public works at least 24 hours before the work is commenced and on its completion. It shall be the duty of the director of public works to see that this section is enforced, both as to the erection of barriers or enclosures and as to travel on the street by vehicles or otherwise during the time prohibited. 
(s)  Performance bond. Persons performing construction or excavation work in the public right-of-way or public road shall, prior to initiating the construction or excavation work, provide to the county a performance and completion bond in the amount determined by either the county's risk manager or director of public works, to be adequate to either complete the proposed work impacting the public right-of-way or public road in its entirety or to restore the public right-of-way or public road to its preconstruction condition if the person fails to complete the work to the satisfaction of the director of public works. No work shall commence under the permit until the bond has been submitted to and approved by the director of public works or designee. 
(t)  Insurance. The county's risk manager shall require the person conducting construction activities or excavation work within the public rights-of-way or public roads to obtain a policy of public liability and property damage insurance and affording coverage of not less than $200,000.00 for property damage resulting from a single occurrence, and $1,000.000.00 for the death or injury of any person, subject to a limit of $2,000,000.00 for injuries or death resulting from any single occurrence. The insurance policy or policies shall be with an insurance company authorized and licensed to do business in the State of Georgia, to protect the county from liability claims arising out of the permitted construction or excavation activities. These insurance requirements may be met by evidence of self-insurance, or any bona fide captive insurance or self insurance program acceptable to the county. A copy of the policy or policies, or certificate evidencing same, shall be submitted to the director of public works, and must be approved by him or the county's risk manager or his designee, before any work is commenced under the permit. 
(u)  Guarding of temporary excavations. All persons conducting construction or excavation in any public road, sidewalk or public right-of-way for any purpose shall erect around the construction of excavation work, a fence or barrier adequate to protect the public from the excavation or construction work. When the excavation or construction is being performed across the sidewalk or at a place used by pedestrians, a bridge shall be erected over the excavation or construction work sufficient for the safe passage of the public. All construction or excavation activity shall be properly lighted at night as determined by the director of public works. The guarding and protection of excavations or construction work shall be in accordance with state law and with specifications promulgated by the director of public works and as set forth in the county's utility accommodations guidelines and procedures manual, on file in the office of the director of public works. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-92. - Revocation of permit; administrative appeal. 
A permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the director of public works, upon a finding that the permittee is not in compliance with the permit conditions or any provision of this article. Where possible, the violator will be afforded a reasonable opportunity to cure the violation before such revocation, suspension, or modification become effective. The permittee may pursue an appeal to the county manager in the manner provided in subsection 62-91(c). 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-93. - Utility markings. 
(a)  Temporary markings. Prior to any utility construction, excavation or repair that may damage other utilities located in the public right-of-way, persons performing construction or excavation activities shall perform such work in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq., or any other applicable laws or regulations, and shall, to the extent authorized by law, locate and mark the location of all existing utilities, or ensure that such location and marking has taken place prior to commencing the work. Upon the completion of all construction activities, all temporary utility location markings that are not water soluble shall be removed by the permittee or its agents. 
(b)  Permanent pavement marker. All permanent utility markers in the public right-of-way or public road shall: Identify the owner of such utility facility, be no larger than three inches in diameter, installed flush with the pavement, and constructed with such material that in the event of failure, will not create a public safety hazard. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-94. - Time limitations for construction or excavation in residential areas or major connectors or arterials. 
The director of public works shall restrict all construction or excavation activity within the public right-of-way or public roads located within residential areas, except for work performed from dawn until dusk or during the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m, whichever will ensure the safety and welfare of the public. The director shall ensure that all permits issued for work in residential areas shall contain the above restrictions. The director of public works also has the discretion to limit the hours of construction or other activities within a major connector or arterial in order to ensure the public welfare. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-95. - Pedestrian access. 
(a)  Where it is necessary to close a portion of the pedestrian public right-of-way, only the minimum necessary width of the right-of-way shall be obstructed so as to leave a safe, passable thoroughfare not less than four feet in width, and providing appropriate access at and between intersections in accordance with the Americans With Disabilities Act (the "ADA") standards, and separated from the construction area by adequate safety barriers as approved by the director of public works. 
(b)  Where it is not possible to provide access via method (a) above, a temporary pedestrian route shall be erected utilizing a combination of the existing sidewalk, the adjacent parking lane, and/or the adjacent vehicular traffic lane at the discretion of the director of public works. Where a traffic or parking lane is used, appropriate barricades and signage shall be utilized to separate the pedestrian lane from the vehicular lane and the route shall be accessible as per the guidelines of the ADA. 
(c)  Where the party seeking the permit has shown due diligence to perform either (a) or (b), of this section and are unable to do so due to the structural necessities of the work to be completed, proper signage must be provided at each pedestrian-accessible intersection, between which lies the permitted closure or obstruction, directing pedestrian traffic to cross to the other side of the street. Signage must be visible to pedestrian traffic both on the side of the street with the obstruction and to pedestrian traffic at intersections with access to the segment of the sidewalk containing the permitted obstruction. 
(d)  The director of public works is prohibited from accepting, as reason for an inability to comply with items (a), (b), or (c) of this section, that the pedestrian right-of-way must be closed due to a need for vehicular parking on the site of the work being performed necessitating the closure. 
(e)  All walkways mandated by this section, shall be maintained by the permittee, and any damage, or obstructions to this temporary right-of-way shall be repaired and cleared immediately by that party. Permittee is required to display the permit in a conspicuous place so that the public and inspectors can visibly see it. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-96. - Scheduling and coordination of excavation. 
(a)  Twelve month plans; proprietary information. In order to facilitate an interactive planning process, persons desiring to excavate or make an opening, in the public right-of-way or public road, as part of the compliance requirement for any permit issued, shall submit a quarterly plan in a format acceptable to the director of public works that show all major excavation work anticipated to be done in the public right-of-way or public road for the next 12 months. The plan shall include a method of excavation designed to protect to the maximum extent possible, the existing infrastructure and minimize the interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic plans may be revised and updated from time to time by such person. The person submitting the plans shall mark such plans as proprietary, or trade secrets and the plans will be protected from disclosure by the county, to the extent permitted by law. Should any third party seek access to the information submitted, the county shall notify the entity submitting the quarterly plan of the request and afford such submitting entity the ability to seek intervention of the courts to prevent disclosure. This requirement shall not impose any requirement on any person desiring to cut a street to disclose confidential business information. This 12-month plan shall not require persons to disclose information on lateral construction marked protected. In addition, this information is only an estimate and will only be used for general location of construction or excavation activities of the person and no liability shall be incurred due to or on account of the submission of such projection. 
(b)  Coordination of 12-month plans. The director of public works shall review all 12-month plans on file in order to identify conflicts and opportunities for coordination of activities. The director shall notify persons with a 12-month plan on file of such conflicts to the extent possible to maximize coordination of major excavation work and to avoid unnecessary and repeated excavations in a public road or public right-of-way. All persons shall coordinate, to the extent possible, major excavation with other potentially affected persons to minimize disruption of the county's public rights-of-way and public roads. The department of public works may schedule monthly meetings with persons who desire to work in the rights-of-way or public roads for the purpose of reviewing submitted as-built plans as required in section 62-91. Persons who seek to perform excavation activities in the right-of-way or public road shall be required to attend such meetings. Failure to attend such meetings shall subject all persons to revocation or suspension of permits or the issuance of a stop work order. 
(c)  Persons participating in joint excavation. The permit holder shall be deemed the lead person on the joint excavation. In addition, the permit shall list the names of all persons participating in the joint excavation. 
(d)  Department of public works repaving schedule. In March of every year, the director of public works shall prepare for public inspection, a preliminary 12-month repaving plan showing anticipated and proposed resurfacing and repaving of the public right-of-way or public road. Upon completion, such 12-month repaving plan shall be provided to every person with a 12-month plan on file with the department of public works. The director of public works will update such plan as appropriate and provide a copy to the persons referenced in the preceding sentence. 
(e)  Industry meetings. The persons subject to this article will use their best efforts to conduct industry meetings on a regular basis to try and better coordinate excavation activities. The department of public works may participate in these industry meetings and endeavor to coordinate major excavation work of the county and the industry. 
(f)  Good faith efforts. Persons subject to this article will use good faith efforts to conduct joint excavation activities subject to technical, economic and competitive considerations. Joint applications shall be approved in an expedited manner and be given high priority. Any joint application shall identify the lead person responsible for the requested permitted activity. The lead person will coordinate the activities of the other persons participating in the joint project. As an incentive, to encourage joint excavation activities, the county shall implement expedited permit procedures. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-97. - Rehabilitation and restoration of the pavement. 
Whenever any person desires to excavate or make an opening in any public road or public right-of-way, such person shall repair and restore the public street or public right-of-way, including milling and resurfacing, to the specifications of the department of public works. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-98. - Availability of material and equipment before starting work. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to tear up or interfere with the pavement upon a public road, public right-of-way, or sidewalk unless, immediately prior to the time the person commences the work, the person has sufficient material and equipment immediately available with which to carry out the paving proposed and the director of public works is satisfied that this section has been complied with. If the director of public works determines that the person has not complied with this section, the director shall refuse to allow the public road, public right-of-way, or sidewalk to be torn up or interfere with, nor work be allowed until the person complies with this section. 
(b)  Responsibility for damages. Any and all damages to a public road or public right-of-way, on either level, or damage to bridge, viaduct or tunnel structures caused by a person working within the public right-of-way or public road, must be repaired immediately at no cost to the county and to the satisfaction of the director of public works. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-99. - Emergency excavations. 
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent any person from taking any action reasonably necessary for the preservation of life or property or for the restoration of interrupted service provided by a utility facility operator or owner when such necessity arises during days or times when the department of public works is closed. In the event that any person takes any action to excavate or cause to excavate the public right-of-way pursuant to this section, such person shall notify the department of public works as soon as possible or within hour of becoming aware of the need for emergency action, whichever is lesser. If the emergency takes place during non-business hours, the person shall notify the department of public works within one hour of the time county offices are first opened. The person shall submit a written statement of the basis of the emergency action and described excavation performed and any work remaining to be performed. Persons determined by the director of public works to have conducted work where an emergency situation did not exist shall be deemed to be in violation of this article and subject to enforcement action authorized by this article. Persons conducting emergency excavations pursuant to this section shall prominently display a notice of such emergency activity. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-100. - Relocation of utility facility. 
The county shall have superior rights to the use of its public roads and public right-of-way. The county reserves the right to perform any public works or public improvement necessary to maintain its public roads and public right-of-way. The county may therefore, upon written request to a permittee, require the relocation of a utility facility which is physically within the public right-of-way or public road and in conflict with proposed construction improvements by the county or its agents. Such relocation shall be at the permittee's sole expense when the relocation is necessary to improve or maintain the public road or public right-of-way for transportation uses, or where in the director of public work's sound discretion, the utility facility constitutes an obstruction or interference with the safe use or safe operation of such public road or public right-of-way by the traveling public. 
(1)  Notification; failure to remove. Whenever the department of public work determines, in its sound discretion, that it is necessary to have a utility facility removed and relocated, the department of public works shall give the utility facility's owner or operator 60 days written notice directing the removal and relocation of such utility obstruction. Upon receiving written notice from the county to remove, or relocate facilities which are using or occupying a public right-of-way which the county has to improve, the permittee shall, within 60 days thereafter, begin arrangements for said removal or relocation in accordance with said written notice from the county. Should the utility facility's owner or operator fail to comply with such notice within a reasonable time sufficient to allow for procedures reasonably necessary for the removal and relocation of the facilities, the county may give the permittee a final notice directing that such removal begins not later than ten days from the receipt of such final notice. 
(2)  Removal or relocation of facilities by the county. If the utility facility's owner or operator refuses or neglects to relocate said facilities existing in the public right-of-way within ten days of receipt of such final notice, or if an emergency affecting public safety or health exists requiring immediate relocation of the utility facilities, to the extent not inconsistent with state and federal law, the county may relocate such facilities by its own forces or by contract with any entity and the utility facility's owner or operator shall pay to the county the reasonable costs incurred in connection with such relocation. 
(3)  Payment for relocation by county. Should the county incur any expense in the relocation of any utility facility under this section, a statement of such expenses shall be submitted to the utility facility's owner or operator, which shall make payment to the county. In the event the utility facility's owner or operator does not make payment or arrange to make payment to the county within 60 days after receipt of such statement, the department of public works shall certify the amount for collection by the county attorney. 
(4)  Removal or relocation of facilities for aesthetic purposes. If the relocation of facilities in the right-of-way or public road is for aesthetic purposes or purposes not related to improving the public right-of-way for transportation purposes or to maintain the public right-of-way for health or safety reasons, then the cost of such relocation shall be borne by the requesting third party and not by the county or the utility facility's owner or operator. 
(5)  Removal or relocation of facilities by an act of God. If an act of God necessitates the relocation of a utility facility located in the public rights-of-way or public road, the cost of such relocation shall not be borne by the utility facility's owner or operator. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-101. - Stop work order. 
Upon written notice from the director of public works, or his or her designees or employees and all police and code enforcement personnel—who shall have such powers as are reasonably necessary to monitor, enforce and give effect to this article—that construction or excavation work within the public right-of-way or public road, or any work that impacts these public areas, are being performed contrary to, or are in violation of the provisions of this article, or is being done in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. The notice shall be in writing and delivered to the on-site authorized representative or his designee of the person performing the excavation or construction work. The notice shall state the conditions pursuant to which the work can resume. Upon receipt of a stop work order, the person conducting the work shall utilize appropriate measures to secure and safeguard the site and equipment and to protect the health and safety of public. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-102. - Emergency stop work order. 
Nothing in this article shall prevent the director of public works or his designee to order the stoppage of all work within the public right-of-way or public road where the director or his designee determines that an emergency exists. Emergencies include, but are not limited to, factors that pose a danger to the public health, safety, and well being of persons or property, including the public right-of-way. In such instances, no written stop work order shall be required. Only work necessary to secure and safeguard the site and equipment is permissible subsequent to the emergency stop work order. Within a reasonable time of the emergency stop work order, the director of public works or his designee shall provide a written basis for the emergency work stoppage and include therein, the conditions under which the work may resume. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-103. - Enforcement. 
Unless otherwise provided, the enforcement of this article shall be within the jurisdiction of the county's enforcement personnel, including the director of public works or his or her designees or employees and all police and code enforcement personnel who shall have such powers as are reasonably necessary to monitor, enforce and give effect to this article. Specifically, but not by way of limitation, any violation of this article may be tried upon citations issued by enforcement personnel pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 and any successor statute. Persons designated by the director of public works or as otherwise designated by the county manager, are hereby authorized to issue citations or summons or both, charging violations under this article, returnable to Fulton County Magistrate Court, or any other court having jurisdiction of a commitment court throughout the entire county, for a hearing. For purposes of enforcing the provisions of this article, the Fulton County Magistrate Court, including the environmental court, shall be entitled to take action to ensure compliance. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-104. - Violations of article; civil remedies; criminal penalties; restitution. 
Upon a determination that a person is in violation of this article the violator shall be subject to one or more of the penalties: 
(1)  Civil action. In addition to the criminal penalties set forth in subsection (1), the county shall have the right to enjoin any act or omission in violation of this article that is punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(2)  Criminal penalties. A court of competent jurisdiction is authorized to find the violations of this article for which a specific penalty is not provided, to be a misdemeanor, and any person found guilty thereof shall be punished for a misdemeanor as provided by law. 
(3)  Restitution. In addition to the penalties imposed in subsections (1) and (2), a person violating any provision of this article, shall be responsible for the cost incurred by the county to repair any damage to the county water or sewer facility resulting from any violation. 
(4)  Additional penalties. The imposition of any of the foregoing penalties shall not prevent revocation or suspension of a permit by other administrative sanctions or any other relief that may be granted under law. 
(5)  Continuous and repeated violations. 
a.  Violations of this article that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
b.  With respect to violations of this article that are continuous, with respect to time, each day the violation continues, it is a separate offense. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-105. - Enforcement of other laws, rules, or regulations not limited. 
Nothing in this article shall limit the authority of any state, local agency, or departments of the county to enforce any other laws, rules, regulations, or ordinances relating to water or sewer services. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-106. - Effect on other duly enacted ordinances, rules and resolutions. 
Nothing in this article is intended to repeal any other duly enacted ordinance, resolution, or parts of ordinances or resolutions of the county, except where such ordinance, resolution, or parts of ordinances or resolutions are in direct conflict with this article. Any such repeal under this section shall be to the extent of such conflict only and no further. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-107. - Inclusion in Code of Ordinances. 
The provisions of this article shall be included and incorporated within the Code of Laws of Fulton County, and may hereafter be numbered and re-lettered to accommodate this inclusion. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-108. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is declared or adjudged to be unconstitutional, or otherwise contrary to law, such adjudication shall in no manner affect any other section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase, which shall remain in full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Sec. 62-109. - Effective date. 
This resolution and Code amendment shall become effective upon its adoption, and that all resolutions and Code priorities in conflict with this resolution and Code amendment are repealed to the extent of the conflict. 
(Res. No. 02-0264, 2-20-02) 
Chapter 66 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Secondhand watch dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-49-2 et seq.; pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; used motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-47-1 et seq.; purchase and resale of used motor vehicles and vehicle parts, O.C.G.A. § 40-4-40 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1—66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SECONDHAND JEWELRY 

Sec. 66-31. - Applicability of article provisions. 
Every person, whether a licensed junk dealer or pawnbroker, or any other secondhand dealer, who, exclusively or as incidental to or in connection with other business, purchases, sells or acquires in trade used or secondhand jewelry, flat silver, gold, and silver objects of every kind and description, including watches and clocks, any of which is made in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals; diamonds, emeralds, rubies, or other precious stones; pistols or guns; bicycles or accessories shall, for the purpose of this article, be a secondhand dealer. Any person who shall purchase any article of the kinds herein described from any person other than a bona fide dealer in those articles shall, for the purpose of making the reports required herein, also be a secondhand dealer and subject to all the provisions of this article relating to those records and reports. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-41) 
Sec. 66-32. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  Contents of record book. All secondhand dealers shall keep a book wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property of the kinds specified in section 66-31 of this article which they acquire by purchase of trade, and the name, address, estimated age, weight and height of the person from whom purchased or acquired and the date and hour of the purchase. These entries shall be made as soon as possible after the transaction is had, in no case more than one hour thereafter. 
(b)  Inspection. This record shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by the Fulton County Police Department. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-42) 
Sec. 66-33. - Entries in record book to be numbered serially; property to be tagged with corresponding number. 
Every entry required to be made in the secondhand dealer's book required by section 66-32 shall be numbered serially, and the property described in the entry shall have attached to it a tag bearing the same serial number. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-43) 
Sec. 66-34. - Acquiring articles with serial number mutilated or altered. 
It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer to purchase or acquire in trade any watch, clock, pistol, gun, automobile tire, or battery, or any other article commonly branded with a serial number, upon which the number has been mutilated or altered. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-44) 
Sec. 66-35. - Daily reports to police; form and contents. 
Every secondhand dealer identified in section 66-31 above shall make a daily report in writing to the Chief of Police of Fulton County in such form as may be prescribed by him, of all property purchased or acquired by him during the 24 hours ending at 12:00 midnight on the date of the report. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-45) 
Sec. 66-36. - Examination and inspection of articles by police; segregation of suspicious articles. 
All property purchased or acquired by a secondhand dealer shall at all times be subject to examination and inspection by the police department. If, upon the inspection, a police officer shall have reasonable cause to believe that any of the property is stolen, he shall segregate it. It shall thereafter be unlawful for the person in possession of the property to dispose of it, or in any manner mutilate, melt, or disfigure it, until 15 days have elapsed from the date of the inspection. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-46) 
Sec. 66-37. - Property not to be disposed of for 15 days after acquisition. 
All property purchased or acquired by a secondhand dealer shall be held for not less than 15 days. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-47) 
Sec. 66-38. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer to buy or receive any property of the kinds described in section 66-31 of this article from any person under the age of 18 years, provided that any secondhand dealer taking from the seller a statement in writing that the seller is of age will not be held subject to the provisions of this section, if the appearance of the seller is such as to make it uncertain that he is not 18 years of age. 
(Code 1983, § 33-7-48) 
Chapter 70 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to environment, ch. 26; ordinances pertaining to utilities, ch. 82; resolutions pertaining to utilities, ch. 178. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Solid waste, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1—70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-31. - Provisions for disposal by owners. 
The owner of every lot or parcel embraced within the garbage districts herein created upon which is located any house, residence, building, apartment, tenement, or other structure served by the garbage collection and disposal facilities herein provided, shall: 
(1)  Provide a closed garbage can or containers of such type and size as may be prescribed by the director of public works; 
(2)  Cause to be placed therein all garbage and refuse from said property; and 
(3)  Cause said containers to be placed and continuously maintained at such location on the property as directed by the director of public works. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-73) 
Sec. 70-32. - Free disposal of recyclable goods and yard trimmings. 
The board of commissioners hereby declares as its policy on the third Saturday of every month, residents of Fulton County will be allowed free disposal of recyclable goods and yard trimmings at the Merk/Miles Transfer Station. 
(Res. No. 97-0815, 6-18-97) 
Editor's note— Resolution No. 97-0815, adopted on June 18, 1997, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, its inclusion as § 70-32 was at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 70-33—70-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENT 

Sec. 70-66. - Garbage disposal tax districts established. 
The territories of Fulton County, as fixed and established from time to time by the board of commissioners requiring garbage collection and disposal facilities, shall constitute garbage collection and disposal tax districts. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-71) 
Sec. 70-67. - Levy. 
There is hereby levied annually for garbage collection and disposal service and for the purpose of establishing and maintaining garbage collection and disposal, against each lot or parcel of real property within garbage disposal districts upon which is located any house, residence, building, apartment, tenement or other structure, and against the owner thereof, assessments as follows, all of which shall have the lien, dignity, and priority, and be paid in the manner, as set forth in this division, and which shall be a lien against the respective properties, to wit: a charge equal to the charge paid by Fulton County under the contract for such services. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-72) 
Sec. 70-68. - Basis for payment. 
All sums due Fulton County for garbage service shall be payable on the three-month service basis. The director of public works shall keep complete records and shall notify, by ordinary mail, each property owner of his garbage assessment, but failure to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of the assessment imposed hereby. Payment shall be made not later than 30 days from the billing date for service rendered in the preceding three months. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-74) 
Sec. 70-69. - Past due assessments; interest rate. 
Past due assessments shall bear interest at the rate of interest paid on delinquent property taxes. Whenever any assessment shall remain unpaid for 60 days from the due date, an execution shall be issued therefor in the name of the board of commissioners and signed by the chairman of the board. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-75) 
Sec. 70-70. - Executions against property and owner. 
The execution authorized in section 70-69 shall issue in rem against the property described in the assessment roll, and in personam against the owner thereof, and shall include, in addition to the principal and interest, the sum of $5.00 for the issuance of the same. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-76) 
Sec. 70-71. - Recording of executions. 
Any executions for garbage assessments may be recorded on the general execution docket of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton County and handed to the Sheriff of Fulton County for collection. No such execution shall be discharged unless all garbage assessments shall have been paid in full. Subsequent proceedings had thereon shall be as provided by law for the enforcement of executions for taxes. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-77) 
Sec. 70-72. - Single fieri facias. 
All past due claims of Fulton County against any property or person for garbage assessments shall be included in a single fi. fa., and it shall not be necessary for the public works department to issue separate fi. fa. for each quarter of service rendered, provided nothing herein shall invalidate any fi. fa. rendered for default in the payment of one quarter or any other circumstances, when the same is issued and recorded for the protection of the county's interest or the interest of any other person. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-78) 
Sec. 70-73. - Purpose of assessments. 
Assessments made herein against property within said districts are made for the benefit and service of improved properties, regardless of whether or not such house, residence, building, apartment, tenement, or structure is actually in use or is occupied. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-79) 
Sec. 70-74. - Property relieved from assessment. 
Property may be relieved from assessment upon the following conditions: 
(1)  If the owner certifies that the property is permanently removed from residential use, the assessment will be canceled effective the next quarter, provided notice is given 15 days prior to the beginning of the quarter. 
(2)  Thereafter, the owner may ask for renewed service and it will be furnished, provided he asks for service within 12 months and will pay the full charge from the date the service was canceled. 
(3)  If he asks for service after 12 months, charges will begin at the beginning of the quarter in which service is requested. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-80) 
Sec. 70-75. - Hardship. 
Any person within a tax district created under the provisions of this division who, because of special circumstances, is unable to pay the tax levied therein may be relieved by the county commission from payment of the tax currently due; however, such outstanding tax shall be recorded as a lien against such person's property to be collected not later than the first sale of such property. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-81) 
Secs. 70-76—70-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICES 

Sec. 70-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Collection means the aggregating of solid waste from its principal source and includes all activities up to such time as the solid waste is delivered to the place at which it is processed or disposed. 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment building, roominghouse, business, industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a one- or two-family dwelling unit or condominium. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Construction/demolition waste means discarded building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operation of pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, asbestos-containing waste, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wallboard, paper, cardboard, inert waste, landfill material and other nonputrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final disposition of solid waste occurs, and includes but is not limited to landfill and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. 
Dispose means to discharge, deposit, inject, dump, place or get rid of any solid waste into or on any land or water so that such solid waste or any constituent thereof may enter into the environment to transfer to the control of another. 
Garbage means all household or domestic waste, including waste from the preparation and cooking of food, vegetable, fruit and meat scraps, ashes, cans and bottles, paper, floor sweepings, cardboard and other such material to be disposed of from residents, churches, schools, office buildings, business establishments and similar places. 
Governing authority means Fulton County, its board of commissioners, and where delegated by the board of commissioners, the directors of the Fulton County Department of Public Works and the Fulton County Board of Health. 
Hauling contractor means any person, firm, association, entity or organization who collects, removes or disposes of solid waste, other than his own, whether or not under a written contract and whether or not for compensation. 
Illegal dumping means to dispose of any solid waste in a manner that is not in accordance with this division, state laws and federal regulations, rules and orders. 
Industrial waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations that is not a hazardous waste regulated under the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.). Such wastes include, but are not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: Electric poser generations; fertilizer and agricultural chemicals; food-related products; leather and leather products; nonferrous metal and foundry products; organic chemicals, plastics and resins; pulp and paper; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay and concrete products; textiles; transportation equipment; and water treatment. This term does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. 
Landfill means a method of disposing of solid waste, other than putrescible waste or hazardous wastes, on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Open dump means a disposal facility of which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn or otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment. 
Owner means any person, firm or corporation owning, leasing, renting, occupying, or managing any premises in the jurisdiction of the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County. 
Person means any individual, trust, firm, association, joint-stock company, corporation (including a government corporation), partnership, organization, municipality, commission or county, or any agency, board, department or bureau of this state or any other state or of the federal government. 
Plastic bag means a polyethylene or other heavy duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation Standard of at least 1.5 mils and not exceeding a 30-gallon capacity, with securing twist ties. 
Putrescible waste means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible waste include but are not necessarily limited to kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry wastes, and garbage. 
Recovered material means those materials which have known use, reuse or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recycling means any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Registered contractor means a hauling contractor duly registered by the Fulton County Department of Public Works as having met all criteria necessary to provide solid waste handling in unincorporated Fulton County. 
Residential unit means any freestanding structure or shelter or any part thereof used or constructed for use as a residence for one family. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where putrescible solid wastes are disposed of by means of placing an earth cover thereon and which is approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources for such purposes. 
Solid waste means any garbage, construction/demolition waste, industrial waste, industrial putrescible waste, sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations and community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. 1342; or source, special unclear or byproduct material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, amended (68 Stat. 923). 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposal of solid waste or any combination of such activities. 
Solid waste handling facility means any facility, the primary purpose of which is the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposal, or any combination thereof, of solid waste. Such a facility shall not include one handling the processing of recovered material. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 96-1223, art. IV, 12-4-96; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-82. - Enactment authority. 
The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, Georgia, under the authority of Article 9, Section 2, Paragraphs 1 and III of the Constitution of the State of Georgia (1983) and O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 8, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.), hereby ordains and enacts into law this division. 
(Ord. No. 96-1223, art. I, 12-4-96) 
Sec. 70-83. - Purpose of division. 
The Fulton County Board of Commissioners hereby declares the purposes of this division are to: 
(1)  Establish a uniform, equitable and consistent procedure for regulating the collection and disposal of solid waste in unincorporated Fulton County; 
(2)  Comply with the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.), as amended, including reducing of the amount of solid waste entering landfills by 25 percent and the beneficial reuse of yard trimmings; 
(3)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens and the environment; 
(4)  Establish minimum standards for residential collection of solid waste by hauling contractors; and 
(5)  Prohibit illegal dumping of solid waste in unincorporated Fulton County. 
(Ord. No. 96-1223, art. III, 12-4-96) 
Sec. 70-84. - Scope of division. 
(a)  General. The provisions of this division apply to all persons presently engaged in solid waste handling in unincorporated Fulton County and all hauling contractors doing business or proposing to do business in unincorporated Fulton County. 
(1)  This division shall apply to unincorporated Fulton County only. 
(2)  No person shall engage in solid waste handling except in such manner as to conform to and comply with this division and all applicable Fulton County, state and federal legislation, rules, regulations and orders. 
(3)  No solid waste may be disposed of by any person in an open dump, nor may any person cause, suffer, allow or permit open dumping on his property as defined by the Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, EPD, chapter 391-3-4-04. 
(4)  No owner or occupant shall allow the accumulation of solid waste on premises under his or her control or about his or her residential unit or commercial establishment, where such solid waste creates or may create a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or is unsightly, or emits foul, unpleasant or harmful odors which constitute either a public or private nuisance. 
(5)  It shall be a violation of this division for any person to place or cause to be placed for collection, any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(6)  It shall be a violation of this division to dispose of any solid waste by illegal dumping on public rights-of-way, public parks or any public facilities in unincorporated Fulton County. 
(7)  It shall be a violation of this division to place yard trimmings in or mixed with solid waste. 
(8)  It shall be a violation of this division to place yard trimmings in plastics bags for collection. 
(9)  Neither operation nor application of this division shall be waived, abridged or otherwise limited in scope or effect by any contract between hauling contractors, customers or any other person falling within the jurisdiction of this division; nor shall this division grant, bestow or otherwise guarantee any rights not contained in any such contract, nor expose Fulton County to any liability whatsoever. 
(b)  Persons. All persons shall engage in solid waste handling in unincorporated Fulton County in the manner proscribed in this division. 
(1)  Solid waste handling within unincorporated Fulton County shall be conducted only by hauling contractors duly registered with the Fulton County Department of Public Works, unless otherwise exempt by section 70-85. 
(2)  Failure by a resident to provide evidence (receipts, contracts, canceled checks or other proof of payment) of proper disposal upon request by Fulton County officials shall be a violation of this division, punishable as set forth in section 70-89. 
(c)  Hauling contractors. No person shall collect and/or dispose of solid waste for a fee in unincorporated Fulton County without first obtaining all required permits and registering with the Fulton County Department of Public Works. 
(Ord. No. 96-1223, art. V, 12-4-96) 
Sec. 70-85. - Exemptions from division. 
(a)  Provisions of this division shall not apply to any resident of unincorporated Fulton County disposing of solid waste in a manner that is not conducive to insect and rodent infestation or the harboring and feeding of wild dogs or other animals; impairs the air quality; impairs the quality of the groundwater or surface water; impairs the quality of the environment; or is likely to create other hazards to the public health, safety or wellbeing as may be determined by the director of public works or his or her designee or the director of the Fulton County Board of Health or his/her designee, and the resident is: 
(1)  Disposing of solid waste originating from the resident's primary home onto land or facilities owned by the resident; or 
(2)  Disposing of solid waste by self-hauling directly to a disposal facility or to a commercial establishment owned by the resident. 
(b)  This division shall not apply to any person disposing of livestock feeding facility waste from facilities with a total capacity of up to 1,000 cattle or 5,000 swine. If such person shall provide an approved waste disposal system which is capable of properly disposing of the runoff from a 25-year storm and which complies with the environmental protection division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources solid waste regulations, such person shall be further exempt regardless of total per head capacity. Nothing in this division shall limit the right of any person to use poultry or other animal manure for fertilizer. 
(c)  Composting of yard trimmings is expressly allowed or permitted pursuant to this division. 
(d)  Dead animals shall be disposed of pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 96-1223, art. VI, 12-4-96; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
Sec. 70-86. - Registration and reporting. 
(a)  General. All hauling contractors must meet the minimum requirements annually as are set forth in this division in order to engage in solid waste handling within unincorporated Fulton County. 
(b)  Registration requirements. During any time that hauling contractors are engaging in solid waste handling in unincorporated Fulton County, hauling contractors must have registered with the Fulton County Department of Public Works by obtaining and providing the following terms: 
(1)  EPD permit. A solid waste handling permit from the director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or any successor agency authorized to issue permits pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-24. 
(2)  Fulton County Board of Health Permit. A copy of the permit required by the Fulton County Board of Health pursuant to chapter 34 of this Code and the Fulton County Board of Health Rules and Regulations. 
(3)  Insurance. Provide to the Fulton County Department of Public Works proof of insurance as follows: 
a.  Comprehensive general liability insurance: $500,000.00. 
b.  Vehicle liability: 
1.  $500,000.00 limit per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
2.  Comprehensive covering all owned, nonowned and hired vehicles. 
3.  All insurance contracts must specify vehicles for solid waste collection. 
c.  Umbrella liability insurance coverage with a broad primary coverage in an amount of $1,000,000.00. 
All comprehensive general liability, vehicle liability and umbrella liability policies shall be maintained and shall remain effective for the full duration of registration. 
(4)  Performance bond. All hauling contractors shall, prior to engaging in solid waste handling in unincorporated Fulton County, post with the department of public works a performance bond in the amount of $10,000.00. Alternatively, hauling contractors may provide an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of $10,000.00 in lieu of bond. 
(5)  Indemnification. Registered contractors shall certify to Fulton County by duly notarized letter that it will, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the county, its officers, boards, commissioners, employees and agents against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments from third parties, its affiliates, its subsidiaries or agents, including subcontractors for damages which may be the result of willful, negligent or tortious conduct or operations arising out of the business of collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste, whether or not the action or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this division or is covered by insurance or a performance bond. 
(c)  Reporting requirements. Within 30 days following the close of each quarter of operation, registered contractors shall submit to the director of the department of public works or his or her designee for reporting to the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, reports of operation showing the following for unincorporated portions of Fulton County: 
(1)  Tonnage figures showing total solid waste tonnage collected for household garbage and trash; and 
(2)  Documentation showing that yard trimmings and recyclables collected are being processed as recovered material. 
(Ord. No. 96-1223, art. VII, 12-4-96; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
Sec. 70-87. - Service requirements. 
(a)  Residential services. All registered contractors for solid waste handling shall provide the minimum following services: 
(1)  Weekly curbside collection of solid waste. 
(2)  At least once every other week curbside recycling, including container, and yard trimmings collection. Handling of yard trimmings in unincorporated Fulton County shall be carried out in accordance with the following restrictions: 
a.  Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with solid waste. 
b.  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of in solid waste disposal facilities that have liners and leachate collection systems or that require vertical expansion. 
c.  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored for collection in a manner that facilitates collection, composting or other lawful handling. Collection of yard trimmings in plastic bags is prohibited. 
d.  Upon collection, yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled until they are recycled ultimately by chipping, mulching, composting or other beneficial use. 
e.  Landfill disposal of yard trimmings is prohibited. 
(3)  Inoperative, privately used, worn out household appliances (e.g., refrigerators, stoves, air conditioning units, washing machines, dryers) and discarded furniture shall be collected at the curbside as needed by the registered contractor, at an agreed-upon fee between the registered contractor and the customer. 
(4)  Nothing in this division is intended to prohibit the registered contractor from offering discounts or additional services to senior citizens 65 years or older or the disabled. 
(5)  Nothing in this division shall prevent customers from contracting with registered contractors for additional services. 
(6)  Registered contractors are encouraged to offer incentive-based pricing in order to increase participation in curbside recycling. 
(b)  Commercial services. Hauling contractors performing commercial services are subject to the same requirements of solid waste registration under section 70-86 as hauling contractors perform residential services. However, when hauling contractors are engaged in the performance of commercial services, they are not required to comply with the minimum standards set forth in subsection (a) of this section, nor the bonding requirements of subsection 70-86(b)(4). 
(c)  List of registered contractors. A list of all current registered contractors will be available for public inspection in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners and in the department of public works at all times. 
(Ord. No. 96-1223, art. VIII, 12-4-96; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
Sec. 70-88. - Termination/revocation of registration and/or permits. 
(a)  General. Registration may be terminated by mutual agreement of Fulton County and the registered contractor. Registered contractors shall terminate registration by giving 30 days' notice to the director of the department of public works as well as its customers prior to such termination. 
(b)  The director of public works. The director of public works shall notify the registered contractor of violations of this division. If the registered contractor fails to comply with any of the provisions of this division within seven days of notification, or at the discretion of the director of the department of public works, a hearing shall be held before the director of public works, with the registered contractor being notified in writing of the time and place of the hearing and the violation of this division which has not been corrected. The registered contractor shall be given the opportunity to appear by representative or counsel to answer any such charge by the director of public works or his/her designee. Should the director of public works determine that any of the provisions of this division have been violated by the registered contractor, the director of public works shall have at his/her discretion, after the findings of the hearing, the right to render a decision revoking registration or provide for probation of the registered contractor within seven days of the decision of the director of public works. The registered contractor shall have the right to appeal in writing the decision of the director of public works to the county manager or his/her designee within seven days of the decision of the director of public works. A hearing shall be held by the county manager. The decision of the director of public works shall be held in abeyance pending the final decision of the county manager. After such hearing, the decision of the county manager shall be final. At the discretion of the county manager, the registered contractor shall be deemed to have forfeited his/her performance bond. The director of public works shall be instructed to proceed with calling the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to remedy the violations of this division as he/she deems fit. 
(Ord. No. 96-1223, art. IX, 12-4-96; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
Sec. 70-89. - Penalties for violation of division. 
(a)  In addition to the provisions of section 70-88, any person violating any provision of this division may be fined up to $500.00 per violation after a hearing in the Fulton County Environmental Court or Magistrate Court. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(b)  Fulton County, upon violation of the provisions of this division, shall be entitled to take such remedial action to ensure compliance, and any person convicted shall reimburse Fulton County for any cost or expense associated with compliance efforts, and Fulton County shall be entitled to place a lien on the property to secure payment and reimbursement for these expenses. 
(c)  Any hauling contractor who is found to have violated any of the provisions of this division by the Fulton County Environmental Court or Magistrate Court shall be subject to the same penalties in this section and may also be restrained from operating as a registered contractor and a civil action may be filed by the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 96-1223, art. X, 12-4-96; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
State Law reference— Maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b). 
Sec. 70-90. - Enforcement of division. 
(a)  Violations of any provisions of this division shall be reported initially to the director of the department of public works or his or her designee, who is charged with the administration of all sections of this division. 
(b)  The provisions of this division regarding the issuance of health department permits shall be enforced by the Fulton County Board of Health. 
(c)  The provisions of this division regarding solid waste handling shall be enforced by the Fulton County Department of Public Works with assistance as needed from the Fulton County Police Department and the Fulton County Board of Health. 
(d)  The provisions of this division regarding application for and termination of registration shall be enforced by the department of public works. 
(e)  The provisions of this division regarding the disposal or onsite burial of solid waste shall be enforced by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division of the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 96-1223, art. XI, 12-4-96; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
Sec. 70-91. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this division is declared or adjudged unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase which shall remain in full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 96-1223, art. XII, 12-4-96; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
Sec. 70-92. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions in direct conflict with this division are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 96-1223, art. XIII, 12-4-96; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
Sec. 70-93. - Liability. 
Neither the approval or granting of registration under the provisions of this division, nor the compliance with the provisions of this division shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the governing authority for damage to any person or property. 
(Ord. No. 96-1223, art. XIV, 12-4-96; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
Sec. 70-94. - Board of health rules and regulations. 
The Fulton County Board of Health Rules and Regulations for Solid Waste are incorporated into this division by reference. 
(Ord. No. 96-1223, art. XV, 12-4-96; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, adopted May 16, 2018, changed the title of § 70-94 from "health department rules" to "board of health rules and regulations." 
FULTON COUNTY 
SOLID WASTE/RECYCLABLES VOLUME REPORTS  FOR PERIOD OF ___________ TO ___________ 

 
TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN: 
The bearer of this letter, ___________ d.b.a., ___________ with a business address of ___________ having met the registration requirements of section 70-86 of the Code of Ordinances of Fulton County, Georgia, i.e., solid waste handling permit, by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division and permitted by the Fulton County Health Department, is hereby duly registered as a solid waste hauling contractor for unincorporated Fulton County as long as there is continued conformance with the requirements of chapter 78, article II, division 3 of the Code of Ordinances of Fulton County, Georgia. 
Sincerely, 
Andrew Jenkins 
Director of Public Works 
Secs. 70-95—70-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SANITARY LANDFILLS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Landfills, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-24 et seq. 

Sec. 70-106. - Violations of article; misdemeanor. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, take all necessary action to correct the violation and shall permanently cease such violations. 
(b)  Any person who intentionally violates any provision of this article and who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for the satisfactory correction thereof, and any person who fails to cease all work after a stop order has been issued on a project shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day in which a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be punished in the manner prescribed by law for misdemeanors, and shall further reimburse the county for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the county by reason of such violation. 
(d)  Persons designated by the director of public works and/or the director of inspections and permits are hereby authorized to issue citations or summonses, or both, charging violations under this article, returnable to the State Court of Fulton County, or to any other court having the jurisdiction of a commitment court throughout the entire county, for trial. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-96) 
State Law reference— Punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b). 
Sec. 70-107. - Posting of article provisions. 
Copies of this article shall be posted in a conspicuous manner on every Fulton County Sanitary Landfill Site to which this article shall apply. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-97) 
Sec. 70-108. - Trespassing. 
No person shall knowingly and without authority enter upon the land or premises, now or in the future, designed as a sanitary landfill site without the express permission of the director of public works or his delegate; nor shall any person knowingly and without authority remain upon the land or premises, now or in the future, designed as a sanitary landfill site, after the permission of the director of the department of public works or his delegate has been withdrawn. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-91) 
State Law reference— Trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 70-109. - Scavenging. 
No person shall knowingly and without authority remove any material from the land or premises now or in the future designed as a sanitary landfill site including, but not limited to, material constituting residential and commercial solid waste, trash, tin cans, glass bottles, garbage, rubbish, discarded materials, sand, gravel, slag, or other refuse. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-92) 
Sec. 70-110. - Unauthorized burning. 
No person shall knowingly and without authority, by means of fire or explosive, cause any burning of any material including, but not limited to, those materials described in section 70-109 on the land or premises now or in the future designated as a sanitary landfill site; nor shall any person knowingly or without authority start or maintain any fire or other burning on the land or premises now or in the future designated as a sanitary landfill site. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-93) 
Sec. 70-111. - Moving equipment. 
No person shall knowingly and without authority employ any means to move or relocate or otherwise cause any transportation of any heavy equipment or machinery including, but not limited to, trucks, bulldozers, graders, or other motorized vehicles located on the land or premises, now or in the future, designated as a sanitary landfill site. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-94) 
Sec. 70-112. - Fees. 
Fees for the disposal of garbage and refuse at the county landfills shall be as fixed from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-95) 
Chapter 74 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverage excise taxes, § 6-36 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18; finance, § 102-251 et seq.; resolutions pertaining to taxation, ch. 170. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Taxation, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1—74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - METROPOLITAN ATLANTA RAPID TRANSIT SALES AND USE TAX 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-31. - Authority of article. 
This article is enacted by Fulton County, Georgia (the county), pursuant to the authority granted to the county under the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority Act of 1965, as amended (the act). 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. I), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-32. - Short title of article. 
This article shall be known as the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Sales and Use Tax Resolution. The tax levied by this resolution shall be known as the rapid transit sales and use tax. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. I, § 1), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-33. - Purpose and levy of tax. 
The county has entered into a rapid transit contract and assistance agreement with DeKalb County, Georgia (DeKalb), and the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (authority) as of September 1, 1971, that has become final and binding upon the county by compliance with the provisions of section 24 of the act and approval of the voters as therein required, (as amended, the rapid transit contract). Pursuant to the authority of section 25 of the act, this tax is hereby levied and imposed as a retail sales and use tax upon the retail purchase, retail sale, rental, storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property, and the services described and set forth in the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act (Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act), in 1951 Ga. Laws, page 360, as amended, which is now codified as O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8, art. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq.), and as it may be from time to time amended, except as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-625(a), and except as otherwise provided by law, on sales, uses and services rendered, in the geographical area governed by the county. Each transaction in the geographic area of the county which (1) is subject to the tax levied by the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act; or (2) involves the retail sale, rental, storage, or consumption of motor fuel as described below; or (3) may otherwise by law be subject to the rapid transit sales and use tax, shall be subject to the rapid transit sales and use tax. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. I, § 2), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-34. - Rate. 
This tax is levied at the rate of one percent for the period from April 1, 1972, until June 30, 2032, or such other later date as may be provided from time to time by section 25(b) of the act, and shall thereafter be reduced to one-half of one percent. As required by 1971 Ga. Laws, pages 2082—2092, said tax shall be added to and collected with the sales and use tax imposed by the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act, and the state revenue commissioner, pursuant to that act, is hereby authorized and directed to establish a bracket system by appropriate rules and regulations to collect the tax herein imposed by the county, provided that the tax levied upon the transactions described in section 74-33(2) and (3) shall be administered and collected by the state revenue commissioner in the same manner as the sales and use tax collected pursuant to the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. I, § 3), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-35. - Motor fuel. 
The rapid transit sales and use tax hereby levied shall apply, any law to the contrary notwithstanding, to the retail sale, rental, storage, use, or consumption of motor fuel as the term "motor fuel" is defined by O.C.G.A. § 48-9-2(9). 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. I, § 4), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-36. - Other transactions. 
The rapid transit sales and use tax hereby levied shall apply to any transaction that may now or hereafter be subject by law to the rapid transit sales and use tax. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. I, § 5), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-37. - Use of proceeds. 
The proceeds of the tax levied pursuant to this article shall be used solely by the county to fulfill the obligations incurred in the rapid transit contract entered into with the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. I, § 6), 7-3-91) 
Secs. 74-38—74-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 74-71. - Collection procedures. 
The tax levied by this article shall be collected and administered in accordance with 1971 Ga. Laws, pages 2082—2092, as amended. The retail sales and use tax shall be administered and collected solely by the state revenue commissioner in the same manner and subject to the same penalties provided for in the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act. No variance shall be permitted between the Georgia sales and use tax and the rapid transit sales and use tax, except as to rate, except as provided in section 25(a) of the act, and except as may be otherwise provided by law. The vendor's responsibility shall be to the state revenue commissioner and not to the county. The county shall not make sales tax audits. Dealers shall be allowed a percentage of the amount of the tax due and accounted for pursuant to this article and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be at the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act, as now or hereafter amended. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. II, § 1), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-72. - Special fund. 
All sales and use tax monies collected by the state revenue commissioner under this article shall be paid to the director of the fiscal division of the department of administrative services to the credit of a special fund which is on the books of the fiscal division of the department of administrative services under the name "Collection of Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority Taxes," and such sales and use tax monies shall be credited to the account of the county. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. II, § 2), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-73. - Distribution of funds. 
As soon as practicable after the rapid transit sales and use tax monies collected under this article have been paid into the state treasury, in any month for the preceding month, the director of the fiscal division of the department of administrative services shall draw his warrant on the state treasury in the proper amount due the county in favor of the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (authority), which payment the authority shall credit to the county in the appropriate amount and which payment shall be charged to the account of the county under the special fund described above in section 74-72. Any errors made in any such payments or any adjustments otherwise necessary, whether attributable to refunds to taxpayers or by some other fact, shall be corrected, and adjustments shall be made in such payments for the next month or subsequent months. The amount due the county shall be reduced by the amount of costs incurred by the department of revenue in the administration and collection of the rapid transit sales and use tax. The amount of costs of the department shall be certified by the state revenue commissioner to the director of the fiscal division of the department of administrative services who shall deduct such amount from the amount due to the county. The amount deducted shall be deposited by the director of the fiscal division of the department of administrative services in the state treasury to the credit of the general fund. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. II, § 3), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-74. - Rules and regulations. 
The state revenue commissioner shall have the power to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws, or the Constitutions of the State of Georgia or of the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of revenues hereunder. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. II, § 4), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-75. - Forms. 
The state revenue commissioner shall utilize the forms used for returns and for the payment of taxes pursuant to the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act and for the payment of the tax on motor fuel, and shall add appropriate forms for the use of those persons with the responsibility of collecting the tax levied pursuant to this article. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. II, § 5), 7-3-91) 
Secs. 74-76—74-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INCORPORATION OF STATE SALES AND USE TAX ACT 

Sec. 74-106. - Incorporation. 
Pursuant to the authority granted in section 25 of the act, the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act (codified as O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8, art. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq.)), as amended, and as it may be from time to time amended, subject to section 74-71 hereinabove, is incorporated herein, made a part hereof, and reenacted as a part of this article, insofar as it may apply to the collection, administration, and disposition of the tax authorized by the General Assembly of Georgia in 1971 Ga. Laws, pages 2082—2092, as amended. Such portions of said Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act which are inconsistent with or specifically do not apply to the collection of the rapid transit sales and use tax are hereby excluded from incorporation. The Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act is further limited and changed as specifically set forth in this article so as to define the imposition, administration and operation of the said Georgia Act as it applies to the collection of the rapid transit sales and use tax in this or other counties which are now or may later join in the imposition of this tax. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. II, § 1), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-107. - Amendments. 
All amendments to the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act subsequent to the date of the enactment of this article which are not inconsistent with the provisions and intent of this article shall automatically be incorporated in and become a part of this article. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. II, § 2), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-108. - Substitutions and limitations to the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act. 
(a)  Rate. Except where the rapid transit sales and use tax is added to the tax imposed by the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act for the purposes of establishing a bracket system, or for similar purposes of combining the two taxes, wherever a rate is set forth in the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act, there shall be substituted therefor a rate which shall be equal to one percent until June 30, 2032, or such later date as may be provided from time to time by section 25(b) of the act, and thereafter the rate shall be equal to one-half of one percent. 
(b)  Taxing district. Wherever the terms "state" or "State of Georgia" appear in the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act, where such terms are used to define the taxing agency, taxing district or the taxing boundaries, the term "county" shall be substituted therefor in order to define the area in which this tax is imposed. Where the terms "state," "State of Georgia," or "Georgia" shall appear with reference to portions of that act other than specified above, no substitution shall be made, unless the resulting interpretation would be clearly contrary to the intent expressed in this article. 
(c)  Coverage of the tax. In addition to those transactions to be taxed under the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act, the rapid transit sales and use tax shall (as provided in section 25 of the act) apply to the retail sale, rental, storage, use, or consumption of motor fuel as the term "motor fuel" is defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-9-2(9), just as if said retail sale, rental, storage, use, or consumption of motor fuel were subject to the tax imposed by the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act, and the rapid transit sales and use tax shall apply to such other transactions that may otherwise by law be subject to the rapid transit sales and use tax. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. II, § 3), 7-3-91) 
Secs. 74-109—74-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 74-141. - Effective date. 
The effective date of the tax authorized by this article shall be April 1, 1972, provided that with respect to services which are regularly billed on a monthly basis, the tax shall become effective with the first regular billing period coinciding with or following the effective date of the tax as herein specified. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. IV, § 1), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-142. - Application to contracts existing at time of enactment. 
The tax imposed under this article shall not apply to sales of goods made pursuant to bona fide written contracts entered into before the date of the enactment of this article, provided delivery is completed prior to April 1, 1972; or to the purchase price of any building supplies, fixtures, or equipment that enter into or become a part of a building or other kind of structure in this county, where plans, specifications, and a construction contract for a specific project have been entered into prior to the date of the enactment of this article, provided delivery is completed prior to April 1, 1972. The provisions of this section shall supersede and replace the provisions of section 3403aC.(2)(e) of the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Act. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. IV, § 2), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-143. - Tax credit. 
The tax imposed under this article shall not apply in respect to the use, consumption, distribution, or storage of tangible personal property for use or consumption in this county upon which a rapid transit sales and use tax equal to or greater than the amount imposed by or under this article has been paid in another county or municipality, the proof of payment of such tax to be according to rules and regulations made by the state revenue commissioner. If the amount of tax paid to another county or municipality is not equal to or greater than the amount of tax imposed under this article, then the dealer shall pay an amount sufficient to make the tax paid in the other county or municipality and in the county equal to the tax imposed under this article. No credit shall be given under this section for taxes paid in another county or municipality if that county or municipality does not grant a like credit for taxes paid in the county. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. IV, § 3), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-144. - Notice to Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority of dealer-purchaser litigation. 
Where suit is filed between the dealer and purchaser or consumer as described in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-8-35, 48-8-41, and where the issue of taxability is raised in any such case, the person who raised such issue shall furnish the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority a copy of the initial pleading wherein such issue is raised, receipt of which shall be acknowledged by the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority, and such acknowledgement filed in the court wherein such case is pending. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. IV, § 4), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-145. - Intercounty transactions. 
(a)  The rapid transit sales and use tax imposed by this article is also levied in the geographic area of DeKalb County, Georgia (DeKalb), and may hereafter be levied in the Counties of Clayton, Gwinnett, and Cobb if they satisfy the requirements of the act and become a party to the rapid transit contract dated as of September 1, 1971, between the authority, Fulton, and the county. For the purposes of this article, the rapid transit sales and use tax is a retail sales and use tax upon the retail purchase, retail sale, rental, storage, use, or consumption of tangible personal property and the services described and set forth in 1951 Ga. Laws, page 360 (now codified as O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8, art. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq.)), as now or hereafter amended, and upon the retail sale, rental, storage, use, or consumption of motor fuel as the term "motor fuel" is defined by O.C.G.A. § 48-9-2(9), and upon such other transactions which may otherwise be subject by law to the rapid transit sales and use tax, on sales, uses, and services rendered in the geographic area governed by this county: 
(1)  The rapid transit sales and use tax is deemed to be a point of sale tax pursuant to which all retail sales are, regardless of the residence of the purchaser and place of delivery, consummated at the place of business of the retailer. 
(2)  All retail sales of goods and services by retailers located in the county to persons in the county or in any other county levying a rapid transit sales and use tax are taxable. 
(3)  All retail sales of goods and services by retailers located in the county to persons outside of the county and any other county levying a rapid transit sales and use tax are taxable; provided, however, that no rapid transit sales and use tax shall be imposed upon the sale of tangible personal property which is ordered by and delivered to the purchaser at a point outside the geographical area governed by any of the local governments imposing the tax, regardless of the point at which title passes, if such delivery is made by the seller's vehicle, U.S. mail, common carrier, or by private or contract carrier licensed by the Interstate Commerce Commission or the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(4)  All goods and services purchased by persons resident in this county or in any other county levying a rapid transit sales and use tax, said sales being made by a retailer outside of this county or any other county levying a rapid transit sales and use tax, are subject to a use tax, and said use tax shall be collected by the retailer who shall remit such tax to the state revenue department. 
(5)  All sales of goods and services made to a resident of this county or in any other county levying a rapid transit sales and use tax by retailers out of the State of Georgia are taxable to the same extent said transactions are taxable under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act. 
(6)  All sales made by retailers in this county or in any other county levying a rapid transit sales and use tax where the tangible personal property or services are delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out of state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to out of state destinations are taxable only to the extent such services are taxable under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, are otherwise taxable in accordance with section 25(a) of the act, or may otherwise by law be subject to the rapid transit sales and use tax. 
(b)  The basis for credit to the account of a local government when a sale involves two or more areas subject to the rapid transit sales and use tax, shall be the point of sale. The rapid transit sales and use tax shall not be due on any tangible personal property or services the point of sale of which has already created liability for the rapid transit sales and use tax. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations made and published by the state revenue commissioner. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. IV, § 5), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-146. - Penalties and interest. 
All penalties and interest collected under the provisions of this article on sales and use tax assessments shall be prorated between the state and the county on such basis as may be prescribed by the state revenue commissioner. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. IV, § 6), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-147. - Act and article as contracts. 
The act and this article constitute contracts with the holders of revenue bonds issued under the act, as declared in section 10(q) of the act, and said contracts are made in part for the purpose of securing and inducing investors to buy the revenue bonds of the authority, and the provisions of the federal and Georgia Constitutions prohibiting the passage of laws impairing the obligations of contracts protect the rights and security of the holders of such bonds under such contracts from impairment by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia or by the county. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. IV, § 7), 7-3-91) 
Sec. 74-148. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this article, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional was not originally a part hereof. The county hereby declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this article if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(91-RM-294, § 5(art. IV, § 8), 7-3-91) 
Secs. 74-149—74-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL/MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County hotel/motel occupancy tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 74-181. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases are for the purpose of this article, and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as follows: 
County means Fulton County, Georgia. 
Director of finance means the director of the department of finance of Fulton County, Georgia or the director's designee. 
Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed, for occupancy, by one or more occupants. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, auto court, inn, public club, or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention, or other buildings in which human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in Fulton County, Georgia, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, subleasee, mortgage in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy, of any guestroom in a hotel for at least thirty consecutive days. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or other group or combination acting as a unit excepting the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the county is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction there from whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1983, § 33-6-1; Res. No. 06-0472, 5-3-06; Res. No. 10-0895, 9-15-10) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-182. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
(a)  There shall be paid a tax of three percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in Fulton County. The tax imposed by this article shall be paid upon any occupancy on and after May 1, 1975, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease, or other arrangement made prior to such date. Where rent is paid, or charged or billed, or falls due on either a weekly, monthly, or other term basis, the rent so paid, charged, billed, or falling due shall be subject to the tax herein imposed to the extent that it covers any portion of the period from May 1, 1975; and such payment, bill, charge, or rent due shall be apportioned on the basis of the ratio of the number of days covered thereby. Where any tax has been paid therefore, the director of finance may, by regulation, provide for credit or refund of the amount of such tax upon application therefore as provided in section 74-187 of this article. 
(b)  For one continuous three-year period commencing on June 1, 1987, the tax payable under this section shall be six percent, and an amount equal to at least 60 percent of the total taxes collected under this section shall be expended for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  Promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows; 
(2)  Supporting a facility owned or operated by a state authority for convention and trade show purposes, or any other similar or related purposes; 
(3)  Supporting a facility owned or operated by a local authority or local government for convention and trade show purposes, or any other similar or related purposes, if such facility is substantially completed and in operation prior to July 1, 1987; 
(4)  Supporting a facility owned or operated by a local government or local authority for convention and trade show purposes, or any other similar or related purposes, if the construction of such facility is funded or was funded in whole or in part by a grant of state funds; or 
(5)  For some combination of such purposes. Amounts so expended shall be expended only through a contract or contracts with the state, a department of state government, a state authority, or a private sector nonprofit organization, or through a contract or contracts with some combination of such entities, except that amounts expended for the purposes described in subsections (b)(3) and (b)(5) of this section may be so expended in any otherwise lawful manner. 
(c)  From and after June 1, 1990, the tax payable under this section shall be five percent; and an amount equal to the amount by which the total tax is collected exceeds the taxes which would be collected at a rate of three percent shall be expended for one or more of the purposes set forth in subsections (b)(1)—(5) of this section. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, a "private sector nonprofit organization" may be a chamber of commerce, a convention and visitor's bureau, a regional travel association, or any other private group organized for similar purposes which is qualified as a nonprofit organization for federal income tax purposes under the Federal Internal Revenue Code. 
(Code 1983, § 33-6-2; Res. No. 06-0472, 5-3-06) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
Sec. 74-183. - Persons liable for tax; extinguishment of liability. 
Every person occupying a guestroom in a hotel in this county is liable for the tax. The liability is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to Fulton County except that a receipt from an operator maintaining a place of business in this county or from an operator who is authorized by the director of finance under such rules and regulations as he may prescribe, to collect the tax and who is, for the purposes of this article, regarded as an operator maintaining a place of business in this county, which receipt is given to the occupant pursuant to section 74-186 hereof, is sufficient to relieve the occupant from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers. 
(Code 1983, § 33-6-3; Res. No. 06-0472, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 74-184. - Collection of tax by operator; receipt to occupant; rules for collection schedules. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in the county as provided in section 74-183, and renting guestrooms in the county, not exempted under section 74-186 of this article shall, at the time of collecting the rent from the occupant and on demand shall, give the occupant a receipt therefore. In all cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable therefore at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The board of commissioners shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax. 
(Code 1983, § 33-6-4; Res. No. 06-0472, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 74-185. - Unlawful advertising regarding tax. 
It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any guest directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rental of the guestroom, or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
(Code 1983, § 33-6-5; Res. No. 06-0472, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 74-186. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed hereunder: 
(1)  Upon a permanent resident. 
(2)  Upon a corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, or educational purposes, or for one or more such purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
(Code 1983, § 33-6-6; Res. No. 06-0472, 5-3-06) 
State Law reference— Exemptions from tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
Sec. 74-187. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
(a)  Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the county shall immediately register with the director of finance of the county, on a form provided by said officer. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 15 days after the date such tax becomes effective and is imposed as set forth in section 74-182, but such privilege or registration after the imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business, and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the director of finance may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of a corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. The director of finance shall, within ten days after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of such registrant. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificate shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the director of finance upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. 
(b)  If the director of finance deems it necessary in order to facilitate initial registration hereunder of persons engaged in business or prior to the date of imposition of tax as set forth on this article, he may prescribe provisions therefore other than those provided in this section. Such provisions shall be made to effect the purpose hereof. For such purposes, such provisions shall be in lieu of those provided herein. Such registration and the certificate thereof shall have the same effect as that provided herein. 
(Code 1983, § 33-6-7; Res. No. 06-0472, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 74-188. - Determinations, returns, and payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. The tax imposed by this article shall become due and payable from the occupant at the time of occupancy of any hotel in this county. All amounts of such taxes collected by any operator shall be due and payable to the Tax Commissioner of Fulton County monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period as set forth in section 74-186. 
(b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; execution. On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the tax commissioner in such form as the commissioner may prescribe, by every operator, liable for the payment of tax hereunder. 
(c)  Contents of return. All returns shall show the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as required by the tax commissioner. 
(d)  Delivery of return and remittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due to the tax commissioner at Fulton County Administration Building, Atlanta, Georgia 30303. 
(e)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and paying the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8, art. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq.), the Georgia Retailers and Consumers Sales and Use Tax Act, as now or hereafter amended. 
(f)  Extension of time for filing a return and paying tax. For a good cause, the tax commissioner may extend but not to exceed one month, the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension of time may be granted. Any person to whom an extension of time has been granted, who makes a return and pays the tax within the period of extension shall pay in addition to the tax, interest on the amount thereof at the rate of three-quarters of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, for a period of such extension to the time of return and payment. 
(Code 1983, § 33-6-8; Res. No. 06-0472, 5-3-06) 
State Law reference— Commission for collection of tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52. 
Sec. 74-189. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the director of finance is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the county by any person, the director of finance may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the director of finance's possession or that may come into the director of finance's possession. One or more than one deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more than one period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent per month, or fraction thereof from the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the day of payment. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the director of finance may offset overpayments for a period or periods against underpayments for another period or periods, against penalties, and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in section 74-190(c). 
(d)  Penalty; negligence or disregard of rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to negligence or disregard of this chapter or other rules and regulations, a penalty of 15 percent of the amount of such deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made due to fraud or an intent to evade any provisions of this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(f)  Notice of director of finance's determination; service of. The director of finance or a designated representative thereof shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, service shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 9-11-4 and shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the director of finance. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this chapter the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States post office. 
(g)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article, or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Code 1983, § 33-6-9; Res. No. 06-0472, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 74-190. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in the director of finance's possession or may come into his possession. Upon the basis of this estimate, the director of finance shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the county adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or for more than one period. 
(b)  Manner of computation; offsets; interest. In making a determination the director of finance may offset overpayments for a period or penalties against the interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in this section. 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the twentieth day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the day of payment. 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this chapter or rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the person, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in addition to the 15 percent penalty provided in section 74-191. 
(e)  Giving of notice; manner of service. Promptly after making his determination, the director of finance shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Code 1983, § 33-6-10; Res. No. 06-0472, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 74-191. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay tax. 
Any person who fails to pay any tax to the county or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the county within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in section 74-190(c). 
(Code 1983, § 33-6-11; Res. No. 06-0472, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 74-192. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Security; director of finance may exact; amount; sale of; notice of sale; return of surplus. The director of finance, whenever he deems it necessary to ensure compliance with this article, may require any person subject thereto to deposit with him such security as the director of finance may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the director of finance, but shall not be greater than twice the persons' estimated average liability for the period for which he files returns, determined in such a manner as the director of finance commissioner deems proper, or $10,000.00, whichever amount is the lesser. The amount of the security may be increased by the director of finance subject to the limitations herein provided. The director of finance may sell the security at public auction, with the approval of the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, if it becomes necessary to do so in order to recover any tax or any amount required to be collected, interest or penalty due. Notice of the sale may be served upon the person who deposited the security personally or by mail; if by mail, service shall be made in the manner prescribed for service of a notice of a deficiency determination, and shall be addressed to the person at his address as it appears in the records of the director of finance. Upon any sale, any surplus above the amounts due shall be returned to the person who deposited the security. 
(b)  Notice of delinquency to persons holding, credits or property of delinquent; time for; duty of persons so notified. If any person is delinquent in the payment of the amount required to be paid by him, or in the event a determination has been made against him which remains unpaid, the director of finance may, not later than three years after the payment became delinquent, give notice thereof by registered mail to all persons in the county having in their possession or under their control any creditors or other personal property belonging to the delinquent, or owing any debts to the delinquent. After receiving the notice, the persons so notified shall neither transfer nor make any other disposition of the credits, other personal property, or debts in their possession or under their control at the time they receive the notice until the director of finance consents to a transfer or disposition or until 20 days elapse after the receipt of the notice. All persons so notified shall within five days after receipt of the notice advise the director of finance of all such credits, other personal property, or debts in their possession, under their control or owing by them. 
(c)  Action for tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the director of finance may bring an action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the county to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(d)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the director of finance showing that he has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(e)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the purchase price as required, he becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the director of finance shall either issue the certificate or mail a notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the director of finance of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the director of finance to mail the notice will release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold the purchase price as above provided. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells out his business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs the later. 
(f)  Refund of tax, penalty, or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the county under this article, it may be refunded, provided a verified claim in writing therefore, stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the director of finance within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be audited and shall be made on forms provided by the director of finance. If the claim is approved by the director of finance, the county manager, and the board of commissioners, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person from whom it was collected or by whom paid and the balance may be refunded to such person, his administrators, or executors. 
(Code 1983, § 33-6-12; Res. No. 06-0472, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 74-193. - Administration of article. 
(a)  Authority of director of finance. The director of finance shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the imposition of the Hotel/Motel Occupancy Tax. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The director of finance shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of Fulton County and the State of Georgia, or the constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Records required from operators; form. Every operator renting guestrooms in the county shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the director of finance may require. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The director of finance or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any person renting guestrooms and any person liable for the tax and may investigate the character of the business of the person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the person, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the tax, the director of finance may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in his or their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the director of finance when the director of finance requires and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the director of finance may require. 
(f)  Disclosure of business operators; limitation on rule. The director of finance or any person having an administrative duty under this article shall not make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any operator of any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, or expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this article. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Code 1983, § 33-6-13; Res. No. 06-0472, 5-3-06) 
Secs. 74-194—74-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOBILE HOMES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq.; classification of mobile homes as a separate class of property for ad valorem property tax purposes, Ga. Const. art. VII, § I, ¶ III. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-226. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mobile home means a mobile home as defined in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-131; provided, however, that those mobile homes which qualify the taxpayer for homestead exemption under Georgia law shall not be considered mobile homes and subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 26-2-31) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-227. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall do any act prohibited hereby or shall fail to do any act required hereby shall be deemed to be guilty of a violation hereof and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-183. Each separate day's violation shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(Code 1983, § 26-2-43) 
State Law reference— Meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3. 
Secs. 74-228—74-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOCATION OR RELOCATION PERMIT AND DECAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Issuance of mobile home location permits; display of decals, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492. 

Sec. 74-256. - Application for decal. 
Before any person shall locate or relocate a mobile home within the limits of this county, he shall apply for and obtain from the Tax Commissioner of Fulton County, a decal authorizing such location or relocation if the mobile home is to be used as a residence by the owner thereof, as a residence for others, or for any other purpose. 
(Code 1983, § 26-2-32) 
Sec. 74-257. - Relocation without current year location permit. 
The owner of a mobile home used as a residence which is located within the limits of this county may not be relocated within the confines of the county or beyond such confines without first obtaining a current year location permit from the aforesaid tax commissioner. 
(Code 1983, § 26-2-33) 
Sec. 74-258. - Payment of taxes required prior to issuance of permit. 
It shall be a condition precedent of issuance of any permit required by this article that the owner of said mobile home shall submit to the aforesaid tax commissioner proof that all state and county taxes theretofore accruing and payable with respect to such mobile home have in fact been paid; and, if the mobile home which is to be located or relocated is then located within any portion of the county that lies within the limits of a municipality therein, the owner shall likewise submit proof that all applicable municipal taxes have been paid before a permit may be issued. 
(Code 1983, § 26-2-34) 
Sec. 74-259. - Requirements for decal. 
Any owner of a mobile home who has made application for the location or relocation of a mobile home and whose application meets qualifications as set out by this county as it pertains to mobile homes shall be issued a mobile home decal. The decal to be issued for location of a mobile home within the county shall be the same color as prescribed by state law and shall be affixed to the mobile home in such a manner as to cause it to be easily visible for inspection at all times it is being used as a residence within the confines of this county. 
(Code 1983, § 26-2-35) 
Sec. 74-260. - Relocation to another county; notification required. 
Whenever a permit authorizing the relocation of a mobile home is issued and that mobile home is to be relocated within the confines of another county in this state, the Tax Commissioner of Fulton County shall notify the tax commissioner of the other county of the date of the issuance of the permit. 
(Code 1983, § 26-2-36) 
Sec. 74-261. - Application for location decal. 
Each year every owner of a mobile home subject to taxation under the provisions of this article shall, on or before April 1, make application to the tax commissioner for a mobile home location decal and, upon payment of or proof of payment of taxes, as provided, shall be issued a location decal. Any mobile homes which are tax exempt under existing Georgia law for the year stated will furnish any proof as required to establish the tax exempt status of said mobile homes and shall be issued a location decal. The issuance of said decal by the tax commissioner shall be evidenced by the issuance of a decal, green in color, which shall reflect the county of issuance, and the calendar year for which this permit is issued. The decal shall be prominently attached and displayed on the mobile home by the owner. 
(Code 1983, § 26-2-37) 
Sec. 74-262. - Information required. 
The tax commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered, subject to the specific provisions of this article, to require that applicants furnish such information in writing as may be reasonably required to effectuate the purposes hereof. 
(Code 1983, § 26-2-38) 
Sec. 74-263. - Other requirements of county continue to apply to location of mobile homes. 
The issuance of any decal under the provisions of this article shall in no way be construed as superseding the requirement for the location of mobile homes as the same may be contained within appropriate resolutions or other actions of the Fulton County Planning and Zoning Commission, and the issuance of a decal under the provisions of this article shall not prohibit the planning and zoning commission from requiring a relocation of the mobile home to a place where such mobile home is permitted by the regulations of the Fulton County Planning and Zoning Commission; but in such case, the owner of the mobile home shall apply for and obtain a decal for the relocation as if such relocation was the result of his own initiative. 
(Code 1983, § 26-2-39) 
Sec. 74-264. - Dealers to furnish list. 
All dealers in mobile homes shall furnish to the tax commissioner a list of all mobile homes in their possession, whether owned by them or not, on January 1 of each year. 
(Code 1983, § 26-2-40) 
Sec. 74-265. - Location prohibited without decal. 
(a)  No person shall own or have located within the limits of Fulton County any mobile home unless application for a decal shall have been made and decal received as provided by this article. 
(b)  No person shall hereafter initially locate any mobile home within the limits of Fulton County without having made an application for and having obtained a decal. 
(c)  No person shall occupy any mobile home as a residence nor permit any other person to occupy the same as a residence unless a decal shall have been obtained as provided by this article. 
(Code 1983, § 26-2-41) 
Sec. 74-266. - Mobile home parks; decal required. 
No owner or operator of a mobile home park shall permit any mobile home to be located or relocated within the confines of such park unless the decal required by this article shall have been obtained. No owner or operator of any mobile home park shall permit any mobile home presently located within the limits of the park owned or operated by him to remain in the park after the date of this article unless a decal authorizing the continued location as required by this article shall have been obtained. The owner or operator of a mobile home park shall furnish to the Tax Commissioner of Fulton County a complete list of all mobile home owners who have mobile homes located within such parks on January 1 of each year. Such lists are to be delivered to the tax commissioner within ten working days. 
(Code 1983, § 26-2-42) 
Secs. 74-267—74-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 06-0471, Exh. A, adopted May 3, 2006, repealed and reenacted art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 97-0264, §§ 33-7-61—33-7-67, adopted March 5, 1997. See the Code Comparative Table—Ordinances and Resolutions for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
State Law reference— Local license tax on depository financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 74-301. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bank means any financial institution chartered under the laws of any state or under the laws of the United States which is authorized to receive deposits in this state and which has a corporate structure authorizing the issuance of capital stock. 
Department of finance shall mean the department of Finance of Fulton County. 
Director of Finance shall mean the director of the department of finance of Fulton County or the director's designee. 
Depository financial institution means a bank or a savings and loan association. 
Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
Savings and loan association means any financial institution, other than a credit union, chartered under the laws of any state or under the laws of the United States which is authorized to receive deposits in this state and which has a mutual corporate form. 
(Ord. No. 06-0471, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-302. - Tax levied; rate. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 2011 and for each year thereafter an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within Fulton County at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said depository financial institutions. 
(Ord. No. 06-0471, Exh. A, 5-3-06; Res. No. 10-1126, 9-15-10) 
Sec. 74-303. - Minimum business license tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-91(a) shall be $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 06-0471, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 74-304. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-91(c), each depository financial institution subject to the tax levied by this article shall file a return of the gross receipts with the Director of Finance on or before March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Said return shall be in the manner and the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue, based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The return shall provide the information necessary to determine the portion of the taxpayer's Georgia gross receipts to be allocated to each taxing jurisdiction in which such institution has an office. The Director of Finance shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in said return. 
(Ord. No. 06-0471, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 74-305. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be paid to the Director of Finance at the time of filing the return. 
(Ord. No. 06-0471, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 74-306. - Administrative provisions. 
The Director of Finance is hereby directed to forward a copy of this article to each depository financial institution located in unincorporated Fulton County and to the home office of each such depository financial institution that does business in unincorporated Fulton County if located outside the county. 
(Ord. No. 06-0471, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 74-307. - Relation of tax to other business licenses. 
The tax imposed by this article shall be in lieu of any other business license upon depository financial institutions. 
(Ord. No. 06-0471, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Chapter 76 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; resolutions pertaining to telecommunications, ch. 172. 
State Law reference— Regulation of cable television systems by counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 76-1. - Satellite subscription television system. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Satellite subscription television system means services provided to subscribers for sale where the provider of the services utilizes a master antenna type system or earth dish type system designed to receive and distribute satellite television signals. 
(b)  Business license restrictions. A business license to operate a satellite subscription television system shall only be issued to provide service to one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership wherein any wiring necessary to operate such system does not cross adjacent nonowned property lines and does not cross county rights-of-way in the unincorporated area of Fulton County. 
(c)  Application of section. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person, firm, or corporation that is franchised by the board of commissioners to own and operate a cable television system under sections 76-31—76-62 of this article. 
(d)  Business license required. No person, firm, or corporation shall construct, operate or service a satellite subscription television system within the unincorporated area of Fulton County without first obtaining a business license to carry on said business. 
(e)  License fee. The annual license fee shall be provided by chapter 18, article II of this Code. 
(90-RCM-593, § 35, 8-15-90) 
Secs. 76-2—76-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FRANCHISES 

Sec. 76-31. - Community antenna television system defined. 
Wherever used in this article, the phrase "broadband telecommunications system," or "community antenna television system" or "CATV system" shall mean a system composed of, without limitation, antenna, cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, or any other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities, designed, constructed, or wired for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying, and distributing audio and/or visual radio, television, electronic, or electrical signals to and from persons, subscribers, and locations in the unincorporated areas of Fulton County, Georgia. The systems may include, if otherwise lawful, television frequency modulated radio signals disseminated to the general public by licensed broadcasting stations, music originated on premises of grantees, weather information, and news ticker. In the event the grantee shall include television and frequency modulated radio signals disseminated to the general public by licensed broadcasting stations, the grantee agrees to carry these signals consistent with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-5) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 76-32. - Franchise required; application; issuance. 
(a)  Before any person, firm, or corporation shall begin to construct or operate a community antenna television system within Fulton County, it shall file a written application for a franchise from the county, with the county manager, in a form prescribed or acceptable to the county manager, which application shall contain information showing: 
(1)  The applicant's name and address; 
(2)  The date and place of incorporation, if the applicant is incorporated; 
(3)  A list of names and addresses of stockholders, directors, and officers of the applicant, if incorporated; 
(4)  The most recent certified balance sheet of corporation or partnership or a sworn statement of net worth, if the applicant is an individual; 
(5)  Location of all other CATV operations of the applicant; 
(6)  Location and telephone numbers of all offices, branches, and warehouses in Fulton County; 
(7)  The means of erecting wires contemplated by the applicant; 
(8)  Names of companies from which permission has been obtained to use existing poles or lines; 
(9)  Plans (including a map) and timetable of construction and expansion of the system; 
(10)  Plan of financing the system; 
(11)  Evidence of ability to provide policies or certification of insurance as to worker's compensation, liability, and indemnification as prescribed by this article; 
(12)  The applicant's proposed rate structures; and 
(13)  Such other information as required by the County Manager of Fulton County. 
Each applicant for a franchise hereunder shall submit a filing fee in the amount of $10,000.00, by certified check, payable to Fulton County. After the applicant complies with any rules or regulations of Fulton County, as set out herein, the board of commissioners shall consider an applicant's legal, technical, character, financial, and public interest qualities. The board of commissioners may also consider the applicant's proposed construction plans, the applicant's total service package, whether it is in the public interest to grant more than one franchise, and such other matters as the board of commissioners may deem relevant or appropriate. Upon the full consideration of these matters, the board of commissioners shall, in the exercise of its sole discretion, either grant or deny the application for a franchise. If a franchise is granted, the board of commissioners shall, by resolution, authorize the county manager to execute a written franchise agreement with the applicant. 
(b)  This article and its terms and conditions shall be accepted by the grantee by any written franchise agreement executed and acknowledged by the grantee and by the county and filed with the county manager. The agreement shall incorporate the grantee's written application to the county for the CATV franchise and shall bind the grantee to the provisions of the application insofar as they can be legally enforced. The board of commissioners may require a grantee to clarify any portion of its written application prior to the grant of the franchise. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-3) 
State Law reference— Authority to require franchise, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-2. 
Sec. 76-33. - Nonexclusive right of grantees to install system. 
In accordance with the conditions and reservations which are hereinafter specified, the nonexclusive right may be granted to any persons, firms, or corporations which are approved for a franchise as hereinafter provided and which comply with the terms hereof, hereinafter referred to as grantees (and intending thereby to refer either singularly to any individual grantee or collectively to all grantees if there are more than one) and to grantees' successors, assigns, or designees, subject to section 76-46 hereof, to engage in the business of operating a broadband telecommunication system, commonly called a community antenna television (CATV) system, in the unincorporated areas of Fulton County, Georgia, for the purpose of providing cable television service and any aspects of expanded cable television service, if any, as the grantee may from time to time deem advisable. Where authorized under the provisions hereof, the grantee shall have the right and privilege to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across, and along any public street, public way, and public place, now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the unincorporated areas of Fulton County, Georgia, any poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduit vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the broadband telecommunications system, in accordance with the laws and regulations of the United States of America, and the State of Georgia, and the resolutions and regulations of Fulton County, Georgia, commencing from and after the adoption of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-1) 
Sec. 76-34. - Requirements for installation and maintenance of system. 
(a)  Grantees shall install a broadband telecommunications system capable of distributing at least 35 television channels or their equivalent, the system to be installed and maintained in accordance with the best accepted standards of the community antenna television industry and the Federal Communications Commission's cable television technical standards. 
(b)  For the purpose of permitting the transmission of signals throughout the metropolitan area, the grantee may interconnect its CATV system with any adjacent CATV system. 
(c)  A grantee shall interrupt system service after 7:00 a.m. and before 1:00 a.m. only with good cause for the shortest time possible and, except in emergency situations, only after publishing notice of service interruption at least 24 hours in advance of the service interruptions. Service may be interrupted between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. for routine testing, maintenance, and repair, without notification, any night except Friday, Saturday, or Sunday, or the night preceding a holiday. 
(d)  The grantee shall maintain a written record or log listing the date of subscriber complaints, identifying the subscriber, and describing the nature of the complaint, and when and what action was taken by the grantee in response thereto. This record shall be kept at the grantee's local office for a period of two years from the date when the complaint initially occurred and shall be available for inspection during regular business hours, without further notice or demand, by the county manager or a designated representative. 
(e)  If one or more municipalities within the county have granted franchises for the development of cablevision to other than the grantee or grantees who shall be granted a franchise by the county, the county franchisee or franchisees shall negotiate with the franchisees serving the municipalities in order to provide interconnection of the system so that the Fulton County School System can utilize an integrated system providing for simultaneous and exclusive broadcasts and reception by all schools in the system. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-2) 
Sec. 76-35. - Maintenance of office in county required. 
The grantees shall provide, at a minimum, the following services to handle consumer and user complaints: 
(1)  Each grantee shall maintain an office in the county, which shall be open during all usual business hours, have a publicly listed telephone, and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs may be received on a 24-hour basis. 
(2)  Each grantee shall maintain a repair and trouble-shooting force capable of responding to subscriber complaints or requests for repair service within 24 hours after receipt of the complaint or request. No direct charge shall be made to the subscriber for this service. 
(3)  Each grantee shall ensure that all subscribers, programmers, and members of the general public have recourse to a satisfactory hearing of any complaint. Each grantee shall present to the county, no later than three months after the grant of a franchise hereunder, a set of rules, regulations, and procedures concerning the handling and settling of complaints. Provided, further, that each grantee shall provide its subscribers with copies of procedures for filing complaints, and shall provide additional copies to any person on request. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-4) 
Sec. 76-36. - Operation. 
(a)  The grantee, upon request of the county and without cost to the county, shall make available a county channel. 
(b)  The grantee, upon request to the county and without cost to the county, shall make available up to four education channels to the Fulton County Board of Education. 
(c)  The grantee, upon the request of the county and without cost to the user, shall make available a public access channel. For the presentation of programming on public access channels, the grantee shall provide adequate studio facilities and equipment without cost to members of the public. In addition, appropriate technical assistance shall also be furnished without cost by the grantee if requested. Channel time shall be provided on a first-come, first-served basis, without charge to the members of the public. Actual production costs may be charged to the users for live studio programs exceeding five minutes. The grantee shall endeavor to provide such channel time to as many different persons as is practicable, it being the intent that the public channel serve as a significant source of diversified expression. 
(d)  If a grantee is operating a system within one or more cities in Fulton County, and the cities' systems are interconnected with the system in the unincorporated area, and if through the interconnection the channels called for by subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section are part of the system of the cities, and if the county, the Fulton County Board of Education, and the members of the public of the unincorporated areas of Fulton County are granted all the time they request of the city systems channels, a grantee of the county shall not be required to provide separate governmental, educational and access channels to the county. 
(e)  The grantee shall provide without charge all subscriber services, and a free service connection to all public schools and support buildings, libraries, hospitals, and other public buildings designated by the county, provided that the grantee is able to provide such connections with 300 feet of aerial drop cable from its trunk or distribution cables. 
(f)  The grantee shall, before energizing the system, file with the county manager an outline of channel allocations and designations and shall thereafter inform the county manager of any changes or additions to channel allocations and designations. 
(g)  The CATV system shall carry the signal of all noncommercial educational FM radio stations located within the county. 
(h)  The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate any rules, regulations, terms, and conditions governing the operation and conduct of its business as shall be necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under its franchise with the county, and to ensure uninterrupted service to each and all of its subscribers; provided, however, that these rules, regulations, terms, and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this article or federal and state laws. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-6) 
Sec. 76-37. - Supervision by the county. 
(a)  The grantee shall construct, operate, and maintain the CATV system, subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the county who have jurisdiction in such matters, and in strict compliance with all laws, resolutions, departmental rules, and regulations. 
(b)  The CATV system and all parts thereof shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection by the county. 
(c)  The county manager may from time to time issue any reasonable rules and regulations concerning the construction, operation, and maintenance of the CATV system as are consistent with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Technical disputes concerning compliance with FCC technical standards and other agreed upon technical matters between the county and the grantee shall be resolved by submission to arbitration pursuant to the terms of section 76-59 hereof. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-7) 
Sec. 76-38. - Reports. 
(a)  The grantee shall furnish the county with progress reports indicating in detail the area of construction of the CATV system. Such periodic reports shall be furnished at six-month intervals, the first report to be made six months from the date of the execution of the written franchise agreement. 
(b)  Within five days after the grantee, its affiliates and/or subsidiaries have filed a report, petition, or communication with any city, state, or federal agency pertaining to any aspect of operation hereunder, or the financial arrangement therefor, it shall file a copy of such report, petition, or communication with the county. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-8) 
Sec. 76-39. - Office for notices, directions, orders, and requests. 
The grantee shall maintain an office in the county for as long as it continues to operate the CATV system or any portion thereof, and hereby designates such office as the place where all notices, directions, orders, and requests may be served or delivered under this article. The county manager shall be notified of the location of the office or any change thereof. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-9) 
Sec. 76-40. - Right of grantees to use poles and other equipment of public utilities. 
(a)  There is hereby granted the further nonexclusive right, privilege, and authority to grantees, as defined herein, to lease, rent, or in any other manner obtain the use of towers, poles, lines, cables, and other equipment, and facilities from any and all holders of public licenses and franchises within the unincorporated area of the county including, but not limited to, the Southern Bell Telephone Company and the Georgia Power Company, and to use these towers, poles, lines, cables, and other equipment and facilities, subject to all existing and future resolutions and regulations of the county. The poles used by grantees, other than those owned by grantees, shall be those erected and maintained by existing public utility systems or those owned by the county, when and where practicable, provided mutually satisfying agreements can be entered into with these companies and with the county by separate agreements. 
(b)  Grantees shall provide and keep current a map of the county showing the exact type, style, and location of any and all lines, poles, and other fixtures of grantees within the unincorporated area. 
(c)  Grantees shall have the right to erect and maintain their own poles, as may be necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of the television distribution system, provided written prior approval is obtained in these instances from the county manager. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-10) 
Sec. 76-41. - Prohibited acts of grantees. 
Neither grantees, their subsidiaries, nor their employees shall engage in the business of selling, renting, or leasing television sets which make use of signals transmitted by their system, nor shall grantees, their subsidiaries, or their employees, engage in servicing of television sets or receivers owned or leased by their subscribers, or the sale of parts for the same. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-11) 
Sec. 76-42. - Requirements for towers, poles, wires, and appurtenances. 
(a)  Grantees' transmission and distribution system towers, poles, wires and appurtenances shall be located, erected, and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or to interfere with new improvements the county may deem proper to make, or to hinder unnecessarily or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, or other public property; removal of any equipment to avoid interference shall be done promptly upon receiving written request to do so from the county, or its designated official; and will be at grantee's expense. 
(b)  Construction and maintenance of the transmission and distribution system shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code, prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the National Electrical Code and the National Board of Fire Underwriters, and any applicable resolutions and regulations of Fulton County affecting electrical installations, which may be presently in effect, or changed by future resolutions. 
(c)  All installations of equipment shall be of permanent nature, durable, and installed in accordance with good engineering practices, and of sufficient height to comply with all existing county regulations, resolutions, and state laws so as not to interfere in any manner with the right of the public or individual property owner, and shall not interfere with the travel and use of public places by the public and during the construction, repair, or removal thereof, shall not obstruct or impede traffic. Further, said construction shall be subject to inspection by the county. 
(d)  No poles are to be erected upon the public streets, alleys, avenues, and grounds, and no excavation of any type shall be done or caused to be done upon the public streets, alleys, avenues, and grounds unless permission in writing is first obtained from the county. 
(e)  If any of grantees' cables or wires are installed on existing aboveground systems which are placed underground at any future date, at no expense to the county, the grantee shall likewise place their cables or wires underground. 
(f)  In the event that a change is made in the grade, width, or location of public streets, alleys, avenues, and grounds by authority of the county, which shall necessitate the removal of any poles, wires, and transmission and distribution lines to conform to the change of grade, the grantee shall make the necessary changes in their lines, at their own expense, upon due notice from the county. 
(g)  In the maintenance and operation of their television transmission and distribution system in the streets, alleys, and other public places, and in the course of any new construction or addition to their facilities, the grantees shall proceed so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the general public; any opening or obstruction in the streets or other public places made by grantees in the course of their operations shall be made only after having obtained prior written permission from the county to do so, and shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences, or boardings, the bounds of which, during periods of dusk and darkness, shall be clearly designated by red warning lights. 
(h)  All work in any way necessitated by the business of grantees which may involve the opening, breaking up, or tearing up of a portion of a street, sidewalk, or other part of any county-owned or county-controlled property, shall be done and repaired in a manner approved by the county, and shall, at the option of the county, be done by the county, and the county shall be reimbursed by the grantee for the reasonable costs of the work. Nothing herein shall be construed as a requirement that the county conduct an excavation or repair on behalf of or as agents for grantees. 
(i)  Grantees shall, at their expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate on the same street, alley, or public place, or remove from the street, alley, or public place, any property of grantees when required by the county by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street excavation, freeway and bridge construction, change of establishments of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, and tracks or any other types of structures or improvements by governmental agencies when acting in a governmental or proprietary capacity, or other structures of public improvement; provided, however, that grantees shall in all such cases have the privileges and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of grantees in place as provided in section 76-49 hereof. 
(j)  Where located within the right-of-way of public streets, highways, alleys or other thoroughfares, the grantee's towers, poles, wires, and appurtenances shall be placed at such location within the right-of-way as is designated from time to time by the county planning and community development department. 
(k)  No work within the right-of-way shall be commenced until a permit to perform the work shall have been applied for and granted by the planning and community development department of the county. Requests for permits to work upon the road rights-of-way must be filed with said department not less than 24 hours prior to the time that the work is scheduled to commence. Applications for permits to perform work within a street right-of-way must be filed in the name of the grantee, who shall at all times be responsible for the proper performance of the work that is scheduled. The application shall be upon such form as is customarily used or accepted by the county with respect to public utilities seeking permission to work within a street right-of-way. The application shall be accompanied by maps, prints, or drawings showing the nature of the work to be done, the location of the work, the anticipated beginning and ending dates of the work, the location of all public utilities and improvements within the right-of-way involved, and how the same will be affected by the grantee's proposed work, a general description of the proposed work, and such other information as the planning and community development department reasonably deems necessary before the granting of the requested permit. 
(l)  When performing any work within or adjacent to any public right-of-way, a grantee shall take all reasonable precautions to protect the public, and erect such warning devices as shall be reasonably calculated to apprise the public of the presence of the work and the activities being undertaken. 
(m)  The granting of any permit to a grantee to perform work within or adjacent to public right-of-way shall not in any instance constitute an acceptance by the county of any responsibility for the activities of a grantee. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-12) 
Sec. 76-43. - Joint use of poles to be granted county. 
Grantees shall grant to the county, free of expense, joint use of any and all poles owned by them for any proper municipal purpose, insofar as it may be done without interfering with the free use and enjoyment of the grantees' own wires and fixtures. Proper regard shall be given to all existing safety rules covering construction and maintenance in effect at the time of construction. If, in accommodating the county's joint use of their poles, grantees are required to change or replace poles or install new poles, the county shall compensate grantees for such additional expense. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-13) 
Sec. 76-44. - Insurance required by grantees. 
(a)  Grantees shall, at all times, keep in effect the following types of insurance coverage: 
(1)  Workmen's compensation upon their employees engaged in any manner in the management, operation, installation, or servicing of their plant and equipment within the county. 
(2)  Property damage liability insurance to the extent of $300,000.00 as to any one person and $500,000.00 as to any one accident, and personal injury liability insurance to the extent of $500,000.00 as to any one person and $1,000,000.00 as to any one accident. 
(b)  Through the foregoing contracts, the grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the county, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees, against and from any and all claims, demands, causes of actions, actions, suits, proceedings, damages (including, but not limited to, damages to county property and damages arising out of copyright infringements, and damages arising out of any failure by the grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or licensees of programs to be delivered by the grantee's CATV system), costs or liabilities (including costs or liabilities of the county with respect to its employees), of every kind and nature whatsoever including, but not limited to, damages for injury or death or damage to person or property, and against all liability to others, and against any loss, cost, and expense resulting or arising out of any of the same, including any attorney fees, accountant fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs, per diem expense, traveling and transportation expense, or other costs or expense arising out of or pertaining to the exercise or the enjoyment of any franchise granted hereunder. Provided that the grantee shall not be liable for any damages, fees or expenses where any lawsuit is based on the actions or omissions of the county but not on any act or omission by the grantee. 
(c)  All of the foregoing insurance contracts shall be in a form satisfactory to the county, as determined by the county manager, and shall be issued and maintained by companies authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, and they shall require 30 days' written notice of any cancellation to both the county and a grantee herein, and a copy of the policy shall be filed with the county manager. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-14) 
Sec. 76-45. - Gross receipts payments required. 
(a)  Each grantee shall pay the franchise fee hereinafter set forth, in addition to the filing fee. For the rights granted hereunder, the grantee shall pay to the county at the time hereinafter specified and subject to the terms of section 76-51 hereof, a franchise fee equal to four percent of the monthly total gross revenues of its cable television system. Gross revenues shall mean any and all compensation and other consideration derived directly and indirectly by the grantee or its subsidiaries from subscribers in the unincorporated areas of Fulton County for regularly furnished basic cable television service, installation fees, and pay programming services. This payment by the grantee to the county shall be in lieu of any applicable occupation tax, license tax, or other similar levy, and shall be paid monthly. Nothing herein contained, however, shall in any way relieve the grantee or their assigns or successors from the obligation of paying any property taxes to Fulton County or any other governmental subdivision of the State of Georgia or any other taxes lawfully levied by the State of Georgia on the operation of grantees. 
(b)  Grantees shall file with the county manager, within 90 days after the expiration of any calendar year during the term of the rights granted hereunder, a statement prepared by a certified public accountant showing the gross revenues as defined herein. It shall be the duty of the grantees to pay to the county within 15 days after the time for filing these statements, any unpaid balance for the calendar year covered by the statement. In any year or portions thereof, during which payments under this section amount to less than $200.00 per month, the grantees shall pay the county the minimum amount of $200.00 per month, the payments to commence immediately upon the adoption and approval of this article and the grant of a franchise hereunder. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-15) 
Sec. 76-46. - Sale, assignment or transfer of rights granted to grantees. 
Any sale, assignment, or transfer of the rights hereunder shall be made only with the prior consent of the board of commissioners, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The proposed transferee or assignee must show financial responsibility to the satisfaction of the board of commissioners and must agree to comply with all the provisions of this article, and provided, further, that no consent shall be required for a transfer by trust deed, deed to secure debt, or other hypothecation as a whole, to secure an indebtedness. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-16) 
Sec. 76-47. - Grantees subject to resolutions, rules, regulations and specifications, regulating street work. 
Grantees are subject to all requirements of the county resolutions, rules, regulations, and specifications including, but not limited to, those concerning street work, street excavation, use, removal and relocation of property within a street, and other street work. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-17) 
Sec. 76-48. - Rights reserved to county. 
There is hereby reserved to the county every right and power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by any state statute or resolution of the county, and grantees, by their acceptance of the rights granted hereunder, agree to be bound thereby, and to comply with any action or requirement of the county in its exercise of any right or power. Further, the rights granted hereunder shall not preclude the county from granting to any other person a right to provide similar services in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-18) 
Sec. 76-49. - Abandonment of property by grantees. 
(a)  In the event that the use of any part of the system should cease for any reason for a continuous period of 12 months, or in the event the system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of this article, or the rights granted hereunder have been terminated, cancelled, or have expired, grantees shall promptly remove from the streets and public places all property and poles of the system, other than any which the county may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of this removal, grantees shall promptly restore the street or other area from which the property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the county. 
(b)  Any property of grantees to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the county may prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of grantees in place, grantees shall submit to the county an instrument to be approved by the county, transferring to the county the ownership of the property. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-19) 
Sec. 76-50. - Failure of grantee to complete required street work. 
Upon failure of grantees to complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this article to be done in any street, within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the county, the county may cause this work to be done, and grantees shall pay the county the cost thereof in the itemized amount reported to grantees within 30 days after receipt of the itemized report. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-20) 
Sec. 76-51. - Term and rates. 
The term for which each franchise is granted as provided herein shall be for a period of 15 years. A grantee may file an application for a renewal of a franchise at the end of the initial 15-year term and at the end of any subsequent renewal of the franchise as provided herein. A grantee shall not be required to submit a $10,000.00 filing fee with its application for renewal of a franchise. Upon receiving an application for renewal, the board of commissioners shall consider a grantee's legal, technical, character, financial, and public interest qualities in light of the grantee's past performance under its franchise. The application for renewal shall be granted by the county if the county determines that the grantee is satisfying the obligations imposed upon it by the terms and conditions of this article and is otherwise in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. The renewal shall be for an additional ten-year period. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-21(a)) 
Sec. 76-52. - Performance bond and deposit. 
Upon being granted a franchise, the grantee shall file with the county manager, and shall, thereafter, annually, during the period of the franchise, maintain in full force and effect a corporate performance bond running in favor of the county, written by an approved corporate surety, in a sum no less than the highest monthly franchise fee paid by the grantee to the county in the preceding calendar year, plus ten percent thereof, or $25,000.00, whichever is greater. The amount of the bond shall be recoverable from the principal and sureties thereof for all damages resulting from the failure of the grantee to make any payment of all fees or amounts required herein to be paid to the county. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-22) 
Sec. 76-53. - Installation deadline. 
(a)  The grantee, within two years from the date of the receipt of all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business including, but not limited to, microwave carrier licenses and any other permits, licenses, and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems or their associated microwave transmission facilities, shall extend its energized trunk cable to the entire residential area within the county; provided, however, that in any event, energized trunk cable shall be extended to the entire residential area within 30 months of the grant of a franchise. Residential area shall mean that contiguous area within the unincorporated area in North Fulton County and that contiguous area within the unincorporated area of South Fulton County delineated on a map on file with the county manager on the date on which a franchise is granted. 
(b)  The following line extension provisions shall apply to the parts of unincorporated area of the county which are not within the residential area as herein defined: 
(1)  Each year the county manager shall designate those areas adjacent to the residential area with at least 50 homes per mile of public way or easement as additions to the residential area, and the map on file with the county manager shall be revised to reflect these additions. The grantee shall extend its energized trunk cable to all these additional areas within one year of the completion of the initial system. Thereafter, the grantee shall extend its energized trunk cable to all additional areas within one year of their designation as part of the residential area. 
(2)  The grantee, whenever it receives a request for aboveground service from at least eight subscribers within 1,320 feet of its trunk cable, or for underground service from at least 12 subscribers within 1,320 feet of its trunk cable, shall extend its system to these subscribers, provided that the extension is technically and physically feasible. The 1,320 feet shall be measured in extension length of the grantee's trunk cable required for service located within the public way or easement and shall not include length of necessary drop cable to any individual subscriber. 
(3)  Service shall be provided to any other person or persons within the unincorporated areas of Fulton County if requested upon payment to the grantee by the person or persons of the costs of extension including, without limitation, costs of material, labor, and easements. 
(c)  In the event that in any area of the county more than 150 feet of drop cable is necessary to connect a subscriber's home to the trunk cable, the grantee may charge the subscriber the actual cost of this extension over 150 feet. 
(d)  In the event more than one franchise is granted covering the same area, and if the franchisees commence the installation of their lines within the same area, no franchisee shall be required to extend its lines down a street or road where another franchisee has already extended its lines. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-23) 
Sec. 76-54. - Force and effect of article. 
If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is for any reason held illegal, invalid, unconstitutional, or void, all other sections thereof not so held shall be and remain in full force and effect. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-24) 
Sec. 76-55. - Limitations on rights, privileges, or exemptions granted. 
No privilege, right, or exemption shall be granted or conferred under this article except those specifically prescribed herein. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-25) 
Sec. 76-56. - Foreclosure or other judicial sale. 
(a)  Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the system located in the unincorporated areas of Fulton County, or upon the termination of any lease covering all or a substantial part of the system, the grantee shall notify the county manager of this fact, and this notification shall be treated as a notification that a change in control of the grantee has taken place, and the provisions of section 76-46 hereof, governing the consent of the county to transfer the system, shall apply. 
(b)  The county shall have the right to cancel this franchise 120 days after the appointment of a receiver, or trustee, to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other action or proceeding, unless the receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of the 120 days, or unless: 
(1)  Within 120 days after his election or appointment, the receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of this article and remedied all defaults thereunder; and, 
(2)  The receiver or trustee, within 120 days, shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby the receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this article and the franchise granted to the grantee. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-26) 
Sec. 76-57. - Cancellation of franchise. 
(a)  In addition to any other provision for the cancellation of a franchise set out herein, the county may terminate a franchise in the event of the willful failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee to do or comply with any material requirement or limitation contained herein, or any material rule or regulation of the board of commissioners or county manager subject to the procedures set forth in this section. 
(b)  The county manager may make written demand that the grantee do or comply with any requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule, or regulation. If the failure, refusal, or neglect of the grantee continues for a period of 30 days following the written demand, the county manager may place his request for termination of the franchise upon the next regular meeting agenda of the board of commissioners. The county manager shall cause to be served upon the grantee at least ten days prior to the date of the meeting of the board of commissioners, a written notice of his intent to request termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the county clerk at least once ten days before the meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. 
(c)  The board of commissioners shall consider the request of the county manager and shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was with just cause. 
(d)  If the failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was with just cause, the board of commissioners shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon any terms and conditions as are reasonable. 
(e)  If the board of commissioners shall determine the failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee without just cause, then the board of commissioners may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be terminated and forfeited unless there be compliance by the grantee within any period as the board of commissioners may fix. 
(f)  The termination and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the county under the franchise or any provision of law. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-27) 
Sec. 76-58. - Purchase of system upon cancellation, termination, or expiration of franchise. 
(a)  Upon the cancellation, termination, or expiration of a franchise, the county shall have the right to purchase the CATV system in the unincorporated areas of Fulton County in accordance with subsection (b) of this section and the county may direct the grantee to cease operation of the CATV system. If the county elects to purchase the CATV system, the grantee shall promptly execute all appropriate documents to transfer title to the county, and shall assign all other contracts, leases, licenses, permits, and any other rights necessary to maintain continuity of service to the public. The grantee shall cooperate with the county or with another person, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity authorized or directed by the county to operate the CATV system for a temporary period in maintaining continuity of service. Nothing herein is intended as a waiver of any other rights the county may have. 
(b)  If a franchise: 
(1)  Is cancelled or terminated by the county as provided for in this article, the purchase price to the county for the CATV system shall be its then book value (i.e., cost less accumulated depreciation) according to generally accepted accounting principles with a reduction for any damages incurred by the county in connection with the cancellation. The book value, if not agreed upon, shall be determined by arbitration pursuant to section 76-59 of this article, but shall not include any valuation based upon the franchise. Damages incurred by the county shall include, without limitation, any payments made by the county to another person, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity, for the operation of the system for a temporary period until a franchise is granted. 
(2)  Terminates by expiration of its terms, the purchase price to the county for the CATV system shall be its then fair market value of the CATV system as of the date of expiration of the term of its franchise. The fair market value shall be the fair market value of all tangible and intangible property forming part of the CATV system, but shall not include any valuation based upon the franchise. The fair market value, if not agreed upon, shall be determined by arbitration pursuant to section 76-59 hereof. 
(c)  Upon cancellation, termination, or expiration of a franchise, the county may direct the grantee to operate the CATV system for the account of the county for a period of six months. The county shall pay the grantee all reasonable and necessary costs incurred by it for the operation of the CATV system during this period. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-28) 
Sec. 76-59. - Arbitration. 
Matters which are expressly made arbitrable under provisions of this article shall be determined by a panel of three arbitrators. One arbitrator shall be appointed by the county, one by the Grantee, and the third by the presiding Judge of the Superior Court of Fulton County, Georgia. The fees of the arbitrators shall be fixed by the presiding judge. The expenses of the arbitration, including the fees of the arbitrators, shall be borne by the parties in any manner as the arbitrators may provide in their award, but in no event shall the county be obligated for more than one-half of the expenses. The determination of a majority of the arbitrators shall be binding on the parties. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-29) 
Sec. 76-60. - Renegotiation. 
(a)  Upon written notice given by the county or grantee, one to the other, not less than six months prior to the fifth and tenth anniversaries of the date of execution of a franchise agreement, the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement may be modified, provided that both the county and the grantee are agreeable to the modification. Modification shall be directed toward effecting alterations in the terms and conditions to reflect those technical and economic changes which have occurred during the interim period. 
(b)  Any changes in the franchise agreement necessitated by modification to the Federal Communications Commission regulations shall be incorporated into the franchise agreement within the time limit provided for in the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission then in force and effect. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-30) 
Sec. 76-61. - Emergency alert. 
The system shall include an emergency alert capability which will permit the board of commissioners or its designee to override, by remote control, the video and/or audio of all channels simultaneously except those involved in retransmission of television broadcast programming in the case of public emergencies. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-31) 
Sec. 76-62. - Minority business enterprise objectives. 
(a)  By previous resolution and order, the board of commissioners has established as county policy, the objective that a minimum of 20 percent of county public contracts be awarded to bidders of established minorities in order to correct a serious underutilization of such firms in county contracting and purchasing activities. To assist this effort the grantee shall adopt the objective whereby a minimum of 20 percent of its purchasing/contracting activity to fulfill the terms of this franchise shall be with firms owned by members of an established minority. 
(b)  An established minority shall mean any group of people historically disadvantaged, and thereby hindered from free participation in economic activity, due to discrimination based on race, religion, color, sex, or national origin. 
(c)  The grantees compliance with this provision shall be evaluated by an annual report to the board of commissioners at the close of each operational year of the grantee. However, the first such report covering the grantees actions from the start of this franchise shall be made 60 days after enactment of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 33-4-32) 
Sec. 76-63. - Basic service rates and charges. 
(a)  The county will follow the FCC rate regulations in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the companies and any other cable television system operating in the county, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the franchises. 
(b)  In connection with such regulations, the county will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties. 
(c)  The county manager, or his designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the county and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC rate regulations in order to enable the county to regulate basic service rates and charges. 
(93-RC-426, §§ 1—3, 8-18-93) 
Secs. 76-64—76-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-0725, Att. A, adopted Oct. 17, 2018, repealed art. III in its entirety and Att. B of said ordinance enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former art. III, § 76-86, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Res. No. 98-1048, adopted Sept. 2, 1998. 

Sec. 76-86. - Wireless enhanced 9-1-1 charge. 
(a)  Unless specified otherwise in this resolution, all terms shall be defined in the same manner as specified in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-122. 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-133(a), there is imposed a monthly 9-1-1 charge upon each telephone service, subscribed to by a telephone subscriber, whose exchange access lines are in the areas served or which could be served by the 9-1-1 service. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(a)(1)(A), the amount of such 9-1-1 charge shall be $1.50 per month per telephone service provided to the telephone subscriber. 
(c)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-133(a), there is imposed a monthly wireless enhanced 9-1-1 charge upon each wireless telecommunications connection, other than a connection for prepaid wireless service, subscribed to by a telephone subscriber whose place of primary use is within the geographic area that is served by Fulton County, Georgia, or that would be served by Fulton County, Georgia, for the purpose of such an emergency 9-1-1 system. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. 46-5-134(a)(2)(A), the amount of such enhanced wireless 9-1-1 charge shall be $1.50 per month per wireless telecommunications connection provided to the telephone subscriber. 
(d)  All such 9-1-1 charges collected by service suppliers shall be remitted to the Georgia Department of Revenue, as the contracted collection partner of the Georgia Emergency Communications Authority, at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-185, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-186, and any other Georgia Department of Revenue or Georgia Emergency Communications Authority rule or regulation adopted pursuant to Article 12 of Chapter 13 of Title 38 of the O.C.G.A. and Chapter 13 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Administrative Procedures Act". 
(e)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134, all proceeds received by Fulton County from 9-1-1 charges imposed by this ordinance shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by the Fulton County; kept separate from general revenue of the county; and used exclusively for the statutorily authorized purposes. 
(f)  The clerk to the Fulton County Board of Commissioners shall file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of the applicable resolution within ten days of the adoption thereof. Any subsequent amendment to this resolution shall likewise be so filed by the clerk within ten days of the adoption thereof. 
(Res. No. 18-0725, Att. B, 10-17-18) 
Secs. 76-87—76-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - 911 PREPAID WIRELESS SERVICE FEE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-0725, Att. A, adopted Oct. 17, 2018, repealed art. IV in its entirety and Att. B of said ordinance enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, § 76-101—76-104, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 11-0636, Exh. 1, adopted Aug. 3, 2011. 

Sec. 76-101. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(b)(1), there is imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge and the amount of such 9-1-1 charge shall be $1.50 per retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public safety answering point. 
(b)  All such 9-1-1 charges collected by service suppliers shall be remitted to the Georgia Department of Revenue, as the contracted collection partner of the Georgia Emergency Communications Authority, at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-185, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-186, and any other Georgia Department of Revenue or Georgia Emergency Communications Authority rule or regulation adopted pursuant to Article 12 of Chapter 13 of Title 38 of the O.C.G.A. and Chapter 13 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Administrative Procedures Act." 
(c)  The clerk to the Fulton County Board of Commissioners shall file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of the applicable resolution within ten days of the adoption thereof. Any subsequent amendment to this resolution shall likewise be so filed by the clerk within ten days of the adoption thereof. 
(d)  Unless specified otherwise in this article, all terms in this article shall be defined in the same manner as specified in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-122. 
(e)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134, all proceeds received by Fulton County from 9-1-1 charges imposed by this article shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by the county; kept separate from general revenue of the county; and used exclusively for the statutorily authorized purposes. 
(Res. No. 18-0725, Att. B, 10-17-18) 
Chapter 78 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Moving of buildings, § 14-176 et seq.; ordinances pertaining to roads and bridges, ch. 62; vehicles for hire, ch. 86; resolutions pertaining to traffic and vehicles, ch. 174. 
State Law reference— Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-1-1—40-6-376, known as the uniform rules of the road, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this county with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Code 1983, § 29-1-2) 
Cross reference— Enactment authority, § 78-61. 
Sec. 78-2. - Traffic engineering. 
The public works department shall direct or perform all traffic engineering studies which may be necessary for the safe and efficient operation of the county road system. Based on these studies the department shall recommend to the board of commissioners necessary traffic control regulations to improve system operation. 
(Code 1983, § 29-1-1) 
Sec. 78-3. - Traffic control signs, markings, and devices. 
(a)  Upon approval of the board of commissioners, the county traffic engineer, or a designee thereof, is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic control signs, markings, and devices: 
(1)  Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway; 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(3)  Traffic lanes; 
(4)  Speed, parking, or other traffic control zones; 
(5)  Stop, yield, one-way and other directional devices; and 
(6)  Any other sign, marking, device, or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the roads and streets of the county. 
(b)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices, and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the county. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic control devices of the county. 
(c)  The county traffic engineer shall keep and maintain an accurate official schedule setting out all traffic zones, markings, signs, and other traffic control devices. The schedule and any amendments or changes thereto shall be known as the Official Traffic Control Schedule of Fulton County, Georgia, and shall be adopted by resolution of the board of commissioners. This traffic schedule, as amended, is incorporated herein and made a part of this chapter by reference. An official copy thereof shall be kept in the office of the county clerk; shall be available to the public; and copies certified by the county clerk shall be admissible in court as proof of the location of any traffic zone, marking, sign, or other traffic control device. 
(d)  No person shall be charged with violating a traffic zone, marking, sign, or other traffic control device unless appropriate signs, markings, or devices are in fact operating or in existence on the streets involved. 
(e)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign, or other traffic control device established hereunder shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 29-1-3) 
Cross reference— Truck routes; posted regulatory signs, § 78-67; use of temporary truck routes by restricted vehicles, § 78-68. 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 
Secs. 78-4—78-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq. 

Sec. 78-36. - Parking violations; responsibility. 
Whenever any vehicle shall be parked in violation of any provisions of any ordinance or state law prohibiting or restricting parking, the person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be responsible for such violation and subject to the penalty thereof. It shall be a defense to said violation that the person was not the registered owner, and/or that said vehicle was not parked in violation of state law, and/or that said violation was committed while said vehicle was stolen from the registered owner. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-2) 
Cross reference— Parking of commercial vehicles weighing 6,000 pounds or more, § 78-75. 
State Law reference— Liability of vehicle owner for traffic or parking violations occurring while vehicle leased to another, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-207. 
Sec. 78-37. - Parking meters; authority for installation. 
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to provide for the installation, operation, maintenance, and policing of parking meters to be installed on the streets of the county. The exact number of meters to be installed on the streets or spaces to be metered shall be determined on the basis of traffic engineering studies which shall be thorough and complete of the areas in which the meters may be installed and the installation shall be restricted to those areas in which a parking time limit is provided in this article or by any ordinance of the county. 
(Code 1983, § 29-2-1) 
Sec. 78-38. - Parking time limits; fees. 
(a)  The period of time of parking in areas designated as parking meter zones shall be registered by mechanical parking meters, and the charges which are reasonable and necessary to defray the expenses incident thereto, for such parking shall be as set out in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Such meters shall provide for maximum time limits as indicated on each meter of either 15 minutes, 18 minutes, 30 minutes, one hour or two hours. The fee in each instance shall be at the rate of $0.01 for each three minutes of time allowed; provided, however, that in those areas wherein ten-hour meters are installed, the parking time limits shall be ten hours, and the meter charges therefor shall be $0.05 per hour. 
(Code 1983, § 29-2-2) 
Sec. 78-39. - Cruising on public streets. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Cruise, cruises or cruising means to operate a motor vehicle, or to permit the operation of a motor vehicle under one's care, custody, or control, so as to pass the same traffic point within a no cruising zone more than twice within any two-hour period. 
Motor vehicle means every self-propelled device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
No cruising zone means the area bounded by and includes the following streets or portions of streets and any other areas designated by the county board of commissioners: 

 
Traffic control point means any point established by the county chief of police within a no cruising zone for the purpose of monitoring cruising. 
(b)  Violations. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if, on any Monday through Friday between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m., or on any Saturday or Sunday between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., he or she cruises in an area marked in accordance with this section as a no cruising zone. A citation will be issued under this Code section any time after the third passage of the motor vehicle by the traffic control point. 
(2)  The department of public works shall mark a no cruising zone by conspicuously posting the appropriate signs at each entrance to the zone. 
(c)  Exclusions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  An official public safety or emergency vehicle; 
(2)  A licensed public transportation vehicle; 
(3)  A vehicle being used for legitimate business purposes; or 
(4)  Any special event as declared by the county board of commissioners. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall forfeit the sum of $500.00. 
(e)  Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage by the county board of commissioners. 
(Res. No. 02-0369, 3-20-02) 
Sec. 78-40. - Enforcement of parking restrictions on county property. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
County facility means any building or grounds owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by Fulton County. 
County parking area means any area owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by Fulton County and designated by the county for parking. 
Offending vehicle means any "motor vehicle," as defined at O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(33), that is abandoned or otherwise parked in a location or for a duration that violates any rule or regulation established pursuant to the terms of this section. 
Parking management service means any entity which has been authorized by Fulton County to manage or monitor parking in county parking areas and/or to take enforcement action against offending vehicles pursuant to this section. 
(b)  The director of the department of real estate and asset management (D.R.E.A.M.) may create and also modify from time to time such reasonable rules, regulations, restrictions, and/or fees related to the parking of motor vehicles in any county parking area, provided that such rules, regulations, and restrictions do not conflict with any state or municipal laws or regulations applicable to the location of the county parking area. 
(c)  All rules, regulations, restrictions, and/or fees related to the parking of motor vehicles in any county parking area shall be clearly posted to notify users of county parking areas of the conditions governing and the limitations on the use thereof. 
(d)  Parking without payment of posted fees, or during times, in locations, or for durations prohibited by the posted parking regulations in county parking areas shall be a violation of this section. 
(e)  Any vehicle parked in violation of this section ("the offending vehicle") shall be subject to towing or immobilization at the discretion of the county or its designee or assignee, with the vehicle owner responsible for all associated costs and fees that may be charged by towing or immobilization services, including storage fees. 
(f)  Notices posted in county facility parking areas shall include, at a minimum: 
(1)  The rules, regulations, restrictions, and limitations applicable to the parking area, including fees for parking where applicable; 
(2)  The penalties for violation of such posted rules, regulations, restrictions and limitations and/or the failure to pay the posted fees for parking in that location; 
(3)  The location and telephone number where any offending vehicle may be towed and recovered; 
(4)  The telephone number to call for the removal of any immobilization device; 
(5)  The cost of recovery of the offending vehicle and/or removal of the immobilization device; and 
(6)  The form of payment required to retrieve the offending vehicle. 
(g)  The owner of any offending vehicle towed or immobilized shall be responsible for the payment of any parking fees that were unpaid, if applicable, all costs associated with the towing or immobilization of the offending vehicle, and any required storage thereof. 
(16-0994, 11-2-16) 
Secs. 78-41—78-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 78-61. - Enactment authority. 
The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, Georgia, under the authority of Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 1 (Home Rule For Counties) and Article 9, Section 2, paragraph III (Supplementary Powers) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia, as amended, and Georgia Laws 1973, pages 947, § 1, Georgia Laws 1980, page 775, § 5 and Georgia Laws 1981, page 953, § 1, hereby ordains and enacts into law this article. 
Cross reference— Uniform rules of the road adopted, § 78-1. 
State Law reference— Powers of counties over road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42(6) and (10); dimensions and weight of vehicles and loads, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-20 et seq.; ordinances for governing and policing unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a); police powers of local authorities over streets, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(1) and (13). 
(Ord. No. 98-1059, 8-5-98) 
Sec. 78-62. - Purpose. 
The Governing Authority of Fulton County is authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of unincorporated areas of the county for the purpose of protecting the public health safety and welfare. Specifically, the governing authority may provide for the regulation and control of motorized vehicles on the streets of the county; plan, designate, improve, manage, control and maintain an adequate county road system; and determine the maximum load, weight and vehicle dimensions which can be safely transported over each bridge on the county road system. Accordingly, the board of commissioners of the county hereby enacts the following provisions in an effort to regulate and control motorized vehicles in the unincorporated areas of the county for the purpose of protecting and preserving the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens; to thereby curb the usage of certain residential streets in the county by trucks as cut through routes, and to discourage the parking of such vehicles on these streets and public right of ways. 
(Ord. No. 98-1059, 8-5-98) 
Sec. 78-63. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Fulton County Truck Route Ordinance", and as Article III of Chapter 78, of the Code of Laws of Fulton County. 
(Ord. No. 98-1059, 8-5-98) 
Sec. 78-64. - Scope of article. 
The provisions of this article shall apply only to unincorporated the county or any area within the jurisdiction of the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. No. 98-1059, 8-5-98) 
Sec. 78-65. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
Governing authority means Fulton County ("County"), its board of commissioners, and where delegated by the board of commissioners, the Director of the Fulton County Department of Public Works or his/her designee, and the Fulton County Police and Sheriff departments. 
Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self propelled. 
Operator means any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle. 
Owner means a person, other than a lienholder or security interest holder, having the property in or title to a vehicle. The term includes a person entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in or lien by another person but excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as security except as otherwise specifically provided in this title. 
Person means every natural person, firm, copartnership, association, or corporation. 
Pneumatic tire means every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the load. A vehicle shall be considered equipped with pneumatic tires when pneumatic tires are used on all wheels. 
Pole trailer means every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
Police officer means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area, and residential or farm properties, timberland or forest. 
Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular traffic by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
Roadway means that portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively. 
Semitrailer means every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a railway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
Stand or standing means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
Stop or stopping : 
(1)  When required, means complete cessation from movement; or 
(2)  When prohibited, means any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
Tractor means any self-propelled vehicle designed for use as a traveling power plant or for drawing other vehicles but having no provision for carrying loads independently. 
Trailer means every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
Truck means every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
Truck camper means any structure designed, used or maintained primarily to be loaded on or affixed to a motor vehicle to provide a mobile dwelling, sleeping place, office or commercial space. 
Truck tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
State Law reference— Definitions, motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1. 
Sec. 78-66. - Restrictive vehicles in excess of weight and length limitations required to use truck routes; exceptions. 
All motor vehicles having a gross weight in excess of 36,000 pounds, including the load thereon, or having an overall length in the excess of 30 feet, except vehicles designated as to carry passengers, are prohibited from using streets within the unincorporated areas of the county, except those streets authorized by this article as truck routes, including any amendments hereof, or as may be further designated by the governing authority as truck routes, except when: 
(1)  The terminal, parking lot, repair garage, or headquarters of the restricted motor vehicle is not a designated truck route, ingress to and egress from those places shall be made by the most direct route available between the terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters and nearest designated truck route; 
(2)  A delivery or pickup is to be made at a location which is not on a designated truck route, and not within any areas bounded by certain specified streets that the county prohibits normal truck traffic because of congestion, ingress to and egress from that location shall be made by the most direct route available between that location and the nearest designated truck route; 
(3)  A delivery or pickup is to be made by a truck tractor, road tractor, combination road tractor-trailer within any areas which is not on a designated truck route, and not within any areas bounded by certain specified streets that the county prohibits normal truck traffic because of congestion, such delivery or pickup shall not be made between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 98-1059, 8-5-98) 
Sec. 78-67. - Truck routes; posted regulatory signs. 
The following routes, as further identified by posted regulatory signs, and as may be revised from time-to-time by the traffic administrator with the approval of the governing authority, are designated as truck routes: 
_______ 
_______ 
_______ 
_______ 
_______ 
_______ 
_______ 
Cross reference— Traffic control signs, § 78-3(d). 
State Law reference— No violation of ordinance unless regulatory sign is posted on roadway, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(c). 
(Ord. No. 98-1059, 8-5-98) 
Sec. 78-68. - Use of temporary truck routes by restricted vehicles. 
If a designated truck route, or any portion thereof, shall be under repair or otherwise temporary out of use, restricted vehicles, as defined in this article, shall use other temporary truck routes as may be designated by the governing authority and further identified by the posting of the regulatory traffic control sign. 
Cross reference— Traffic control signs, § 78-3. 
Sec. 78-69. - Evidence required for restricted vehicle to be off truck route. 
When upon streets other than those designated as truck routes, any person driving or in charge or control of any of the motor vehicles restricted by this Article shall be prepared to present for inspection of police officers his log book, weight slips, delivery slips or other written evidence of his or her destination and point of origin to justify the presence of the restricted vehicle on a street other than a designated truck route. 
(Ord. No. 98-1059, 8-5-98) 
Sec. 78-70. - Weight of vehicle and loads. 
No vehicle shall be operated on any public road within unincorporated Fulton County designated as a truck route, with a total gross weight in excess of 56,000 pounds unless the vehicle is making a pickup or delivery on such road. The maximum gross weight shall then not exceed 73,280 pounds. 
State Law reference— Weigh of vehicles and loads on county roadways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-26(f). 
(Ord. No. 98-1059, 8-5-98) 
Sec. 78-71. - Weight limitations on wheels; axle limitations. 
No wheel on any vehicle operated upon any public road within unincorporated Fulton County, equipped with high pressure, pneumatic solid rubber or cushion tires shall carry a load which exceeds 8,000 pounds by more than 13 percent; or any, or an axle load which exceeds 16,000 pounds by more than 13 percent; an axle load shall be defined as the total on all wheels whose centers may be included between two parallel transverse vertical planes 40 inches apart. If the driver of any vehicle can comply with the requirements of this section by shifting or equalizing the load on all wheels or axles and does so when requested by the proper authority, said driver shall not be held to be operating in violation of this section. 
State Law reference— Wheel loads limitations, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-26(b)(1). 
(Ord. No. 98-1059, 8-5-98) 
Sec. 78-72. - Weight limitations on streets, bridges and culverts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle on any street in unincorporated Fulton County where the weight of such motor vehicle with or without load is in excess of the weight as limited by this article and where signs indicating such limitations are posted. Further, it shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle over a bridge or culvert in unincorporated Fulton County over the weight capacity shown on said bridge and/or culvert. 
(b)  The driver and/or owner shall be liable to the county for any and all damages caused by driving an overweight motor vehicle over any street, bridge and/or culvert with a posted sign. These damages are in addition to any fine or punishment which may be assessed for violation of this article. 
State Law reference— Enforcement of load limits, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-27. 
(Ord. No. 98-1059, 8-5-98) 
Sec. 78-73. - Certain trucks prohibited on certain streets; posted signs. 
(a)  Any truck or truck tractor operated separately or in combination with any trailer or semi-trailer which has either two axles with six tires or three or more axles shall be designated for the purpose of this section as a small truck. No such truck shall be operated on any street or portion of a street within unincorporated Fulton County where signs are posted prohibiting the trucks, except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. Signs may be posted to prohibit the trucks from operation on a single street or a group of streets so as to form a closed area. 
(b)  A motor vehicle described in subsection (a) of this section may be operated on a street or in an area where prohibited by signs, if the vehicle has a gross weight in excess of 36,000 pounds and/or has an overall length in excess of 30 feet and is being operated off an established truck route as provided for in section 78-66. 
(c)  A motor vehicle described in subsection (a) of this section which has a gross weight of 36,000 pounds or less and has a length of 30 feet or less may be operated on a street or in an area where prohibited by signs, under the following conditions: 
(1)  When making a delivery of cargo, when proceeding to a location to pick up a load or to perform a service and the location of the delivery, loading or service is on a prohibited street or in a prohibited area. 
(2)  Ingress and egress from the location is made by traveling the most direct route between the locations and the nearest: 
a.  Street segment on which the vehicle is not prohibited; or 
b.  Designated truck route. 
(d)  The driver of any truck as defined in subsection (a) of this section shall be prepared to present to police officers for inspection the drivers log books, delivery slips and other written evidence of the drivers destination and the point of origin to justify, under subsection (c) of this section, the presence of the truck on a section of street from which the truck would otherwise be prohibited under subsection (a) of this section. 
State Law reference— Need for signs authorized by ordinances to be posted at entrance of roadway, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(20)(c). 
(Ord. No. 98-1059, 8-5-98) 
Sec. 78-74. - Enforcement of weight and load limitations. 
(a)  Any person who violates the load limitations provisions of this article shall be conclusively presumed to have damaged the public roads, including bridges of the unincorporated areas of the county by reason of such overloading and shall, in addition to any other penalty at law, recompensed the county for such damages in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-27, as same may be amended. 
(b)  Any owner or operator of a vehicle which is operated on the public roads of unincorporated Fulton County in violation of the weight limits provided in this article shall be required, in addition to paying the monies provided in subsection (a) of this section, to unload all gross weight in excess of 6000 pounds over the legal weight limit before being allowed to move the vehicle. 
(c)  Any person authorized by state law and section 78-78 of this article to enforce this article may seize the offending vehicle of an owner who fails or whose operator has failed to pay the monies proscribed in subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 32-6-27 and hold such vehicle until the proscribed moneys are paid. Any authorized person seizing such vehicle under this subsection or subsection (b) of this section may, when necessary, store the vehicle, and the owner thereof shall be responsible for all reasonable storage charges thereon. When any vehicle is seized, held, unloaded or partially unloaded under this section, the load or any part thereof shall be removed or cared for by the owner or operator of the vehicle without any liability on the part of the authorized person or the county because of damage to or loss of such load or any part thereof. 
State Law reference— Enforcement of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; enforcement of load limits, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-27. 
(Ord. No. 98-1059, 8-5-98) 
Sec. 78-75. - Parking of commercial vehicles weighing 6,000 pounds or more. 
It shall be unlawful to park any nonmotorized vehicle or conveyance of any motorized commercial vehicle which are designated by the department of public safety for a license tag in a weight category heavier than 6,000 pounds on the right-of-way of any residential street or upon residential zoned property, unless said vehicle is making a delivery to said residential property. School buses shall not fall under this section. This section shall not apply to construction vehicles, trailers, or equipment temporarily located within a construction area, provided such vehicles, trailers or equipment are used in connection with dwelling units under construction within such construction area. Any vehicle or conveyance parked in a manner that violates this provision shall be considered an abandoned vehicle and a nuisance posing a threat to the public health or safety and shall be subject to removal as otherwise authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-1059, 8-5-98; Res. No. 09-0288, 3-4-09) 
Cross reference— Stopping, parking and standing, § 78-36. 
State Law reference— Authority of county to regulate parking, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-2(2); O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; § 40-6-371. 
Sec. 78-76. - Overnight parking of vehicles weighing 6,000 pounds or more. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., on the right-of-way of any residential street, any nonmotorized vehicle or conveyance or any motorized vehicle designated by the department of public safety for a license tag in any weight category higher than the 6,000 pounds commercial classification. Any vehicle or conveyance parked in a manner that violates this provision shall be considered an abandoned vehicle and a nuisance posing a threat to the public health or safety and shall be subject to removal as otherwise authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-1059, 8-5-98; Res. No. 09-0288, 3-4-09) 
Sec. 78-77. - Parking or storage of unlicensed, inoperable vehicles, trailers or equipment. 
Vehicles and trailers of any kind without current license plates shall not be parked or stored on or about any property within a residential zoned district or on the right-of-way of any residential street. Further, vehicles, trailers or equipment permitted to remain in an inoperable condition for more than 30 days shall not be parked or stored on or about any property within a residential zoned district. Provided, however, this section shall not apply to vehicles, trailers or equipment stored in an enclosed structure or appropriately covered and located in the rear yard area. Any vehicle, conveyance or trailer parked in a manner that violates this provision shall be considered an abandoned vehicle and a nuisance posing a threat to the public health or safety and shall be subject to removal as otherwise authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-1059, 8-5-98; Res. No. 09-0288, 3-4-09) 
Sec. 78-78. - Penalties; enforcement generally. 
(a)  Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or no more than 60 days in jail or both for each occurrence; and each occurrence shall be deemed a separate offense. These penalties shall be separate and apart from any costs associated with the removal, towing, seizure, holding or storage of an offending vehicle authorized elsewhere in this article. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specifically provided by resolution of the county board of commissioners, the enforcement of this article shall be within the jurisdiction of the county's police department, and department of sheriff and any other county officer authorized by the State of Georgia to make misdemeanor criminal arrests. Enforcement of this article shall also lie with the Fulton County Code Enforcement Division. Specifically, but not by way of limitation, any violation of this section may be tried upon citations issued by enforcement personnel, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 51-20-63 et seq., and any successor statute. Persons designated by the governing authority are hereby authorized to issue citations or summons or both, charging violations under this article, returnable to a court or courts having jurisdiction over state traffic offenses or other courts having jurisdiction over violations of county ordinances. 
(c)  Any person authorized by state law or by this code section to enforce this article may remove an offending vehicle from any road, right-of-way or other public property or have an offending vehicle that is parked on any road, right-of-way or other public property towed to an appropriate location immediately upon its discovery. The notice provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-11-3 shall be followed as to any vehicle so removed. The owner of the offending vehicle so removed shall be responsible for all reasonable costs associated with the removal or towing of the offending vehicle and any required storage thereof. Any person authorized by state law or by this code section to enforce this article may seize an offending vehicle from any road, right-of-way or other public property and may hold such vehicle until any and all fines imposed upon the owner of the offending vehicle based on the violation(s) are paid in full and any and all costs associated with the removal or towing of the offending vehicle and any required storage thereof have been satisfied in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-11-2. Neither the county nor any person authorized by state law or by this code section to enforce this article shall be liable for any damage or loss when an offending vehicle or a vehicle reasonably considered to be offending at the time enforcement action was taken is removed, towed, seized, held or stored in accordance with this provision. 
(d)  Nothing in this section is intended to allow or shall be interpreted to allow the removal, towing, seizure, holding or storage of any offending vehicle located on private property unless and to the extent such actions are otherwise authorized in state law. 
(e)  For purposes of enforcing the provisions of this section, any Fulton County Court or courts having jurisdiction over state traffic offenses or other courts having jurisdiction over violations of county ordinances shall be entitled to take such action to ensure compliance, and the person convicted shall reimburse the county for any cost or expense associated with such compliance efforts and the county shall be entitled to place a lien on the property or require a bond from the person to secure payment and reimbursement for these expenses. 
(Ord. No. 98-1059, 8-5-98; Res. No. 09-0288, 3-4-09) 
State Law reference— Citations for violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; court with jurisdiction for violating county ordinances dealing with traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(c). 
Secs. 78-79—78-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC CALMING PROGRAM 

Sec. 78-101. - Introduction. 
Many local jurisdictions throughout the United States have been researching and developing measures to manage and control problems associated with traffic flow through their residential neighborhoods. The problems of excessive speeding, cut through traffic, and pedestrian safety are common to many of these jurisdiction. 
The rapid rate of growth of the Metropolitan Atlanta Area Counties has resulted in a significant increase in the volume of traffic on area roadways. Motorists have sought alternative routes to avoid traffic congestion and length of delay experienced on these roadways. Some of these alternative routes are cut-thru routes through residential streets, which has resulted in a proliferation of traffic related problems in residential neighborhoods. Additionally, motorists tend to travel through residential areas, at speeds that greatly exceed the posted speed limit. Residents and neighborhood associations have voiced their concerns about these traffic problems. In light of this, the county board of commissioners has requested that the transportation division of the public works department develop a traffic calming program. 
The mission of the traffic calming program is to improve and enhance the quality of life in residential neighborhoods, by reducing the negative impact of automobile traffic on neighborhood streets. The objective of the program is to develop and implement traffic calming initiatives which may provide corrective remedies to traffic problems associated with excessive speeding, cut-thru traffic, and vehicle and pedestrian safety. The transportation division will implement the program utilizing engineering, enforcement, education, and community participation. The traffic calming program although developed by the county, is meant to be a community driven program. The community will choose the type of traffic calming initiative that they deem suitable, based on the recommendations of county transportation division. The community may be required to pay for the cost of implementing, maintaining, and removing any device associated with the traffic calming initiatives. The funding mechanism will be determined by the board of commissioners. A complete description of various traffic calming devices, estimated costs, warrants and the county associated policies are included in this document. 
(Ord. No. 98-1103, § 1.0, 9-2-98) 
Sec. 78-102. - Definition. 
Traffic calming devices are measures that are implemented to reduce the negative impact created by automobile usage of residential streets. They regulate the travel speeds of motorists, and allow the roadway to be shared safely by pedestrians and bicyclists. Traffic calming is often referred to as reverse traffic engineering because in traffic engineering, the approach is to increase the level of service of the roadway by adding capacity and reducing the lengths of delay time, whereas in traffic calming the general approach is to slow the traffic thereby increasing the lengths of delay time experience by motorists. These traffic calming measures include geometric changes to the existing roadway such as narrow lane widths, chokers, traffic circles, speed humps, and cul-de-sacs. 
(Ord. No. 98-1103, § 1.2, 9-2-98) 
Sec. 78-103. - Purpose. 
The county traffic calming program establishes a policy guide for the county to consistently deal with traffic related matters, and promote safe and convenient travel in residential neighborhoods. The program outlines policies, processes and warrants for implementing traffic calming measures that may be used as possible remedies for traffic related problems in residential neighborhoods. Standardized designs for various devices are included as a part of this program, to ensure uniformity and safety. Variation from these standards may be approved by the county transportation administrator. 
(Ord. No. 98-1103, § 1.3, 9-2-98) 
Sec. 78-104. - Implementation. 
Before any traffic calming measure can be implemented, a traffic study must be undertaken by the transportation division, who will analyze the data and make the appropriate recommendations. Staff of the transportation division are available to make presentations and discuss their findings and recommendations to neighborhood associations and community groups. The recommendations that are made are based on engineering and design standards publications such as the AASHTO Green Book, the MUTCD (Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices), the TRB-Highway Capacity Manual, Fulton County Public Works Design Standards, and other design standards and regulations. Staff will use prudence and good judgement in their recommendations, so that the health, welfare and safety of the community are considered when recommending a traffic calming device. The following are some of the factors that will be consider for any traffic calming device to be implemented. 
(1)  The county will only consider installation of traffic calming devices on streets classified as local, residential streets. 
(2)  Traffic studies must confirm that a traffic related problem exist before the county will recommend a traffic calming device. 
(3)  For speeding, the study must find that a speeding problem exist, based on the standard 85 th percentile speed of at least 11 MPH over the posted speed limit of the road. 
(4)  For cut-thru traffic problems to be confirmed, the average daily traffic, peak hour volumes and directional turning movements will be compared to theoretical estimations as outlined in the most current (ITE) Institute of Transportation Trip Generation Guide. 
(5)  For pedestrian and other safety related problems, confirmation will be made based on the accident data reports, inadequate roadway geometrics (such limited sight distance), school locations and other safety related parameters. 
(6)  The county requires that there must be wide support from the community for implementing traffic calming measures in their neighborhood. 
(7)  It is required that a formal petition be submitted to the county, showing that 75 percent of the property owners in the neighborhood and 90 percent of the property owners along the affected roadway affirm their support for installation of the traffic calming device. In certain circumstances, if number of residents supporting the petition is slightly less than that stated above, but a clear overwhelming majority support is shown for the initiative, the board of commissioners county may opt to waive these percentages. 
(8)  The county transportation administrator may recommend the installation of traffic calming devices without the above percentages based on traffic safety. 
(9)  The design of traffic calming devices must be safe and effective. The county requires that all traffic calming devices be designed as those outlined in this document (Appendix) [Not included in this Code]. Any variation from the standard designs must be approved by the transportation administrator, or his designee. 
(10)  Once the traffic calming devices are installed, the county transportation division reserves the right to move, modify or remove the devices for operational or safety reasons at any time. 
(11)  The neighborhood association may request to have any traffic calming device installed in their community removed. A formal petition will be required showing that 75 percent of the property owners in the neighborhood, and 90 percent of the property owners along the affected roadway affirm their support for removing these devices. Additionally, the neighborhood will be required to cover the cost associated with removing these devices. 
(12)  The county may deny a request to remove a traffic calming device based on operational and safety reasons. 
(Ord. No. 98-1103, § 2.0, 9-2-98) 
Sec. 78-105. - Petition for installing traffic calming devices. 
(a)  [ Petition. ] Where engineering studies indicate that installing traffic calming devices on county-maintained neighborhood roads would correct or improve a traffic situation, and their installation is favored by a majority of property owners in the area, a petition must be submitted to the transportation division of the county for review. All of the property owners in the subdivision should be contacted and given an opportunity to sign this petition, indicating their "yes" or "no" concerning the installation of the traffic calming device. Unless property is undergoing change of ownership, a spouse's signature will not be acceptable if he/she is not the legal owner. If both husband and wife are joint legal owners, both signatures are required. A "Mr. and Mrs." signature is not is not acceptable. All owners must sign individually, including owners of undeveloped lots. Renting tenants are not an acceptable substitute for the legal homeowner. The purpose of the homeowner's association officer attesting to the signatures is to verify the signatures of the property owners. The percentages will be calculated, based on individual lots where owners sign affirmatively, divided by the total number of lots in the plotted subdivision, units, or "defined service area." Each lot counts as only one lot regardless of owners signing. At least 75 percent of the homeowners in the neighborhood and 90 percent of the homeowners along the affected roadway must vote in favor of installing the traffic calming device, before the petition can be presented to the board of commissioners. 
The completed petition must be signed, notarized and the returned to the transportation division, where it will be checked by tax records and land lot maps to insure that it meets all requirements. It will be returned to the sender if it does not meet the requirements. Petitions that do meet the requirements will be presented to the commissioners at their regular Wednesday meeting. A public hearing will be announced at that time for each petition. At the public hearing, the petition will be approved or disapproved by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Installation funded by the neighborhood. The installation of the traffic calming devices by a private contractor will not be considered final until personnel of the department of public works inspect them for compliance with design standards. Charges associated with the installation of these devices are handled by the homeowners association at the time of installation. All installation cost will be funded by the subdivision with the county acting in the role of project administrator. The county will assist the neighborhood in securing a private contract for the construction of speed humps. It is the responsibility of the neighborhood association or the contractor to file for a land disturbance permit with the county development services department. County personnel will inspect and approve the construction of said devices to insure that they meet the design criteria outlined in this document. 
Annualized charges for the maintenance and repair of traffic calming devices are assessed to the neighborhood association through a private agreement with the county at the end of the year. It is the responsibility of the neighborhood association to assess fees to members as determined by the association. The neighborhood association may enter into a private agreement with county for the private maintenance of the traffic calming at such that a yearly maintenance fee will not be collected by the county but the association will be required to maintain these devices to county standards within a reasonable time period as determined by the county. 
(c)  Installation funded by the county. The county will be responsible for all cost associated with the installation at traffic calming devices. Material and repair cost will also be assumed by the county. 
(Ord. No. 98-1103, § 3.0, 9-2-98) 
Sec. 78-106. - Types of traffic calming devices. 
Various types of traffic calming devices/techniques are presented in this section. They are presented and categorized according to their suitability to correct problems associated with each type of neighborhood traffic problem. Some of these devices have been shown to be effective in solving one or more types of traffic-related problems. Results of studies released through the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) of technical papers, indicate that the following were quite effective in residential speed control. These are speed humps, traffic circles, traffic chokers, and traffic diverters. Others mentioned later are suited to correcting problems associated with cut-thru traffic and pedestrian safety. 
(1)  Speed humps (speed reduction device). 
a.  Purpose: To reduce vehicle speeds. 
b.  Effectiveness: 22-foot speed humps are very effective at encouraging 30 mph vehicle speeds. 
c.  Advantages: 
1.  Effectively reduce vehicle speeds. 
2.  It poses no restrictions for bicycles. 
3.  Does not affect intersection operations. 
d.  Disadvantages: Can possibly increase traffic noise from braking and acceleration of vehicles, particularly buses and trucks. 
e.  Cost: Between $2,500 and $3,500 each. 
f.  Transit service impacts: Experience shows 22-foot speed humps do not impede transit services or scheduling. 
g.  Emergency services impacts: When speed humps designs are selected for any street, one must consider whether it is used as a primary response route. 
h.  Other considerations: Speed humps are not considered on grades greater than eight percent. 
(2)  Chicane (speed reduction device). 
a.  Description: A feature that changes the physical characteristics of a roadway section from an existing straight alignment to a series of horizontal curves. 
b.  Purpose: To reduce the speed of vehicles by providing a narrowed vehicle travel path for a section of roadway. 
c.  Advantages: 
1.  Reduces vehicle speeds with less impact on emergency service vehicles. 
2.  May reduce cut-through traffic. 
d.  Disadvantages: 
1.  Most residents would have driveway affected by the type of installation. 
2.  Increased maintenance for landscaping and pavement. 
3.  Significant loss of on-street parking. 
e.  Cost: Between $5,000 and $10,000 per location. 
f.  Transit service impact: Impact not significant. 
g.  Emergency service impacts: Impact not significant. 
h.  Other considerations: N/A. 
(3)  Radar trailer (speed reduction device). 
a.  Description: A portable radar speed meter capable of measuring vehicle speed graphically and displaying the speed of the motorist. 
b.  Advantages: Speeds may be reduced during short intervals where the radar trailer is located. 
c.  Disadvantages: 
1.  Not an enforcement tool. 
2.  No noticeable effect on deterring rat-running traffic. 
d.  Cost: N/A - County purchasing and operates. 
e.  Transit service impacts: N/A. 
f.  Emergency service impacts: N/A. 
g.  Other services: N/A. 
(4)  Narrowing lanes (speed reduction device). 
a.  Description: Striping is used to create narrow travel lanes to 10-foot wide lanes. This gives drivers the feel of a narrow street that does not lend itself to high speeds. 
b.  Purpose: To restrict the width of available road space. 
c.  Advantages: 
1.  Speed may decrease and safety is improved through the provision of positive guidance to drivers. 
2.  The striping can be easily modified if paint is used. 
d.  Disadvantages: Residents do not always perceive striping to be an effective tool for speed reduction. 
e.  Cost: The cost varies on the length of a street. 
f.  Transit service impact: It will not have significant impact. 
g.  Emergency service impacts: It will not have significant impact. 
h.  Other considerations: N/A. 
(5)  Diagonal diverter (reduce cut-through traffic). 
a.  Description: A barrier between diagonally opposite corners of a four-legged intersection, thus creating two unconnected L-shaped intersections. 
b.  Advantages: 
1.  Effectively reduces cut-through traffic. 
2.  Creates no dead-end streets, local residents and service vehicles may view this as a benefit in that their routes can be more direct. 
3.  Reduces motorist speed. 
4.  Can restrict access while retaining bicycle and pedestrian access. 
c.  Disadvantages: 
1.  In a large neighborhood, can shift problems elsewhere unless a strategic pattern of diverters are used. 
2.  May inconvenience local residents who are forced to drive longer more circuitous paths to and from their homes. 
d.  Cost: Approximately $15,000 to $35,000. 
e.  Transit service impacts: Should not be considered on transit streets. 
f.  Emergency service impacts: Even though diagonal diverters would restrict turns to EMS vehicles, they can be designed and installed to provide for emergency access. 
g.  Other considerations: N/A. 
(6)  Semi-diverters (reduce cut-thru-traffic). 
a.  Description: A barrier to traffic in one direction of a street which permits traffic in the opposite direction to pass through. 
b.  Advantages: 
1.  Serve as an alternative to a one-way street designation by allowing residents within the block to continue to use the street for two-way travel opportunity. 
2.  Emergency service vehicles travel time is expedited. 
c.  Disadvantage: Because they block only one-half of the street, these are easily violated. 
d.  Cost: $5,000 to $20,000. 
e.  Transit service impacts: May affect transit routes, however, careful planning will be incorporated to minimize any effects. 
f.  Emergency service impacts: Allows a higher degree of emergency vehicle access than cul-de-sacs or diagonal diverters can be designed to allow emergency vehicle access, but careful consideration needs to be given to their use on primary fire response routes. 
g.  Other considerations: N/A. 
(7)  Median barrier (reduce cut-thru traffic). 
a.  Description: A physical barrier on a non-local street which can effectively eliminate left turns from that non-local street onto a local street and eliminate local street straight-through and left turn traffic across the non-local street. A median barrier usually is an asphalt/concrete curbed island with or without a decorative landscaping and surface treatment. 
b.  Advantages: 
1.  Makes the intersection move safely by reducing the number of conflicting movements. 
2.  Reduces local street volumes. 
3.  Negates the possible need for future expensive traffic signal. 
c.  Disadvantages: 
1.  The physical barrier may sift traffic to other locations where left-turn opportunities exist. 
2.  This tool may inconvenience local residents who will be forced to drive longer more circuitous paths to reach their destination. 
d.  Cost: Cost vary widely. 
e.  Transit service impacts: Transit routes will be planned to accommodate median barriers so the effect should be minimal. 
f.  Emergency service impact: Consultations with emergency service providers will take place before median barriers will be installed. Careful planning of these facilities should minimize any negative impact. 
g.  Other considerations: A full median with no breaks can also be used to prohibit all left turns. 
(8)  Culs-de-sac (reduce cut-thru traffic). 
a.  Description: Complete closure of a street either at an intersection or at a mid-block location. 
b.  Advantages: 
1.  Very effective at eliminating most of the previously speeding traffic on the block. 
2.  Very effective at reducing volumes. 
3.  Can be landscaped for an attractive effect to convey street discontinuity. 
4.  Improves traffic safety. 
c.  Disadvantages: 
1.  Can negatively affect response times for emergency service. 
2.  In large neighborhoods, can shift a problem elsewhere unless a strategic pattern of cul-de-sacs are used. 
3.  Can generate confusion on the part of users unless signed carefully. 
4.  May inconvenience local residents. 
d.  Cost: $20,000 each. 
e.  Transit service impacts: Should not be placed on transit routes. 
f.  Emergency service impacts: Emergency service providers will be consulted before these are installed. 
g.  Other considerations: Inhibits provision of emergency services, but can be used using break away posts. 
(9)  Chokers (reduce cut-through traffic). 
a.  Description: Narrowing of a street at an intersection, mid-block or a segment of a street in order to reduce width of the traveled way by construction of a wider sidewalk or landscape strip. 
b.  Advantage: 
1.  Slight slowing is normally the result. 
2.  Shorter pedestrian crossing distances and better motorist-pedestrian visibility of each other. 
3.  Can discourage truck entry. 
c.  Disadvantages: 
1.  Potential obstacle for motorist to run into. 
2.  May impede bicycle mobility and safety. 
3.  May require reworking of surface drainage. 
4.  May result in loss of curbside parking. 
d.  Cost: $7,000 to $10,000 each. 
e.  Emergency service impacts: The impact should not be significant. 
f.  Transit service impacts: Doesn't impede service, but might affect scheduling. 
g.  Other considerations: Chokers will be 14 to 16 feet wide. 
(10)  Raised crosswalks (pedestrian safety). 
a.  Description: Crosswalks constructed 3 to 4 inches above the elevation of the street. 
b.  Purpose: Intended to reduce vehicle speeds specifically where pedestrians will be crossing a street. 
c.  Effectiveness: Effective at reducing vehicle speeds. 
d.  Cost: Between $2,000 and $5,000 each. 
e.  Noise impact: May generate noise from vehicle decelerating and accelerating. 
f.  Transit service impacts: N/A. 
g.  Emergency service impacts: N/A. 
h.  Other considerations: Consideration for visually impaired persons dictates not placing the raised crosswalk at the same elevation as the sidewalk. Though the crosswalk is raised from the street surface, a pedestrian should also be able to tell when they are entering an area shared with automobiles. 
(11)  Curb extensions (pedestrian safety). 
a.  Purpose: Employed to make pedestrian crossing easier and to narrow the roadway. 
b.  Effectiveness: Improve pedestrian safety by reducing the street crossing distance and improving sight distance. These may also slightly influence driver behavior by changing the appearance of the street. They can be installed either at intersections or midblock. 
c.  Advantages: 
1.  Reduce pedestrian crossing distance and time. 
2.  Make pedestrian crossing points more visible to drivers. 
3.  Prevent vehicles from passing other vehicles that are turning. 
4.  May visually enhance the street through landscaping. 
5.  Does not slow fire vehicles. 
d.  Disadvantages: 
1.  Require some parking removal. 
2.  May make it difficult to accommodate full bicycle lanes. 
e.  Cost: Between $7,000 and $10,000. 
f.  Transit service impact: Enhance service by moving the curb so riders step directly between the sidewalk and bus door. 
g.  Emergency service impacts: N/A. 
h.  Other considerations: N/A. 
(Ord. No. 98-1103, §§ 4.0—4.11, 9-2-98) 
Secs. 78-107—78-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FULTON COUNTY AUTOMATED TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 78-150. - General definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Owner means the registrant of a motor vehicle, except that such term shall not include a motor vehicle rental company when a motor vehicle registered by such company is being operated by another person under a rental agreement with such company. 
Recorded images means images recorded by a traffic-control signal monitoring device: 
(1)  On: 
a.  Two or more photographs; 
b.  Two or more microphotographs; 
c.  Two or more electronic images; or 
d.  Videotape; and 
(2)  Showing a traffic-control signal displaying a circular red or red arrow signal along with the rear of a motor vehicle apparently operated in disregard or disobedience of such signal and, on at least one image or portion of tape, clearly revealing the number or other identifying designation of the license plate displayed on the motor vehicle. 
Traffic-control signal monitoring device means a device with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a traffic-control signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles being operated in disregard or disobedience of a circular red or red arrow signal. 
(Res. No. 05-0692, 6-1-05) 
Sec. 78-151. - Authorization of traffic-control signal monitoring devices. 
Subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-14-21, the board of commissioners authorizes the use of traffic-control signal monitoring devices for purposes of automated traffic enforcement. Use of said devices shall be governed by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-20, 40-14-21, 40-14-22, 40-14-23, and 40-14-24, and any other applicable provisions of law. 
(Res. No. 05-0692, 6-1-05) 
Sec. 78-152. - Identification of intersections for use of traffic-control signal monitoring devices. 
The Fulton County Police Department shall be responsible for the identification and selection of intersections where traffic-control signal monitoring devices will be utilized and for compliance with O.C.G.A. § 40-14-22 and 40-14-23. 
(Res. No. 05-0692, 6-1-05) 
Sec. 78-153. - Enforcement. 
The Fulton County Police Department shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20. 
(Res. No. 05-0692, 6-1-05) 
Sec. 78-154. - Civil penalty. 
The driver of a motor vehicle cited pursuant to this article shall be liable for a civil monetary penalty not to exceed $70.00. Citations shall be issued by the Fulton County Police Department in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(f)(3)(B). 
(Res. No. 05-0692, 6-1-05) 
Sec. 78-155. - Contesting the civil penalty. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(f)(3)(D), liability shall be determined based upon a preponderance of the evidence. Prima-facie evidence that the vehicle described in the citation issued pursuant to this article was operated in violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a), together with proof that the defendant was at the time of such violation the registered owner of the vehicle, shall permit the trier of fact in its discretion to infer that such owner of the vehicle was the driver of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. Such an inference may be rebutted if the owner of the vehicle: 
(1)  Testifies under oath in open court that he or she was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation; 
(2)  Presents to the court prior to the return date established on the citation a certified copy of a police report showing that the vehicle had been reported to the police as stolen prior to the time of the alleged violation; or 
(3)  Submits to the court prior to the return date established on the citation a sworn notarized statement identifying the name of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not limit law enforcement agencies to the use of traffic-control signal monitoring devices in enforcing O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a); and, when there is evidence obtained from another source or sources which constitutes a prima-facie case of a violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a), such violation may be prosecuted as otherwise provided by law in lieu of, but not in addition to, enforcement under this article. 
(Res. No. 05-0692, 6-1-05) 
Sec. 78-156. - Warning period. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(f)(3)(B), only warning notices and not citations for violations shall be sent during the 30-day period following the installation of any traffic-control signal monitoring device. 
(Res. No. 05-0692, 6-1-05) 
Chapter 82 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; technical codes, § 14-36 et seq.; ordinances pertaining to environment, ch. 26; ordinances pertaining to solid waste, ch. 70; Atlanta-Fulton Water Commission, § 102-671 et seq.; private inspection of water and sewer lines, § 106-6; resolutions pertaining to utilities, ch. 178. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Taxation, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); authority to provide for the development storage and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 04-1326, adopted Dec. 15, 2004 amended art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Code 1983. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 

Sec. 82-1. - Water conservation program. 
(a)  This section shall be known as the Fulton County Water Conservation Program. Its purpose is to conserve potable water; to meet requirements of state and federal regulations; and similar related purposes. 
(b)  The Fulton County Water Conservation Program shall be that document entitled "Fulton County, Department of Public Works, Water Conservation Plan," dated January 2003 or any subsequent revision thereof approved by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  It is the policy of Fulton County to promote water conservation by regulating outdoor water use and by complying with the laws and regulations imposed by the state on outdoor water use. 
(d)  Restrictions for outdoor water use during non-drought periods. 
(1)  Restricted uses. The following uses are restricted by hours of the day or by days of the week. 
a.  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-5-7, during non-drought periods persons may irrigate for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants, seven days a week, but only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
b.  Other outdoor water use not listed in subsections (d)(1)a. immediately above and (d)(2) below may occur during non-drought periods 24 hours per day but only on the following days: 
1.  Outdoor water use at odd-numbered addresses is allowed on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays. 
2.  Outdoor water use at even-numbered addresses is allowed on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. 
(2)  Unrestricted uses. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-5-7, the following outdoor uses are allowed during drought and non-drought periods, seven days a week, 24 hours per day: 
a.  Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
b.  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable Fulton County ordinances and state guidelines; 
c.  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable Fulton County Board of Health regulations adopted pursuant thereto; 
d.  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the department to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
e.  Irrigation of personal food gardens; 
f.  Irrigation of new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
g.  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
h.  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
i.  Use of water withdrawn from private wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
j.  Irrigation of horticulture crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
k.  Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
l.  Installation, maintenance, or calibration or irrigation systems; 
m.  Hydroseeding. 
(e)  Any violation of section 82-1(c)(d) shall constitute a misdemeanor as set forth in article II, section 82-44. 
(f)  This amended section shall be effective January 1, 2011. Nothing in this article is intended to repeal any other duly enacted ordinance, resolution, or parts of ordinances or resolutions of the county, except where such ordinance, resolution, or parts of ordinances or resolutions are in direct conflict with this article. Any such repeal under this section shall be to the extent of such conflict only and no further. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04; Ord. No. 10-1248, 10-15-10; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
Sec. 82-2. - Water cross connection control and backflow prevention program. 
(a)  This section shall be known as the Fulton County, Water System, Backflow Prevention and Cross Connection Control Program. Its purpose is to prevent water contamination via interconnections with unsafe and nonpotable sources; to meet requirements of state and federal regulations; and similar related purposes. 
(b)  The Fulton Water System Backflow Prevention and Cross Connection Control Program shall be that document entitled "Fulton County, Department of Public Works, Backflow Prevention Program," dated October 2004 or any subsequent revision thereof approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Secs. 82-3—82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 04-1326, adopted Dec. 15, 2004 amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Code 1983. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
Cross reference— Drinking water supply, § 34-111 et seq. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference —Authority to provide water service, § 1-114. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 82-31. - Statement of necessity. 
It is hereby determined necessary to the protection of the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience of the citizens of Fulton County, and for the orderly development of the water distribution system of the county to establish three water service districts within the county, to provide procedures for the laying of water mains, assessing the cost thereof, and fixing the service charges for the use of the facilities pursuant to the authority granted by article IX, section III of the Constitution of Georgia, as amended, the Fulton Water and Sewer System Act of 1929 (1929 Ga. Laws, page 621 et seq.), and the Fulton County Local Improvement Assessment Law of 1949 (1949 Ga. Laws, page 1423 et seq.). 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-32. - Establishment of water service districts. 
The following water service districts are hereby established: 
(1)  The North Fulton County Water Service District, consisting of that portion of unincorporated Fulton County lying north of the Chattahoochee River, including annexed areas of Alpharetta, Roswell, and Mountain Park where the water distribution system was installed by Fulton County. 
(2)  The South Fulton County Water Service District, consisting of that portion of unincorporated Fulton County lying south of the city limits of the City of Atlanta. 
(3)  The Sandy Springs Water Service District, consisting of that portion of unincorporated Fulton County lying north of the city limits of the City of Atlanta and south of the Chattahoochee River. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-33. - Procedures for construction of main by assessing all or a part of the cost thereof against abutting landowners. 
(a)  Whenever a petition to lay a water main in any public roadway, with the exception of subdivisions, at the expense, in whole or in part, of the owners of the abutting property, has been filed with the board of commissioners, or the commissioners of their own motion have considered a proposal to lay such main, the director of public works shall survey the route of the proposed water main and obtain an estimate of the cost of the facilities, including labor and materials. When the foregoing has been accomplished, the board of commissioners shall consider the matter and take such action thereon as in its judgment shall be proper. However, any extension of water mains in these water service districts will be considered by the board of commissioners only upon agreement of the interested property owners to pay the assessment fees applicable to their district as may be established from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Whenever the board of commissioners shall determine from a preliminary survey that the project has merit and will serve a public need, it shall set a time and place for public hearing thereon before the board of commissioners. Notice of the public hearing shall be given to the owners of the abutting property, in writing by regular mail, at least ten days in advance of the hearing, and by the publication of the notice, one time not less than ten days in advance of the hearing, in the newspaper in which notices of sheriff's sales for Fulton County are published. The notice shall describe generally the facility to be constructed and the route thereof, and shall further state the cost to be assessed against the owners of the abutting property, and the nature of the work or improvement proposed to be made. 
(c)  At the time and place fixed for the hearing and after publication of the notice, the board of commissioners shall proceed to hear the proposal, including objections thereto, if any, of any party at interest, and shall take any action on the proposal as in the judgment of the board of commissioners will best promote the public interest, either approving or disapproving the proposal or postponing decision to a later date. Such action shall be by resolution of the board of commissioners and may be adopted at the next meeting after its advertisement, and after having heard objections thereto, or at any subsequent meeting. 
(d)  After the passage of a resolution ordering the installation of the water main, all property owners to be assessed for the cost of the main who do not, within 15 days thereafter, commence legal proceedings to prevent the assessment being made, shall be conclusively presumed to have accepted the terms of the assessment and shall have agreed that the assessment may be made. 
(e)  In all cases where the proposal is approved, the board of commissioners shall by proper resolution, entered on the minutes of the meeting, authorize the construction of the facility in accordance with the plans and cost estimates prepared by the department of public works. The board of commissioners may undertake the construction with county forces and material purchased by the county, or may proceed to let a contract with an independent contractor, or with some municipality or some other governmental entity. It shall be the duty of the finance director and director of public works to maintain complete and accurate records of the cost of each project, separate and apart from the records maintained on other projects. 
(f)  The cost of such work shall be assessed against the owners of all property abutting the public roadways in which the main is laid and their respective properties, except on corner lots where the first 200 feet on the side, shall be exempt. The assessments shall be charged in accordance with the fee schedule prevailing at the time of approval by the board of commissioners. 
(g)  When the work on any project authorized under the foregoing procedure shall have been completed, the director of public works shall make a full report thereof to the board of commissioners, which report shall include the cost of the facility, a complete description thereof, and a statement of the cost, whether in whole or in part, to be assessed against the owners of the abutting property, on each side of the water main so constructed. 
(h)  The director of public works shall also prepare for the approval of the board of commissioners a resolution and assessment roll, setting forth in detail the names of the owners of the property to be assessed where the owners are known, the frontage of the property to be assessed, together with a statement of the total assessment against the individual property owner, which resolution and assessment roll shall be placed upon the minutes of the board of commissioners. 
(i)  The cost of any improvement made pursuant to this article shall be a lien upon the respective properties from the date of the completion of the improvement and shall be enforceable in the same manner as executions for taxes, and shall have the same rank and character as liens for taxes. 
(j)  The director of finance shall notify the owner, by regular mail, of any property assessed in the manner aforesaid and collect the assessment in full in accordance with the terms and payments as hereinafter set forth. Failure to receive the notice shall not invalidate the assessment. 
(k)  Payment of an assessment may be made without interest or penalty at any time within 60 days from the date of the assessment. 
(l)  Should any property owner, so notified of an assessment against his property desire to pay it in installments, he shall apply to the director of finance, who is authorized and directed to approve payments of the total assessment on a deferred payment plan: one-fourth down within 60 days of date of notice, with the remainder in three equal annual installments. Payments made after 60 days shall draw interest from date of assessments at the rate of interest from time to being charged on unpaid state and county taxes. All deferred installments shall be evidenced by a lien upon the property so improved by the construction of the water main and abutting the same. The director of finance is authorized to provide suitable forms to carry out this section. 
(m)  In all cases where the owner of the property assessed under this article shall fail to acknowledge the lien upon his property, pay the required cash payment, and agree to pay the remainder in installments, as provided herein, or shall fail to pay any installment when due, it shall be the duty of the director of finance to prepare and issue in the name of the board of commissioners an execution against the property and the owner thereof, if the owner is known, for the full amount of the assessment, or for the balance thereof if any portion has been paid, and file the execution with the Sheriff of Fulton County for levy upon and sale of the property so assessed in the same manner that executions for taxes due the state and county are issued, levied and collected. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-34. - Procedure for upgrading existing service. 
In cases where the board of commissioners should, on its own motion, and without a public petition, authorize the construction of a new water main to improve the pressure and circulation of the system, the cost of such new main shall be assessed as otherwise provided in this article. However, no assessment shall be levied against the owner of any property which has previously been assessed for and who has tapped onto the old existing water main, and collection of the assessment from any other owner shall be deferred until application is made by the owner for connection to the new water main. Upon making the application for connection to the new water main the assessment shall be paid either in cash or by the deferred payment procedure provided under this article. The assessment, although deferred under this section, shall be recorded and shall constitute an inchoate lien against the property, to be perfected upon the filing of the application for connection. All assessments under this section shall be paid at the prevailing rate at the time of application. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-35. - Procedures for connection to a water main. 
(a)  Any provision of this article to the contrary notwithstanding, no person shall be allowed to tap or connect to any water main constructed pursuant to this article until the person shall have paid all sums required of him/her hereunder and/or executed the notes and lien acknowledgements provided herein, to the extent and in the amount the same are applicable; provided, further, no connection shall be allowed in any event until a tapping permit is issued by Fulton County. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall permit connection to a water main until a water meter has been installed, and no water shall be taken from any main except through a water meter unless otherwise provided. Nothing herein shall operate to relieve any person from the payment of such charges for water service as the quantity of water used shall require, based upon the prevailing consumer rate in effect. 
(c)  Applicants for connection to the water system in the Sandy Springs Water Service District and in the South Fulton Water Service District shall make application in advance for the City of Atlanta Water Works Department and pay for the meter installation by the city. A tapping permit must be issued by Fulton County pursuant to subsection (a) of this section before applying to the city for a meter. 
(d)  Property owners desiring to connect to the water system in North Fulton County Water Service District shall make application for a water meter with Fulton County. A charge will be made for the water meter in accordance with the size meter required by the prevailing fee schedule. All meters shall be the property of Fulton County and shall not be removed or altered by any person, unless authorized by Fulton County. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person, firm, or corporation to perform any taps or connections to a water main, or remove or alter any water meter in the Fulton County Water Service District. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-36. - Charges for water service. 
(a)  Established. It is hereby determined necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the citizens of Fulton County, to repair and maintain the water system of the county and for the furnishing of the benefits of the system to the citizens of the county who are connected to the system, to fix and collect charges upon all property served by the Fulton County Water System. 
(b)  Rates. For the purpose provided in subsection (a) of this section, there is hereby charged and assessed to each parcel of property served by connection to the Fulton County Water System, a water charge and assessment payable as hereinafter provided, and in the amount determinable as follows: 
(1)  South Fulton and Sandy Springs Water Service Districts. The water charge and assessments in the South Fulton and Sandy Springs Water Service Districts shall be in accordance with the regulations of the City of Atlanta Water System pursuant to the existing contracts between Fulton County and the City of Atlanta. 
(2)  North Fulton Water Service District. The water charge, deposit, and assessment in the North Fulton Water Service District shall be based upon the prevailing fee schedule approved by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  Sprinkler system ready-to-serve charge. There shall be charged and assessed against each connection of a fire sprinkler system, a monthly ready-to-serve charge as may be established from time to time by the board of commissioners. Interest on late payments may be charged in accordance with charges established. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-37. - Underwriter approved factory mutual fire line meter required on all fire service systems having fire hydrant or hydrants installed inside private property. 
(a)  Purpose of section. The purpose of this section is to require the installation of a factory mutual fire line water meter on all fire service systems having fire hydrants or hydrants attached to them on private property. 
(b)  Effective date. As of the adoption of this section, all persons making application for new fire service connections with private fire hydrant or hydrants will be required to have a factory mutual fire line meter installed as a part of the fire service system. 
(c)  Work to be performed by the department of public works forces. Installation of meters as required by this section will be handled by the department of public works crews at the expense of the building owner or lessee. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-38. - Damage to county-owned material; injury to equipment of Fulton County. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person, firm, or corporation to tamper with, maliciously open, move, switch, mar, deface, destroy, paint, damage, or injure any fire hydrant, water main, water meter, or other appurtenances of the water distribution system of Fulton County, or any other property owned by Fulton County. Violations of this section shall be punished as a misdemeanor. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-39. - Meters; disconnection; testing. 
(a)  Water meters may be disconnected at the owner's request received by the finance department and may be removed at the option of Fulton County for a fee as may be established from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Meters may be checked for misreading and obvious leaks by county personnel. 
(c)  A fee, as may be established from time to time by the board of commissioners, shall be charged should the property owner desire to have the meter tested and the meter is recording water consumption within acceptable limits. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-40. - Payment of bills. 
(a)  The water service charge provided by this article shall be payable to Fulton County by all customers in the North Fulton Water Service District and to the City of Atlanta by all customers in the South Fulton and the Sandy Springs Water Service Districts. 
(b)  Fulton County shall maintain properly indexed records in its office reflecting all unpaid accounts based on charges and assessments which constitute liens on real property under the provisions of this article and shall make such records available to title examiners and other members of the public for examination. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-41. - Liens. 
(a)  All charges and assessments levied under this article shall become liens upon the property benefited from the date due and payable. 
(b)  Whenever the owner of any property chargeable under this article shall fail to pay any charge or assessment when it shall become due, execution of a lien against the property shall be issued in the name of the board of commissioners and shall be signed by the director of finance or a designated representative. 
(c)  Said execution shall issue in rem against the property benefited by the service, and in personam against the owner thereof, and shall include, in addition to principal and interest, a fee for the issuance of the same as may be established from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(d)  All executions issued against the property and the owner thereof shall immediately be recorded on the general execution docket in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton County. All executions issued under this article shall be subject to enforcement in the same manner as now provided for the enforcement of state and county tax fi. fas., including levy thereon and the filing and subsequent proceedings in connection with affidavits of illegality. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-42. - Discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills. 
Whenever the owner of any property chargeable under this article shall fail to pay any charge or assessment when the same shall become due, and is given an opportunity to pay, and does not promptly pay the same, water service to the premises shall be discontinued. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-43. - Theft of service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to receive water service by deception and with the intent to avoid payment for said service which is available only for compensation. When such theft of service is discovered, the appropriate law enforcement officials shall be notified and cases shall be prosecuted to the full extent of Georgia Law. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-44. - Violations of article; misdemeanor. 
(a)  Any person who intentionally violates any provision of this article and who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for the satisfactory correction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day in which a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be punished in the manner prescribed by law for misdemeanors, and shall further reimburse the county for any expenses, loss, or damage occasioned the county by reason of such violation such as the total cost incurred by the county to repair or replace facilities, e.g., damaged meters, service connections, pipelines, fire hydrants, or other appurtenances and lost revenue. 
(c)  Persons designated by Fulton County are hereby authorized to issue citations or summonses, or both, charging violations under this article, returnable to the State Court of Fulton County, or to any other court having the jurisdiction of a commitment court throughout the entire county, for trial. 
(d)  No provision of this section shall prevent Fulton County from prosecuting theft of service to the full extent of Georgia law. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
State Law reference— Punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b); theft of service, O.C.G.A § 16-8-5; Punishments for other than misdemeanors, O.C.G.A § 16-8-2 (a)(1). 
Secs. 82-45—82-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NORTH FULTON WATER SERVICE DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note, Art. II. 

Sec. 82-51. - Scope of division. 
The revisions of this division shall apply to all connections to the system in the North Fulton Water Service District. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-52. - Meters and recording devices. 
(a)  Required. Meters and indicating or recording devices of such size and kind as are required or approved by the director of water resources or his representative shall be attached to all premises where county water is used. 
(b)  Ownership; maintenance. All such meters, indicating or recording devices shall be the property of the county and shall be installed according to the requirement of this article, or as provided by the current standards of the water resources department. After the installation of the first meter, indicating or recording device, the county shall keep same in repair and replace with a new one when necessary, except where it has been damaged by some neglect or act of the owner or any person on the property within the consent of the owner. In such case, the cost of repairs shall be charged to the owner or tenant. Upon failure of any owner or tenant served by a meter so damaged to pay, within 30 days from date of bill, for the cost of such repairs, the water shall be shut off and service discontinued until the bill has been paid. 
(c)  Two or more premises on one service meter. In cases where two or more premises with common ownership are supplied through one meter and one service, if at any time one or more of such premises are sold or otherwise transferred, the new owner of the transferred property shall be required to discontinue service to premises so acquired and shall have a separate meter installed. 
(d)  Obstructing or covering up meters and devices. No person shall obstruct, cover up, or hide any water meter, or any water indicating or recording device so that the inspector or meter reader or other employee of Fulton County cannot find or reach such meter or device. 
(e)  Right of entry for inspection, meter reading and other purposes. Authorized representatives of Fulton County shall have the right at all hours to enter upon the premises where county water is used for the purpose of inspecting the pipes; setting, reading, and repairing meters; turning off or on the water; enforcing the ordinances and rules of the county; or regulating water service in any manner necessary. If any water user, whether owner or tenant, should refuse to allow entrance upon any premises for the purposes herein stated, the water shall be shut off from such premises until the requirements of this section are complied with. 
(f)  All new multi-family buildings shall be constructed so that each individual dwelling unit shall be metered in such a way that all water used by said dwelling unit can be recorded and billed. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04; Res. No. 08-0195, 2-20-08; Res. No. 14-0331, 5-7-14) 
Sec. 82-53. - Turning water on by person other than an authorized representative of Fulton County. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized representative of Fulton County to turn water into any service pipe. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-54. - Interfering with waterworks system; tapping; using water without permission. 
No person shall interfere with or in any way intermeddle with any of the wells, reservoirs, basins, water mains, pipes, plugs, meters, or connection of the waterworks; nor make any connection therewith by tapping any of the mains or pipes, or otherwise, without the written permission of the department of water resources; nor permit any such connections or tapping to be made on premises in his control as owner or tenant; nor use water from such unauthorized connections; nor supply water through such unauthorized connections without a permit from Fulton County for use of water. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04; Res. No. 14-0331, 5-7-14) 
Sec. 82-55. - Unauthorized possession of fire hydrant meter 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any unauthorized fire hydrant meter.. Fire hydrant meters shall be installed by the department of water resources after the requesting party makes proper application and pays applicable fees. The hydrant meter shall be installed as close as possible to the requested location. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04; Res. No. 14-0331, 5-7-14) 
Sec. 82-56. - Use of water without permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant to supply water to any other property, person, or user, from the pipes or meters serving water from the system, or to use water from any such water pipe, meter, hydrant, or other device or fixture through which county water may be drawn or used, without a permit from Fulton County. No person shall turn water off or on from any county water pipeline or related appurtenance unless the person has permission from an authorized representative of Fulton County. It shall be unlawful for any person to take or use water from any fire plug, hydrant, valve, pipe, other device or fixture, opening or connection of the system, or to open any plug, hydrant, valve, pipe, or other fixture for the purpose of taking or using the water, unless the person shall have permission from the department of water resources, or is an authorized representative of Fulton County and is acting in the discharge of his duty as such. No person to whom a permit is issued for the use of water for any purpose whatever, including construction purposes, tamping, irrigating, testing, flushing, and the like, shall use or consent to the use of water not authorized by permit from Fulton County. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04; Res. No. 14-0331, 5-7-14) 
Sec. 82-57. - Supplying county water to premises of another. 
No person, whether owner or tenant, receiving water supplied from the county system shall supply any other person, family, or premises except for a common association or commercial authority such as a master metered multi-family housing complex, shopping center, etc. If any person, either as owner or tenant, shall violate or permit other persons to violate any provision of this article, the supply of water to the premises shall be shut off and service discontinued forthwith. The water shall not again be turned on until such unauthorized use of water is stopped and there shall have been paid to the county any charges as the finance director or his representative may determine to be due for water used in violation of this article and for the expense of cutting off and restoring water service. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-58. - Effect of fraudulent representation or unauthorized use of water. 
If the supply of water shall have been turned on to any premises, and afterwards it shall be found that false representation has been made by such applicant, or that water is being used in or upon the premises for purposes not set forth in the application made for the water supply to the premises, the water shall be shut off, and shall remain shut off, until all unauthorized use of water has been stopped, and any sum of money determined due for the use has been paid to the county. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-59. - Waste of water. 
If it is found that there is a waste of water in or about any premises to which water is supplied from the system, either by willful waste or by means of a leak in any water pipe or fixture located in or upon the premises, Fulton County may cause the water to be cut off from the premises upon 24 hours notice to the occupant, unless special circumstances require that such waste shall be immediately stopped. Where the water supply is cut off as herein provided, the water shall not again be turned on until all water bills and the bill for the cost of cutting off and again turning on the water shall have been paid. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-60. - Shutting off water in case of emergency or necessity. 
Fulton County may shut off the supply of water from any pipe or water main in case of emergency, or for repairs or extensions as necessity may require. Reasonable notice shall be given when practicable; however, the county, its officers, and employees shall not be held liable for any damage for shutting off the water in such cases as herein provided, or for insufficient supply of water. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-61. - Opening streets; protection for water pipes required. 
(a)  Generally. Any person who may open the streets or roadways in which there are water pipes, valves or other appurtenances of the system, shall provide for the protection of these pipes where they are exposed by the opening, and the protection shall be such as to preserve the pipes and prevent them from freezing or breaking or from injury in any manner. This section shall apply to all water pipes, mains, laterals, services, connections, or other appurtenances of the water distribution system 
(b)  Cost of work. If county resources are required to protect water pipes, valves or other appurtenances, the cost or expense to the county for this work shall be charged to and paid by the person who is responsible for the exposure of the system. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-62. - Connection of private water system to county system. 
It shall be unlawful to connect any private water pipe, which takes water from any point, well, reservoir, or other source, to pipes which are connected with the water system of the county. Any violation of this section shall cause the permit for the connection from the county's water service to be immediately revoked, and the water shall be shut off until each connection or cross connection to the private well, pond, or reservoir is disconnected and removed. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-63. - Extension of water pipes inside county by person at his own expense. 
All contracts made between the county and persons who, at their own expense, desire the county to extend water pipes inside the county service area shall provide that the design shall be approved and the cost of the extension shall be estimated by the department of water resources, and the amount of such estimate shall thereupon be paid into the county treasury. The work of the extension shall then be done by the county, and subsequent connections to the pipes shall be made only upon permission of the county and upon any terms as the county may, at the time, prescribe. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04; Res. No. 14-0331, 5-7-14) 
Sec. 82-64. - Discontinuance of service. 
If the sums due for water service are not paid by the due date, the water may be cut off from the service to the owner or tenant of the premises. No claim for damage, therefore, shall be urged or claimed by the owner or tenant on account of discontinuance of water service. Fulton County may discontinue service to any customer found to be delinquent on any water or sewer account. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-65. - Water to be cut off in case of violation. 
Upon the discovery of the violation of any provision of this article, any ordinance regulating the use of water, or any rule adopted by the department of water resources, it shall be the duty of Fulton County to discontinue water service to the person guilty of the violation and to the property owned, occupied or controlled by him. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04; Res. No. 14-0331, 5-7-14) 
Sec. 82-66. - Persons responsible for violations. 
Responsibility for failure to comply with the requirements of this article, or any ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the system or the use of water therefrom, and responsibility for the violation of any provision thereof, shall be upon the owner and the tenant as well as upon the individual guilty of the violation. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-67. - Use of fire hydrants. 
(a)  Schedule of charges. No person shall be allowed to use water from any fire hydrant connected to the water system owned by Fulton County, except by special permit from the department of water resources; and in cases where a permit is granted, charges shall be made as follows: the department of water resources shall install a hydrant meter with backflow preventer as prescribed by the department of water resources and the quantity of water used shall be charged to the customer at the prevailing rates in effect in the North Fulton Water District. 
(b)  Deposits required. A deposit, as established from time to time by the board of commissioners, shall be required with each application for installation of a hydrant meter. Part of the deposit may be credited against the water charge for the hydrant usage when the meter is removed. If the meter is damaged prior to removal by the county, charges against the deposit shall be applied. 
(c)  Backflow prevention. Proper backflow prevention measures shall be incorporated as provided by the cross connection control program referenced elsewhere in this article. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04; Res. No. 14-0331, 5-7-14) 
Sec. 82-68. - Temporary use of water by contractors and others. 
(a)  Charges. Contractors and other persons may be supplied with metered water for temporary use according to the regular rates prevailing in the North Fulton Water Service District. 
(b)  Deposit. Prior to any temporary connection, the applicant therefore shall be required to deposit an amount equal to twice that required for water meter installation under the terms of section 82-36(d) of this article. This deposit shall be held by the department of water resources as a guarantee of the safety of the meter and other equipment owned by the county furnished to such persons, and to cover the cost of installation and removal of the meter and temporary service line. Upon payment of all charges and the removal and discontinuance of service through the meter, and the return of the meter to the department of water resources in good condition, one-half of the amount of the deposit shall be refunded. 
(c)  [Effect of rezoning.] Should zoning changes occur during the time period of temporary service which requires upgrading the service; all modifications will be performed at no expense to Fulton County. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04; Res. No. 14-0331, 5-7-14) 
Sec. 82-69. - Charges where two or more meters supply one person. 
Where two or more meters supplying one person are used in supplying one premises, the water consumption as shown by all meters may, in the director's discretion, be consolidated and the rates as fixed be charged for all water consumed. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-70. - Blueprints of industrial, commercial, and high-rise buildings to show proposed location and size of water mains, recommended water meter sizes, and to identify organizations assuming financial responsibility during the construction period. 
(a)  Purpose of section. The purpose of this section is to require blueprints used in applying for a building permit on commercial, industrial, and high-rise buildings contain the proposed size and location of water meters to serve these facilities; in order to determine the availability of an adequate water supply to meet domestic, industrial, and fire service requirements; and to set up a schedule of recommended water meter sizes. It is also the intention of this section to authorize billing for six-inch or larger fire line water meters during building construction to measure actual water consumption. Minimum billing for water consumption shall be not less than the minimum charge for a five-eighths-inch by three-quarters-inch water meter. 
(b)  Authority to determine meter size. The department of water resources shall be authorized to use its discretion in requiring the installation of water meters of adequate size in existing buildings. 
(c)  Authority to discontinue service; waive cutoff fees. Authorized representatives of Fulton County shall be authorized to cut off water services to buildings whose owners refuse to comply with the provisions of this section upon proper notification, and shall be authorized to waive cutoff fees established by other ordinances. 
(d)  Authority to render bill for actual consumption for six-inch and larger fire line water meter during building construction. The department of finance shall be authorized to render bills for six-inch and larger fire line water meters during building construction for the amount of actual water consumption, but not less than the minimum charge for a five-eighths-inch by three-quarters-inch water meter, as an inducement to property owners to have the fire line meters turned on and connected to building piping as soon as possible to ensure water for firefighting purposes. After completion of the building, all six-inch and larger fire line water meters will be billed at regular rates for the size of meter actually installed. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04; Res. No. 14-0331, 5-7-14) 
Sec. 82-71. - Allowance for old meter when larger meter installed. 
Where it is necessary to enlarge a water service by installation of a meter larger than the one in use, the department of water resources is authorized to allow for service values as established from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04; Res. No. 14-0331, 5-7-14) 
Sec. 82-72. - Charges for terminating water service. 
Whenever it is necessary for the county to terminate water service because of nonpayment of a bill, the department of finance is authorized to charge fines as may be established from time to time by the board of commissioners. All charges incurred must be fully paid before water service is restored unless Fulton County waives such charges or authorizes partial payment. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-73. - Penalty for having water illegally turned on. 
Should the water be cut off from any premises by Fulton County for nonpayment of any bills, or any other cause, and afterwards the water is found to be on, the water meter may be removed or the water service plugged; and a fine, as may be established from time to time by the board of commissioners, shall be levied against the property and must be paid before the water is again turned on. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-74. - Penalty for illegally using water through other meter. 
Whenever water service has been cut off for any reason, and it is found that the occupants are using water through another meter or service, the department of finance is authorized to terminate service and fine the responsible party; and if the bill or charge is not paid, Fulton County shall shut off and discontinue water from all meters serving the property until the bill is paid in full. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-75. - Using water through unauthorized connection. 
(a)  Imposition of charges. Should any person use water through any unauthorized pipe or connection, or without the permission of Fulton County, in addition to a tampering fine, charges shall be made against the premises for the estimated quantity of water used; and the water shall be cut off and not turned on again until the bill is paid and permission given for continuance of the supply. 
(b)  Amount of charges. If water is used from an unauthorized connection, the charges shall be in accordance with the schedule of rates then in effect, plus a penalty listed on the current fee schedule approved by the board of commissioners. In addition, if the unauthorized use of unmetered water is from a fire hydrant, a connection charge and a daily charge for water used, plus the necessary repairs to the fire hydrant or to the waterworks system, may be made by the department of finance for each such unauthorized connection. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04) 
Sec. 82-76. - Charges for moving water meters. 
The department of water resources is hereby authorized to establish and collect charges for moving water meters for the convenience of the consumer in accordance with the current material, labor, and equipment charges as determined by the department of water resources. 
(Res. No. 04-1326, 12-15-04; Res. No. 14-0331, 5-7-14) 
Sec. 82-77. - Potable water distribution systems within new detached single-family residential developments. 
(a)  Scope. This section shall apply to all potable water distribution systems within gated or non-gated detached single-family residential developments connecting to the North Fulton Water System and approved for construction after the effective date of this section. 
(b)  Construction and installation. All construction plans for the potable water distribution system shall be approved by the department of water resources. No subdivider of land shall proceed with any construction work on the proposed water system before obtaining the necessary approvals and permits. The water system shall be constructed in accordance with the approved plans and Fulton County standards, including but not limited the following: 
(1)  Construction material shall meet Fulton County standards; 
(2)  The development shall be constructed in accordance with Fulton County standards; and 
(3)  Necessary access and easements shall be granted to Fulton County for the county to inspect, operate and maintain the system. 
The department of water resources shall have full authority to inspect, test, accept or reject all water mains laid within the new development, and to withhold water service until the installation is accepted for use by the county. 
(c)  Authority to establish minimum standards. The department of water resources shall be authorized to establish and revise minimum standards for the construction, inspection, and assessment of all such potable water distribution systems. 
(d)  Ownership and maintenance. Fulton County shall take ownership of and maintain responsibility for the operation and maintenance of all potable water distribution systems within new detached single-family residential developments, whether gated or non-gated within the North Fulton Water Service area. 
(e)  Right of entry; easements; special conditions. Where a development is served by private streets, the subdivider shall provide Fulton County with any and all easements, access and special conditions necessary, which shall be established by the department of water resources and included in the final plat and in an owner/development agreement. Under the terms of section 82-52(e) of this article, authorized representatives of Fulton County shall have the right to enter upon the premises where county water is used for any purpose related to the operation and/or maintenance of the potable water system. 
(f)  Warranty of installation. Upon receipt of plan approval from the Fulton County Department of Water Resources, the developer shall submit a fully executed copy of the standard "owner/developer agreement," as furnished by Fulton County, for the water main installation. This agreement shall provide that the developer warrants the installation of new mains and appurtenances, including fire hydrants and services from the mains to the water meters for a period of one calendar year from the date of acceptance of the mains by Fulton County. If within that one year, it is determined that the developer's contractor failed to follow Fulton County standards and specifications for construction, or utilized non-specified materials or procedures, the developer shall extend the warranty for an additional four years. 
(g)  Authority to execute development agreements. The director of the department of water resources shall be authorized to execute any and all agreements in his or her discretion, as may be necessary for Fulton County ownership, operation and maintenance of proposed potable water distribution systems, subject to approval as to form and substance by the office of the county attorney. 
(Res. No. 14-0331, 5-7-14) 
Secs. 82-78—82-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Authority to provide sewer service, § 1-114. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 82-106. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to ensure adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development in Fulton County and to regulate the use and development of land so that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve new growth and development. 
(92-RC-527, art. II, § 2, 11-18-92; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-107. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms are defined: 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from drainage pipes located inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or sewer service lateral, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer or sewer service lateral means the extension from the building drain to the public (county) sewer. 
Capacity is a measure of the sewage carrying ability of given components of the sewerage system and is the maximum flow of sewage, measured in gallons per day, that can be safely and efficiently transported. 
Line capacity means the maximum quantity of sewage in a given segment of sewer line for a given time period at a minimum slope and maximum depth of flow. 
System capacity means the capacity of a given sewerage system of pumps, pipelines and appurtenances. 
Development generating sewage flow means any additional flow of sewage into the sewerage system resulting from construction, expansion, change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land. 
Direct improvements are always project improvements, not system improvements. Direct improvements include, but are not limited to, any sewers and lines, or any portion thereof, exclusively destined for a development generating sewage flow. 
Excess capacity means that proportion of the capacity of a given sewer line segment or sewerage system which is beyond that necessary to provide a specified level of service insofar as such excess is not a result of engineering design factors such as prudent safety margins or functions of standard material sizes. 
Impact means the effect of additional sewage flow on a sewer system in a given basin or service area. 
Level of service is a measure of the relationship between capacity and service demand expressed in terms of demand to capacity ratios or the comfort and convenience of use or both. More specifically for sewers, level of service is a qualitative measure describing the collective factors of sewer line segment or sewerage system capacity, service demand, depth of flow, overflow conditions and operating costs for specified service conditions. 
Project improvements means site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project and that are not system improvements. The character of the improvement shall determine whether an improvement is a project improvement or a system improvement and the physical location of the improvement onsite or offsite shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a project improvement or a system improvement. If an improvement or facility provides or will provide more than incidental service or capacity to persons other than users or occupants of a particular project, the improvement or facility is a system improvement and shall not be considered a project improvement. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities approved by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners shall be considered a project improvement. 
Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of improvements which is reasonably related to the service demands and needs of the project. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm water, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and storm water as may be present. 
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Sewerage system means a combination of methods for collecting and transporting untreated wastewater, from its source of generation to a sewage treatment plant. This includes street sewers (which collect sewage from building sewers or sewer service laterals), outfalls which collect sewage from the street sewers and interceptors or main collector sewers which collect sewage from outfalls and lead directly to the treatment plant. 
Sewerage improvements means the improvements to system of pipes, pumps, and facilities necessary to provide collection, treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage. The improvements include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Rights-of-way and easements; 
(2)  Collection sewer mains; 
(3)  Outfall, interceptor, and relief sewers; 
(4)  Pumping and discharge stations; 
(5)  Wastewater treatment facilities; and 
(6)  Sludge handling systems. 
System expansion means those capital improvements which expand the capacity of a system to carry and/or treat additional sewage flows. 
System extension means those capital improvements which extend a system to new geographic areas, but do not necessarily expand capacity to carry and/or treat additional sewage flows. Any sewerage system extension or portion thereof which provides capacity only for the development to which it is being extended is considered a project improvement not a system improvement; only that proportion of a sewerage system extension which provides excess capacity beyond that required by the development to which the extension is made is not a project improvement. 
System improvements means capital improvements that are public facilities designed to provide service to the community at large, in contrast to project improvements. 
System improvement costs mean costs incurred to provide additional sewerage system capacity needed to serve new growth and development associated with planning, design, engineering, construction, land acquisition and land improvement. Specifically, costs include, but are not limited to, the construction contract price, surveying, engineering fees, related land acquisition costs including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees, expert witness fees, expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvement element, and administrative costs, provided that such administrative costs shall not exceed three percent of the total amount of the costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued by or on behalf of Fulton County to finance the capital improvements element, but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
(92-RC-527, art. IV, § 1, 11-18-92; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-108. - Rules of construction. 
For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise stated in this article, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this article: 
(1)  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
(2)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(3)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(4)  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
(5)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
c.  "Either... or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(6)  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(7)  The section headings used in this article are included solely for convenience and shall not affect, or be used in connection with, the interpretation of this article. 
(8)  The intent of this article in granting credits and/or refunds is to make such grants to persons or entities who actually paid or will pay fees whether they be "developer" or "property owner" or some other entity. 
(92-RC-527, art. III, § 2, 11-18-92; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-109. - Violations of article; misdemeanor. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provisions of this article shall be served written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who intentionally violates any provision of this article or who shall continue any violation (intentional or otherwise) beyond the time limit provided for the satisfactory corrections thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day in which such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be punished in the manner prescribed by law for misdemeanors, and shall further reimburse the county for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the county by reason of such violation. 
(d)  A failure of the property owner to connect to the sewer collection system within the specified time shall authorize the county to discontinue water service to the premises in addition to the penalties otherwise provided for violation of this article. 
(e)  Persons designated by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners are hereby authorized to issue citations or summonses, or both, to persons violating these regulations returnable to the State Court of Fulton County, or to any other court having the jurisdiction of a commitment court throughout the entire county, for trial. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-222; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b). 
Sec. 82-110. - Application of article. 
This article shall apply to all unincorporated areas of Fulton County and any other area served by the Fulton County Sewer System. 
(92-RC-527, art. I, § 4, 11-18-92; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-111. - Interpretation of article. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the power of the county to adopt such an ordinance pursuant to any other source of local authority or to use any other methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this article. 
(92-RC-527, art. I, § 3, art. III, § 1, 11-18-92; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-112. - Effect of article on fees and charges related to physical improvements to sewerage system. 
Insofar as this article affects fees and charges related to physical improvements to the sewerage system, it is intended to implement and be consistent with the Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq.) as such act directly or indirectly affects extension of the sewerage system from existing facilities to development sites. 
(92-RC-527, art. II, § 1, 11-18-92; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-113. - Powers of inspectors specified. 
(a)  Duly authorized employees of the county shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. Such inspectors shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for wastewater treatment 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) of this section, duly authorized employees of the county shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner, and the owner shall be held harmless for injury or death to the county employees, and the county shall indemnify the owner against loss or damage to its property by county employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner and growing out of the gauging and sampling operations, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions. 
(c)  Duly authorized employees of the county shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the county holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the provisions of the current county approved standards and the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved 
(d)  Duly authorized employees of the county shall be authorized to issue summons to appear before the State Court of Fulton County to answer charges of violations of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-221; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-114. - Entry on property. 
The director of public works and other duly authorized employees of the county department, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-199; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Secs. 82-115—82-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE CHARGES 

Sec. 82-146. - Required. 
It is hereby determined necessary to the protection of the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience of Fulton County, Georgia, to fix and collect charges upon all premises or facilities connected to the county's sewerage system. 
(92-RC-527, art. V, § 1, 11-18-92; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-147. - Determination of charges. 
There is hereby charged to each premises or facility connected to the Fulton County Sewerage System or otherwise discharging sewage, industrial wastes, water, or other liquids, either directly or indirectly into the sewerage system, a sewer service charge payable as hereinafter provided, and in the amount determinable as follows: 
(1)  A regularly billed sewer service charge based upon the quantity of water used by the premises or facility therein or thereon as measured by a water meter or meters. In addition to the normal sewer service charge herein provided, there may be an industrial wastewater sewer service surcharge based on the quality of waste discharge in the system. 
(2)  The sewer service charge shall also be based on rates to be set or approved from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  Water used from private sources shall be metered as required in subsection (4) of this section or estimated by the county, and the sewer service charges shall be billed accordingly. 
(4)  In the event that a lot, parcel of land, premises, or facility discharging sewage, industrial waste, water, or other liquids, either directly or indirectly into the county's sewerage system, or which ultimately enters the sewerage system, is supplied either in whole or in part with water from wells, or any other source other than a municipal or other governmental water system, then such wells or other source of supply shall be registered with the county; and: 
a.  If the water from said wells or other supply is not measured by a water meter, the owner or occupant shall, at his own cost, install and maintain a meter on said supplies in such location and in such manner as is satisfactory to the county. 
b.  If the county deems it practicable, it may establish an estimate of the volume of water used by said premises in lieu of requiring the installation of a meter. 
c.  In either instance, the sewer service charge for said premises shall be based on the volume of water used as established by the meter or the estimate. 
(92-RC-527, art. V, § 2, 11-18-92; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-148. - Use of revenues collected. 
The revenue received from the collection of such charges, together with all other revenue derived from the operation of the sewerage system of the county shall, except as hereinafter provided, be deposited and credited to the "Fulton County Water and Sewerage System Revenue Fund," and shall be used to defray: 
(1)  First, the operation and maintenance costs of the sewerage system, and incidental expenses connected therewith. 
(2)  Second, to pay debt requirements on revenue bonds issued to provide funds for the improvement, repair, and extension of the sewerage system and to provide necessary reserves for debt service. 
(3)  Third, to pay for facilities and appurtenances used in connection with the operation of said system, to acquire necessary easements or the purchase of land, and to provide funds for the necessary reserves and improvements. 
(4)  Such revenues shall not be used for the construction of sewers that are project improvements which shall be paid for by assessment against abutting landowners, or as otherwise provided herein. 
(5)  Revenues received as a result of repayment or recapture of funds extended by the "Fulton County Water and Sewer Renewal and Extension Fund" shall be deposited and credited to the "Fulton County Sewer System Renewal and Extension Fund." 
(92-RC-527, art. V, § 3, 11-18-92; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-149. - Payment of bills. 
It shall be the duty of the authorized Fulton County Department to prepare and mail to each owner or commercial lessee of all premises or facilities served by sewerage connection within the Sewerage System of Fulton County, at the end of each service period, a statement showing the entire amount due for such service period. The sewer service charge as so billed shall be payable at the office of the Fulton County Finance Department, or a municipality within Fulton County, as an agent for Fulton County, when so designated, on or before the 15th day of the month following each period. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-197; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-150. - Liens. 
(a)  Failure to pay such charge or assessment. All of the charges and assessments levied under this article shall become liens upon the property benefited from the date due and payable. Whenever the owner of any property chargeable under this article shall fail to pay any such charge or assessment when the same shall become due, whether service was extended to the property on the order of the owner or of a tenant thereof, execution shall issue in the name of the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, and shall be signed by the director of finance or his designated representative. The execution shall issue in rem against the property benefited by the service, and in personam against the owner thereof, which shall include, in addition to the principal and interest, the sum of $1.50 for the issuance of the same. All executions issued against the property and the owner thereof shall immediately be recorded on the general execution docket in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton County. All executions issued under this article shall have the same lien dignity and priority as fi. fas. or executions issued for county taxes, and shall be subject to enforcement in the same manner as now provided for the enforcement of state or county tax fi. fas., including a levy thereon and the filing and subsequent proceedings in connection with affidavits of illegality. 
(b)  Disconnection of water service for failure to pay. Where there remains a delinquent sewer service charge bill on any premises or facilities served by sewerage connection with the Sewerage System of Fulton County, after the occupant of the premises thereof has been notified by the inclusion thereof of the amount of the past due bill and a current bill or a separate bill, and given an opportunity to pay the bill, and refuses to promptly pay the same, water and sewerage service to such premises shall be discontinued regardless of whether the bill remaining delinquent was incurred by a prior owner or occupant of premises; and the county shall not again supply water to any such premises until such arrears shall be fully paid. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-198; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-151. - Special authorization payment plan. 
In situations where the director of the department of finance determines that payment of mandatory fees or charges for connecting to the county sanitary sewer system, according to the procedures described in other parts of this article will pose an undue economic hardship on an applicant, a special authorization payment plan is permitted. Under the special authorization plan the applicant's total cost for connecting to the sanitary sewer system is paid in four annual installments with one-fourth paid initially, and the remaining principal amount being divided into not more than three equal annual installments maturing one, two, and three years, respectively, from the date of the initial payment. Documents will be executed to evidence this payment plan, a lien will be filed on the property served, and the outstanding balance shall bear interest at the rate charged on unpaid state and county taxes at the time the agreement is entered into. Said evidence of indebtedness shall be negotiable in form, and Fulton County shall reserve the right to transfer and assign such indebtedness to third parties. 
(93-RM-094, 3-17-93; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-152. - Refunds. 
(a)  Refunds shall be made to sewer customers charged for sewer services and not connected in any manner to the county's system of sewers as determined by an authorized representative of Fulton County. 
(b)  The customer must provide written documentation that payment for sewer charges has been made to the county. 
(c)  The customer must provide a written certificate from a licensed plumber that the facility is not connected or serviced by the county system or sewers. 
(d)  Refunds shall not be for a period in excess of four years back from the time a written claim for refund is first made. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-200; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Secs. 82-153—82-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXTENSION FEES 

Sec. 82-186. - Required payments. 
(a)  Any person who, after the effective date of this section, engages in development activity generating sewage flow and who connects to the Fulton County Sewer System for the purpose of discharging sewage flow into the system or who connects or is required to connect existing development to the Fulton County Sewer System for the purpose of discharging flow into the system shall pay sewerage extension fees in the manner and amount set forth herein, or as described elsewhere. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided, a sewerage extension fee is a one-time fee, as opposed to regularly recurring sewer use fees, paid before connection to and use of the sewerage system is permitted. No building permit for any land development activity generating sewage flow requiring payment of a sewerage extension fee pursuant to this article shall be issued by the county unless and until the required sewerage extension fee has been paid as per the provisions of this article. 
(92-RC-527, art. VI, §§ 1, 2, 11-18-92; Ord. No. 93-RM-094, 3-17-93; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-187. - Basis for extension; petition or request; intent of article. 
The Fulton County Sewerage System may be extended to serve existing development upon petition of property owners or upon request by an authorized agent of the county due to a public health emergency. Additionally, the sewerage system may be extended to serve new private development sites at the request of developers. Sewer system extension is, prima facie, a project improvement, as defined herein, and is ultimately a financial responsibility of developers and property owners. The intent of this article is that developers and/or property owners bear a proportionate share of the cost of any sewerage system extensions needed to serve a development. Sewerage extension fees shall be determined by using one of the methods in section 82-188 or section 82-189. 
(92-RC-527, art. VII, 11-18-92; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-188. - Extension to existing development. 
(a)  Petition sewer. On any given street segment, the owners of more than 50 percent of the road frontage of existing residential property may petition the board of commissioners for installation of a sewer system extension to serve such properties. Upon installation of such sewer, all abutting property owners shall be assessed a proportionate share of the cost of such installation. 
(1)  The costs to be borne by the property owners is associated strictly with installing system capacity to serve those property owners and does not include any additional costs that may be associated with the provision of excess capacity for future development. The proportionate share of the cost to be borne by each property owner is based on its relative sewage flow contribution and proportionate length of system extension attributable to that property. 
a.  The sewage flow contribution of each property is estimated using standard engineering practices and methods applied by the Fulton County Department of Public Works. 
b.  If, in the event a sewerage system extension is designed, at the county's request, to provide excess capacity for the purpose of providing service to additional development in the future, then the Fulton County Sewerage System shall pay, with cash or in-kind contribution, the proportionate share of the cost of the excess capacity, such cost to be reimbursed to the county on a proportionate basis as new development enters the system. 
(2)  Whenever a petition for installation of a sewer extension has been presented to the board of commissioners by owners of existing residential property, the county manager or the manager's designee shall: 
a.  Set a date for a public hearing thereon before the board of commissioners. 
b.  Give notice of the petition and date of the hearing to all persons concerned through publication of a notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing and a general description of the proposed sewer extension location and cost. Such notice shall be published in a newspaper of general location circulation or in the newspaper wherein the sheriffs notices are published. Such notice shall be published at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
c.  Give notice, in writing, by regular mail, to all property owners of property abutting said sewer line against which the cost of installation is to be assessed, notice of the time and place of the hearing, and a general description of the proposed sewer extension location and cost. Such notice shall be posted at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall be addressed to the person whose name appears on the last tax digest as the owner thereof and sent to the address listed in the tax digest. 
(3)  At the hearing, any person whose property or interest is affected by the proposed sewer may in person or through an agent or attorney, object to or support the proposed sewer extension. 
(4)  The decision of the board of commissioners regarding approval or rejection of the proposed sewer extension shall be final and conclusive and is also final and conclusive regarding the public necessity for construction of the sewer and the assessment of cost against abutting property owners. 
(b)  Public health. Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, an authorized representative of the county may request of the board of commissioners installation of a sewer system extension. Such request must be accompanied by evidence that a situation immediately adverse to the public health exists and that such situation will be alleviated by installation and use of the proposed sewer system extension. 
(1)  Upon approval by the board of commissioners, such sewer system extension shall be installed immediately. 
(2)  All property abutting such sewer system extension shall be assessed a proportionate share of the cost of installation. 
(3)  The costs to be borne by the property owner is associated strictly with installing system capacity to service those property owners and does not include any additional costs that may be associated with the provision of excess capacity for future development. The proportionate share of the cost to be borne by each property owner is based on its relative sewage flow contribution and proportionate length of system extension attributable to that property. 
a.  The sewage flow contribution of each property is estimated using standard engineering practices and methods applied by the Fulton County Department of Public Works. 
b.  If, in the event a sewerage system extension is designed to provide excess capacity for the purpose of providing service to additional development in the future, then the Fulton County Sewerage System shall pay the proportionate share of the cost of the excess capacity, with cash or in-kind contribution, such cost to be reimbursed to the county on a proportionate basis as new development enters the system. 
(c)  Assessments; petition sewers and installations for reasons of public health. Whenever a petition sewer extension has been installed or whenever a sewer system extension has been installed for reasons of public health, the county manager or the manager's designee shall prepare an assessment roll. Such assessment roll shall describe the system extension and show the abutting property, the existing use (or if undeveloped, the permitted use) of the abutting property, and the names of the owners of the abutting property. All abutting property on both sides of the street shall be assessed a proportional share of the cost of installation as set forth herein. 
(1)  The assessment role as prepared by the county manager or the manager's designee shall be presented to the board of commissioners at a regular or called meeting and adopted and spread on the minutes of the commission. 
(2)  All assessments against property and the owners thereof for the construction of sewer system extensions installed as petition sewers or for reasons of public health shall be liens upon the property from the date of the adoption of an action of the board of commissioners authorizing construction of said sewer system extension. 
(3)  The county manager or the manager's designee shall prepare and keep an improvement register which records all assessments against properties for sewer system extensions installed as petition sewers or for reasons of public health. Such register shall be updated immediately upon passage of authorization for sewer system extension construction by the board of commissioners. The register shall describe the sewer system extension to be built and the properties affected. 
(4)  All properties served shall be assessed a proportionate share of the cost of the extension based on relative sewage flow contributions and proportionate share of the length of extension as described in the remainder of this section. 
(5)  Whenever a sewer system extension abuts a tract of land other than a corner property on more than one side and when said tract is incapable of subdivision because of zoning regulations, building code restrictions, topography, or other reasons, said property shall be assessed only on the side having the greater frontage. 
(6)  Corner property shall be assessed as follows: 
a.  Where the sewer system extension line abuts corner property only on the front, the property shall be assessed for the amount of frontage. 
b.  Where the sewer system extension line abuts corner property on both the front and a side, the property shall be assessed for the frontage; and: 
1.  The first 150 feet of each side abutting a line shall be exempted from assessment. 
2.  The next 100 feet of each side abutting a line shall be subject to assessment. 
c.  Where the sewer system extension line abuts corner property only on a side, the property shall be assessed for the frontage and: 
1.  The first 150 feet of each side abutting a line shall be exempted from assessment. 
2.  The next 100 feet of each side abutting a line shall be subject to assessment. 
d.  Where the sewer system extension line abuts property, but does not abut such property on any street, the property shall be assessed for its street frontage. 
e.  Whenever property has been exempted from assessment for abutting sewers under the terms of this article and the condition of the property or improvements is later changed so that the owner requests a sewer connection be granted, the owner shall be required to pay the amount said property would have been assessed had there been no exemption, but at rates prevailing at the time the connection is granted. 
(7)  Whenever a sewer line has been constructed in accordance with the sections and the cost thereof assessed against the property benefiting thereby and the owners thereof, said owners shall be notified of such assessment and the amount thereof. 
a.  Within 60 days after the date of the assessment, such property owner shall pay the amount of such assessment in full or, upon request, such property owner shall be allowed to elect an installment payment plan. 
b.  If the installment payment plan is elected, the owner shall pay not less than one-fourth of the total assessment in cash within said 60 days and execute and deliver therewith the necessary documents hereafter specified to document and evidence such plan and the assessment lien on the property. 
c.  The remainder of the assessment, after deduction of such cash payment, may, upon the request of the property owner, be divided into not more than three equal annual installments, maturing one, two and three years, respectively, from the date of said assessment, provided proper evidence of such extension shall be executed by the owner of the property, and the unpaid balance shall bear interest from the date of the assessment of the cost until paid at the rate of interest thus being charged on unpaid state and county taxes. Said evidence of indebtedness shall be negotiable in form, and Fulton County shall reserve the right therein to transfer and assign the same to third parties. 
d.  No extension of time for the payment of any assessment shall affect the validity of said assessment or the right of Fulton County, or its assignee, to proceed to enforce the same against said property and the owner thereof. In case of default in any installment, the entire assessment shall become due and payable forthwith. 
e.  Whenever the owner of any property desires to extend the payment of all or any part of any assessment levied against him or his property as provided in the preceding sections, at the time of the application for such extension and the execution of evidences thereof, such owner shall likewise execute an acknowledgement of the lien upon his property for the sewer assessment against the same, which acknowledgement shall be upon a form provided by the county of such nature that it may be recorded and which shall be recorded on the deed records of Fulton County in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
f.  Should the owner of any property against which assessment for sewers has been levied fail either to execute the instruments required for an extension, as provided in the preceding sections, or to pay same in cash within 60 days of the due date, execution shall issue forthwith against the property improved and the owner thereof. 
g.  Assessments against property and the owners thereof for the construction of sewer line and charges made for connection of sewer line shall be paid to the Department of Finance of Fulton County covering the same. 
h.  Whenever the owner of any property shall fail to pay any sewer assessment or extension thereof when the same shall become due, the holder of such evidence, whether the holder is Fulton County or its assignee, shall be entitled to have an execution issued therefore, which execution shall issue in the name of the board of commissioners, be signed by the chairman of the board and be recorded on the general execution docket in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton County. Said execution shall be issued in rem against the property described in the assessment roll and in personam against the owner thereof, and shall include in addition to principal and interest a fee for the issuance of the same as may be established from time to time by the board of commissioners. Subsequent costs thereon shall be the same as those now allowed by law to the sheriff for the performance of similar services. All adjoining property owned by the same party or parties shall be covered in any execution issued and only one such execution shall be issued against any property owner covering adjacent lots. 
i.  All executions for sewer assessment shall be handed to the Sheriff of Fulton County and subsequent proceedings had thereon shall be as provided by law for the enforcement of execution of taxes. 
(92-RC-527, art. VII, § 1, 11-18-92; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-189. - Extension to new development. 
(a)  Responsibility of developer. Any sewerage improvement, extension, and/or expansion, or portion thereof, which is a project improvement is the sole responsibility of the developer. 
(1)  In the event the county requires sewerage system extensions to be built with excess capacity so that additional anticipated development in the geographic area accessed by the extensions may be served by the extensions presently or in the future, then the developer is ultimately liable only for the proportionate share of the cost of the sewer extension attributable to the sewage flow contribution (estimated using standard engineering practices and methods applied by the Fulton County Department of Public Works) of the development compared to the capacity of the extension and length of pipe required to reach the development as compared to total length of pipe constructed. 
(2)  The County must provide credits, in accord with the construction and intent of section 88-19 of the Fulton County Development Impact Fee Ordinance (incorporated herein by reference), to the developer for provision of excess capacity or directly compensate the developer for the proportionate cost of the excess capacity. 
(3)  Sewerage extension project improvements must: 
a.  Be submitted for review and approval at or prior to the time a land disturbance permit is requested. 
b.  Be designed with a minimum capacity to serve the entire project as defined in zoning petitions and/or approved subdivisions, as opposed to phases of such project. 
(4)  Installation of such project improvements may not proceed until: 
a.  The developer has received all required reviews and permits from the county. 
b.  The developer has paid any fees which may be required under other parts of this article and any other applicable ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation of Fulton County. 
c.  The developer has agreed to dedicate or otherwise provide all necessary easements, rights of access, and other necessary property rights associated with the project improvement to the county. 
(b)  Developer requests. Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a developer may request permission, and the county may grant permission, to install sewer extensions to a site at the expense of the developer. 
(1)  If a developer seeks to install a sewer extension to a development and such extension, for whatever reason, can serve only that site, the developer must bear the entire cost of such extension by, at the developer's option, either: 
a.  Causing the extension to be installed using the developer's own means and funds; or 
b.  Paying to the county, before commencement of actual construction, an amount the county has established by contract to be the cost of sewer extension installation. 
(2)  If a developer seeks to install a sewer extension to a development and the county requires such extension to be built with excess capacity so that additional anticipated development in the geographic area accessed by the extension may be served by the extension presently or in the future, then the developer is ultimately liable for the proportionate share of the cost of the sewer extension attributable to the sewage flow contribution (estimated using standard engineering practices and methods applied by the Fulton County Department of Public Works) of the development compared to the capacity of the extension. In this event, at the developer's option, either: 
a.  The developer may cause the extension to be installed using his/her own means and funds; or 
b.  The developer may pay to the county, before commencement of actual construction, an amount the county has established by contract to be the cost of sewer extension installation. 
c.  In either case, the county shall: 
1.  Accept and record the developer's cost of sewer extension installation and reimburse the developer or his/her successors in title the proportionate cost of the excess capacity as it is taken up and paid for by additional development using the extension; 
2.  At the county's option, the county may participate with the developer in providing excess capacity by providing materials necessary for the excess capacity; or 
3.  At the county's option, the county may, upon completion of construction, reimburse the developer for the proportionate share of unused capacity, calculated using the methodology described above, maintain records of the actual cost of installation, and reimburse itself the cost of excess capacity taken up and paid for by additional development using the extension. 
(3)  A developer may request the county and the county may, at its option and using its own resources, install sewer extensions to a site. Using records of actual direct and indirect cost to the county of individual extension installations, the county will charge any developer, including a developer initiating an original request for installation of a sewer system extension, a proportionate share, using methodology described above, of the actual cost of sewer system extension installation. 
(4)  A developer may request, and the county may grant, permission to use unused excess capacity in an existing sewerage system extension to meet the sewage flow contribution of a planned development. In this event, the county shall charge a fee calculated on the basis of the proportionate share of the cost of the sewer extension attributable to the sewage flow contribution of the development compared to the line segment capacity flow rate of the extension and length of pipe required to reach the development site. 
a.  In the event the county has records that may be used to determine the actual cost of installation of the specific system extension requested for use, the cost of the proportionate share (adjusted to present value) shall be based on that actual cost of installation. 
b.  In the event adequate records reflecting actual cost of installation of a specific system extension are not available, the average unit cost of installation of similar system extensions from the previous fiscal year (adjusted to present value) shall be used as the cost basis of calculating proportionate share. 
c.  For the purposes cited above, present value shall be calculated using the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent). 
(92-RC-527, art. VII, § 2, 11-18-92; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-190. - Fee rate schedules. 
(a)  The fee rate schedules are developed and administratively adopted from the department of public works. Such schedules shall be based on the best estimates available to the department of public works of average sewage flow contribution generated by various land uses and shall be used to directly calculate fees and charges. 
(b)  If there is an application to provide a sewer to a type of land use not included in the fee rate schedule, the county manager shall cause a fee to be established, based on flow generation rates found acceptable by the county. 
(c)  Whenever sewerage extension fees are based upon an assumed discharge flow, either the county, at its option, or the developer, at its option, may recalculate the fee based on actual water usage or measured sewer discharge after six months of actual experience. In this event, the owner shall be entitled to receive as a refund, or shall be required to pay as an additional charge, the difference between the initial charge as estimated by the county and the recalculated charge based on actual usage. 
(92-RC-527, art. VIII, §§ 1—3, 11-18-92; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-191. - Individual sewer extension assessment determination. 
(a)  In the event that an applicant for sewer system extension, or an applicant for use of excess extension capacity, under the provisions of this article elects, an individual sewer extension assessment determination may be requested. If it is found that the data, information, and assumptions used by the applicant to calculate the individual sewer assessment determination satisfy the requirements of section 58-173 of this Code (incorporated herein by reference) and the requirements of this section, the individual sewer extension assessment determination shall be deemed the sewerage extension fee due and owing for the proposed development. 
(b)  In addition to meeting the requirements of section 58-173 (incorporated herein by reference), the applicant shall show the basis of the individual sewer extension assessment determination including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Sewer engineering studies including documentation of sewage flow generation rates appropriate to the specific development activity proposed. 
(2)  Sewer engineering studies including documentation of the line capacity of the sewer system extension proposed for installation and the proportionate share of that capacity used by the development. 
(3)  If applicable, sewer engineering studies used to calculate the extent to which an individual sewer line is used as a system extension as opposed to a system expansion (designed to provide excess capacity for the purpose of providing service to additional development in the future) for the purpose of establishing an attribution for base cost of the system extension, the proportionate share of which will serve as a basis for fees. 
(c)  All documentation shall be prepared and presented by qualified professionals registered to practice in their respective fields and shall follow best professional practices and methodologies. 
(d)  A developer may request a preapplication conference with the county manager or the manager's designee. 
(e)  The county manager or the manager's designee shall provide the developer with an independent fee determination within 30 working days of the formal submittal of a complete application for an individual assessment determination, including an individual assessment study. 
(f)  All other requirements being met, nothing in this article shall prevent a developer from receiving a building permit upon payment of fees as required and calculated herein and proceeding while awaiting an individual fee assessment determination. When an individual fee assessment is established, any excess payments shall be refunded. 
(92-RC-527, art. IX, §§ 1—6, 11-18-92; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-192. - Private agreements. 
(a)  In accord with the general provisions of section 58-177 of this Code, and the more specific provisions of this section, any applicant or group of applicants may propose to enter into a private agreement with the county designed to establish proportional share system improvements appropriate to the circumstances of the specific development or developments proposed. 
(b)  Such an agreement may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions which: 
(1)  Modify calculations of sewage generation set forth herein and provide a fee which may differ from that set forth in this article by specifying the nature of the proposed development for purposes of computing actual sewage generation, provided that the agreement shall establish legally enforceable means for ensuring that the actual sewage generated will not exceed the agreed upon estimated sewage generated by the development. 
a.  The agreement must contain language acceptable to the county manager or the manager's designee showing that the assumptions made for sewage generation will be met. Further, language must be included in the agreement to allow the county to assess additional fees if, two years after the completion of construction, the development has not, in fact, met the reduced assumptions of sewage generation and/or if, five years following the completion of construction the development has not, in fact, maintained such reduced sewage generation. 
b.  The agreement must also contain language requiring the developer to report to the county manager or the manager's designee the status of the project relative to assumptions of reduced sewage generation on the second and fifth anniversaries of the completion of construction. Figures to be reported shall include both actual sewage generation figures and sewage generation as a factor of the project's occupancy rate. Failure to report may result in assessment of additional fees. 
(2)  Permit the construction of specific sewer system improvements in lieu of or with a credit against the sewer fee assessable. 
(3)  Permit a schedule and method for the payment of fees in a manner appropriate to the particular and unique circumstances of the proposed development in lieu of other requirements for payment set forth herein, provided that security is posted ensuring payment of the fees, in a form acceptable to the county, which security may be in the form of a cash bond, surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, negotiable certificate of deposit or escrow account, or lien or mortgage on lands to be covered by the building permit. 
(4)  Permit the substitution of sewer system related projects in lieu of or with a credit against the sewerage extension fee assessable. 
a.  Dedication and use of land application sewage treatment sites. 
b.  Dedication of land for use by other sewer related facilities. 
(92-RC-527, art. X, §§ 1, 2, 11-18-92; Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-193. - Use of public sewers. 
(a)  Unsanitary, offensive deposits on property. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited any human excrement, garbage or other noxious waste on public or private property within Fulton County, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said county. 
(b)  Discharging wastes to natural outlets. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the county, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the county, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  Private disposal prohibited unless expressly permitted. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  Sewer connection required if available. The county may require the owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the county and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the county, to install at their expense suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly to the public sewer within 90 days from notice to do so and in accordance with applicable regulations of the Fulton County Board of Health (incorporated by reference in chapter 34 of this Code). 
(e)  Sewer service to adjacent, unincorporated areas. Any user of Fulton County's Wastewater Collection and Treatment System who is located in an unincorporated area adjacent to Fulton County will be subject to the provisions and requirements of this article. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
Sec. 82-194. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, the construction, installation, or operation of central on-site sewage management systems is prohibited for residential developments. Central on-site sewage management may be permitted, where public sewer is not available, if the Fulton County Board of Health or the Georgia Environmental Protection Division approves a permit. 
(1)  In addition to the private sewage disposal system, a sewerage collection and conveyance system shall be designed pursuant to the current Fulton County standards. 
(2)  All related permanent and construction easements shall be dedicated to Fulton County. 
(3)  The sewer system design and easements shall include an outfall to the furthest downstream point of the development property. 
(4)  Fulton County accepts no responsibility for private on-site sewerage disposal systems. 
(b)  Applications, permits. When a public sanitary sewer is not available, building sewers shall be connected to private onsite sewage management systems subject to board of health approval and the following considerations: 
(1)  Applications for permits to construct, repair, alter, enlarge and/or use privies, privy vaults, cesspools, aeration systems and septic tanks shall be referred to the Fulton County Board of Health. The owners shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal system in a sanitary manner at all times in accordance with the conditions of the operating permit, at no expense to the county. Such facilities shall be subject to inspection by the board of health at reasonable times. The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of the Fulton County Board of Health or applicable state or federal laws. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal systems employing subsurface soil disposal where the lot area is less than the minimum requirements enforced by the board of health. 
(c)  Septic tank hauler. It shall be unlawful for a private septic tank pumpout hauler to deposit sewage in a manhole or other point of discharge in the sewage works without approval of the point of discharge and payment of fees as established by the county. 
(d)  Discharge to stream. It shall be unlawful for any commercial or industrial facility to discharge any pollutants such as mud, sand, screenings or wastes from any washing operations directly to a receiving stream without prior approval from the county. This shall include erosion and stormwater flows of muddy water leaving the site of a construction project which may lead to appreciable siltation and/or adverse affects to downstream water users. 
(e)  Requirements of other authorities. No requirement contained in this article shall be construed to relieve the applicant of any additional requirements that may be imposed by other authorities having legal jurisdiction. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
Sec. 82-195. - Sewer service laterals (building sewers) and connections. 
(a)  Permit required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections to, or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer, or appurtenances thereof, without first obtaining a written permit from the county. No connection shall be made except at a connection point approved by the county. If no connection is available, then one shall be provided by the county upon payment of the full construction cost by the applicant. 
(b)  Three classes of permits. There shall be three classes of building sewer permits, for (a) residential services, (b) commercial service, and (c) service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In any case, the owner or his agent shall make application on forms furnished by the county. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the county and shall be accompanied by the necessary connection fees required by the Fulton County Sewer Charge Resolution. Approval of the permit required by this section shall not be deemed to approve of nor authorize anything not stated in the application. 
(c)  Responsibility for installation and maintenance costs. All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer or sewer service lateral shall be borne by the owner. The building sewers or sewer service laterals up to the connection to the public sewer are the responsibility of the property owner and are not part of the sewerage system operated and maintained by the county. If there is a cleanout installed on the service lateral at the edge of the public right-of-way or county easement, under emergency conditions where public health or safety may be jeopardized, the county may assist property owners, at the owner's expense, with maintaining that portion of the service lateral between the county sewer and the cleanout. Repairs to the service lateral within the public right-of-way or county easement shall be undertaken by the county or an approved contractor and the cost shall be borne by the owner. In no way does the maintenance or repair assistance by the county exercise dominion or control of the sewer service lateral. 
(d)  Multiple connections through one service lateral. A separate and independent service lateral shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available nor can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the service lateral from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one service lateral. In cases where there are unauthorized multiple connections to a single service lateral, the county accepts no responsibility for rectifying this problem. The cost of providing separate connections in such cases must be borne by the affected property owner(s). 
(e)  Use of old service laterals. Old building sewers or sewer service laterals may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon examination and test by the county, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)  Compliance with other regulations; joints to be tight. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction, the methods used in excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench for building sewers shall all conform to the building code, plumbing code, current county developmental standards and all other regulations of the county. In cases of conflict and in absence of other provisions, materials and procedures set forth in ASCE-WPCF manual of practice number 9 shall govern. All joints of the building sewer shall be tight and waterproof. 
(g)  Elevation; artificial lifting. Whenever possible, the service lateral shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be mechanically lifted and discharged to the sewer service lateral. 
(h)  Connecting unpolluted wastes. No person shall make any connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected, directly or indirectly, to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i)  Connection of service lateral to county sewer. The connection of the sewer service lateral into the county sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes, current county developmental standards and other applicable rules and regulations of the county. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the county before installation. 
(j)  Notice, inspection, supervision of sewer service lateral construction. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the county when the sewer service lateral is ready for inspection and connection to the county sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the county. 
(k)  Protection of excavations; restoration of public property. All excavations for sewer service lateral installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the county. Construction shall comply with the provisions of PL 91-596, the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Secs. 82-196—82-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER USE AND PRETREATMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 06-1167, adopted November 15, 2006, amended the Code by repealing former art. IV, §§ 82-231—82-240, and adding a new art. IV. Former art. IV pertained to sewer use, and derived from an ordinance of March 2, 1983. 

Sec. 82-231. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Fulton County Sewer Use and Pretreatment Ordinance," and as article IV, chapter 82 of the Code of Ordinances of Fulton County. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-232. - Enactment authority. 
This article is enacted, under the authority of article 9, section 2, paragraph 1 (home rule for counties) and article 9, section 2, paragraph III (supplementary powers) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia, as amended, the Georgia Clean Water of 1964, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-233. - Purpose. 
Fulton County enacts this article in order to implement and enforce the rules and requirements of the Georgia Clean Water Act of 1964, as amended; to set forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the county; to enable the county to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the general pretreatment regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403); to prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; to prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; to protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; to promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; to provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and to enable the county to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-234. - Scope of article. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to unincorporated Fulton County and any other area within the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners, and to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. The article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-235. - Definitions. 
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following words, terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
Act or "the Act." The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
Alternative system. Any approved pretreatment system used in lieu of, including modifications to a standard subsurface system outside the building or an interior type system that is installed other than the Fulton County standard. 
Approval authority. The Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environment Protection Division. 
Authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the written authorization is submitted to the county. 
Automatic grease recovery unit. Electronic grease removal system used on the interior to collect liquid wastewater from kitchen equipment. 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) calendar days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as milligrams per liter (mg/L). 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471. 
Chemical oxygen demand. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g. mg/L). 
Composite sample. A sample composed of no less than eight grab samples taken over the compositing period. A flow proportional composite is a composite sample in which each portion of the sample is proportionate to the flow and combined to form a representative sample. 
Commercial waste. Nontoxic, non hazardous liquid wastewater from commercial facilities. Fats, oil, grease, food scraps and other grease trap contents generated by a food operation or institutional food preparation facility. Any oil waste residue produced from vehicle maintenance or washing that discharges to an oil water separator and/or sand trap. 
Commercial waste FOG permit. A permit issued to a transporter for the collection of commercial waste by pumping out, cleaning, or otherwise servicing a grease trap, oil water separator and sand trap. 
Corbel. To build out one or more courses of brick or stone from the face of a wall in order to form a support. 
County. Fulton County acting under the authority of the Board of Commissioners and by and through its duly authorized, appointed and/or elected officers or employees. 
Director. The director of the Fulton County Public Works Department or a duly authorized representative. 
Disposer. A licensed person or company that receives commercial waste from a transporter for disposal. 
Division. Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act. 
Failure. A condition existing within a pretreatment system which results in the discharge of untreated or partially treated wastewater to the sanitary sewerage system or POTW. 
Generator. A person or company that produces commercial waste. 
GPM. Gallons per minute. 
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Grease trap. A structure or device found in commercial food facilities that separates and retains fats, oil, grease waste prior to discharge to the sanitary sewer system. 
Gray water. Liquid wastewater located in a pretreatment system. Also know as brown water. 
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non domestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
Innovative system. A pretreatment system that, in whole or in part, employs, materials devices, or techniques that are novel or unique that are not specifically described and have not been successfully field tested under sound scientific and engineering principles. 
Installer. A person or company responsible for a contracted project who, for compensation, undertakes to submit a bid to, or does himself or by others construct, install, alter, repair, or modify a pretreatment system. An installer must be a licensed contractor or master plumber in the State of Georgia possessing the experience, knowledge, skill and ability to provide services pertaining to the installation, construction, alteration, repair and design of a pretreatment system. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the County's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued there under, or any more stringent or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any regulations contained in any sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is, or may be, the discharge of pollutants. The construction of such is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a standard of performance under section 306 of the Clean Water Act which will be applicable to such source if such standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 306 of the Act, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of section (1)b. or c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this article has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Non-contact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Oil water separator. A structure or device installed in commercial facilities to retain and separate oil waste prior to discharge to sanitary sewer. 
Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the County's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
PDI certification. Plumbing certification given to plumbing equipment, by the Plumbing and Drainage Institute that has passed the institute's testing standards. 
Permit. Written authorization granted to a person or company to perform services or discharge commercial waste to the sanitary sewer in the County. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. 
pH. A pH measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Phosphorus. An essential chemical element and nutrient for all life forms. Occurs in ortho, pyro, tripoly and organic forms. Each of these forms and their sum (total P) is expressed as mg/L elemental phosphorus. 
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards or standards. Prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Pretreatment system. A grease trap, oil water separator, and sand trap installed to the exterior of the building subsurface or interior at a sink, dishwasher, floor drain, and utility sink to collect and treat commercial wastewater prior to discharge to the sanitary sewer or POTW. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in Section 2.1 of this article. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A "treatment works," as defined by Section 212 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §1292) which is owned by the county. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Repair. Replacement of, modification, or addition to a failing pretreatment system which is necessary to allow the system to function to eliminate a public health hazard or pollution hazard. Servicing or replacing mechanical and electrical parts, replacing with a system comparable to that which is currently inoperable, or making minor structural corrections to a tank. 
Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Sewage. A combination of water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters, and storm waters as may be present but unintentionally admitted. 
Significant industrial user. 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blow down wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the county on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the County may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 82-237(1.)(B) of this article. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
Storm water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Subsurface. Placement of a pretreatment system below ground or recessed in building floor. 
Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Tank capacity. The gallons or volume of commercial waste a transporter's vehicle has the ability to collect at any given time. 
Test manhole. The last discharge point of the pretreatment system and the sampling point for the pretreatment system waste stream. 
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen. The combined amount of organic and ammonia nitrogen, usually expressed in mg/L. 
Total pump out. The complete removal of any waste generated by a waste generator stored in a pretreatment system on site. 
Transporter. A licensed person or company that collects commercial waste from commercial waste generators. 
Transporter station. A licensed business in the state used as a holding point for commercial waste before transferring to a final disposal site. 
Strip retail shopping center. A shopping center with mix use tenants and no defined food court area. Separate owners of individual businesses responsible for their own waste generated. 
User or industrial user. A source of indirect discharge. 
Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-236. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
(1)  BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
(2)  CFR - Code of Federal Regulations 
(3)  COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand 
(4)  EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(5)  EPD - U.S. Environmental Protection Division 
(6)  FOG - Fat, Oil, Grease 
(7)  gpd - gallons per day 
(8)  IU - Industrial User 
(9)  LGA - Local Governing Authority 
(10)  mg/L - milligrams per liter 
(11)  NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
(12)  P - Phosphorus 
(13)  POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works 
(14)  RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
(15)  SIC - Standard Industrial Classification 
(16)  TSS - Total Suspended Solids 
(17)  TKN - Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen 
(18)  TTO - Total Toxic Organics 
(19)  U.S.C. - United States Code 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-237. - General sewer use requirements. 
(a)  Prohibited discharge standards. 
(1)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
a.  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° (60°) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than five (5) percent or any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, per chlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the county, EPD or EPA has identified as a hazard to the system. 
b.  Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 12.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the collection system, POTW or equipment; 
c.  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater than one inch (1.0") or 2.54 centimeters (2.54 cm) in any dimension; 
d.  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
e.  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150° (65.5°), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104° (40°); 
f.  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
g.  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
h.  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the director in accordance with section 82-239.3 of this article; 
i.  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
j.  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the county's NPDES permit; 
k.  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable or federal regulations; 
l.  Storm water, surface water, ground water, discharge from groundwater remediation, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, non-contact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the director; 
m.  Sludge's, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
n.  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director in a wastewater discharge permit; 
o.  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test. In no case shall an industry's discharge exceed a total toxic organics (TTO) concentration of 2.13 mg/L; 
p.  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
q.  Fats, oils, or greases (FOG) of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 100 mg/L. 
(3)  Storage prohibited. Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(b)  National categorical pretreatment standards. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated: 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(c)  Pretreatment standards. The State of Georgia has not established separate pretreatment standards from the federal categorical standards but has established in-stream water quality standards which are to be used in calculating the local limits. 
(d)  Local limits. Fulton County's local limits are tabulated in Appendix A1—A4 and are subject to changes or revisions as may be deemed necessary by the county. Therefore the county reserves the right to revise an IU's discharge permit, to restrict volume of discharge and mass of certain pollutant previously permitted and, if necessary revoke an IU's discharge permit if such discharge would result directly or indirectly in a violation of State or Federal standards at the POTW. 
(e)  County's right of revision. The county reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(f)  Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-238. - Pretreatment of wastewater. 
(a)  Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 82-237(1) of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the, or the director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the director for review, and shall receive authorization from the director before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the county under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
(1)  Whenever deemed necessary, the director may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The director may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(3)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided in accordance to the requirements outlined in section 82-251 when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand. Such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director and shall be located so that they are easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, in accordance with the requirements set forth in section 82-251. 
(4)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(d)  Accidental discharge/slug and spill control plans. At least once every two (2) years, the director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The director may require any user to develop, submit for review and comment, before implementation of the plan. Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 82-241 of this article; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant; 
(5)  Site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(d)  Hauled wastewater. 
(1)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the director, and at such times as are established by the director. Such waste shall not violate section 82-237 of this article or any other requirements established by the county. The director may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(2)  The director shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits in accordance with the provisions of section 82-239 of this article. The director may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(3)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the director. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the director. The director may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(4)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. No hauled waste from outside the boundaries of the county will be accepted. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-239. - Wastewater discharge permit. 
(a)  Wastewater analysis. When requested by the director, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 calendar days of the request. The director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permit required. 
(1)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the director, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 82-239(c) of this article may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(2)  The director may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permitted to the sanctions set out in sections 82-245 through 82-247 of this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(c)  Wastewater discharge permitting; existing connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 30 days after said date, apply to the director for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 82-239(e) of this article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 90 calendar days of the effective date of this article except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the director. 
(d)  Wastewater discharge permitting; new connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for a wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 82-238(e) of this article, must be filed at least 90 calendar days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(e)  Wastewater discharge permit; application contents. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. The director may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(1)  All information required by section 82-241(a)(2) of this article; 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the director to evaluate the wastewater discharge permits application. 
(f)  Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(g)  Wastewater discharge permit decisions. Director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-240. - Wastewater discharge permit issuance process. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permit duration. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the director. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permit contents. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the county in accordance with section 82-240(e) of this article, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this article, and federal, state and local laws, rules, and regulations. 
(c)  Wastewater discharge permit appeals. The director shall provide public notice, if required, of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the director to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 calendar days of notice of its issuance. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the director fails to act within 60 calendar days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Superior Court of Fulton County within 30 calendar days. 
(d)  Wastewater discharge permit modification. The director may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the county's POTW, county personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(e)  Wastewater discharge permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 calendar days advance notice to the director and the director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. The notice to the director must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator have no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(f)  Wastewater discharge permit revocation. The director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed conditions pursuant to section 82-241(e) of this article; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
(g)  Transfer of business ownership; effect of permit. Wastewater discharge permits shall be voided upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(h)  Wastewater discharge permit-re-issuance. A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 82-239(e) of this article, a minimum of 90 calendar days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(i)  Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(1)  If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the county shall enter into an intergovernmental agreement with the contributing municipality. 
(2)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (1) above, the director shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
a.  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
b.  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
c.  Such other information as the director may deem necessary. 
(3)  An inter-governmental agreement, as required by subsection (1), above, shall contain the following conditions: 
a.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use article which is at least as stringent as this article and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 82-237(a)(1) and (2) and 82-237(d) of this article. The requirement shall specify that such article and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the County's article or local limits; 
b.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
c.  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the director; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the director; 
d.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the director with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
e.  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
g.  A provision ensuring the director access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the director; and 
h.  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the inter-municipal agreement. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-241. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either 180 calendar days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (2) below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below: 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
2.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 82-241(j) of this article. 
3.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 82-241(k) of this article. 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 82-241(b) of this article. 
h.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 82-239(f) of this article. 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 82-241(b)(7) of this article: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; the user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than 14 calendar days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(3)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(c)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report containing the information described in section 82-241(a)(2)d.—f. of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 82-239(f) of this article. 
(d)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance of this article. 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in section 82-241(k) of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(e)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 60 calendar days before the change. 
(1)  The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 82-239(e) of this article. 
(2)  The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 82-239(g) of this article or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 82-240(d) of this article in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(f)  Reports of potential problems. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five calendar days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(3)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (1), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(g)  Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the director. 
(h)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director with in 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director within 30 calendar days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the director monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the director samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(i)  Discharge of hazardous waste. 
(1)  The discharge of any hazardous waste as defined under 40 CFR Part 261 is hereby prohibited without prior written authorization of the director. Discharge of certain hazardous materials may be allowed after submitting in writing to the director the following information: the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261; the EPA hazardous waste number; the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other); an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream to be discharged; and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. 
(2)  Any user who receives written authorization from the director to commence the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the receiving POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director and hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month; and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 calendar days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 82-241(e) of this article. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 82-241(a), 82-241(c) and 82-241(d) of this article. 
(3)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (b), above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(4)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the director, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 calendar days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(5)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(6)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued there under, or any applicable federal or law. 
(j)  Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(k)  Sample collection. 
(1)  Except as indicated in subsection (2), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(l)  Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted when received on or before the required date. Submittals received by mail after this date, will be considered late even though postmarked on or before the required date. 
(m)  Record keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the county, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. 
(n)  Operator and lab analyst certification. 
(1)  Industrial pretreatment facility operators who are working at and who remain at an industrial wastewater treatment facility on July 1, 1991, will have until July 1, 1996 to obtain either a minimum class III wastewater treatment plant operator certificate or industrial wastewater operator certificate as issued by the Georgia Board of Examiners for Certification of Water and Wastewater Treatment and Operators and Laboratory Analysts. Any uncertified operator hired after July 1, 1991 will have 12 months from the start of employment to obtain certification. 
(2)  Any industrial laboratory analyst who conducts certain tests, as defined by the board of examiners for certification of water and wastewater treatment and operators and laboratory analysts, in conjunction with the operation of an industrial pretreatment facility shall obtain a certificate from said board; provided, however, that an industrial wastewater pretreatment plant shall be required to have only one responsible analyst obtain such a certificate, and any other analyst in that facility shall be supervised by such person. Any new analyst in responsible charge who is hired after July 1, 1991 will have 12 months from the start of employment to obtain the needed certificate. Any person who has obtained or shall obtain a class I or class II certification by the board as a wastewater treatment plant operators shall not be required to obtain a laboratory analyst certificate from the board to provide services as a laboratory analyst. 
(3)  This certification requirement only applies to industries with pretreatment permits. The county will determine which level of certification is needed on a case-by-case basis. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-242. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Right of entry: inspection and sampling. The director shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the director ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The director shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at least monthly to ensure their accuracy and records of calibrations shall be kept and made available to the director upon request. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  Right of entry. If the director has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the county designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the director may seek issuance of a court order to enter the property from the superior court of Fulton County, or court of like jurisdiction. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-243. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the director inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-244. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
The director will publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the director believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that have caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or have resulted in the director's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 calendar days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 calendar days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-245. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 15 calendar days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 82-245(d) and 82-245(e) of this article and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The director may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(d)  Compliance orders. When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer and/or water service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(e)  Cease and desist orders. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
(f)  Administrative fines. 
(1)  When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may fine such user in an amount of at least $1,000.00 a day for each violation. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(2)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of 25 percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of two percent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
(3)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the director to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within ten calendar days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the director may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The director may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(4)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(g)  Emergency suspensions. The director may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The director may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 82-245(g) of this article are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the director prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under sections 82-245(c) or 82-245(h) of this article. 
(h)  Termination of discharge. In addition to the provisions in section 82-240(f) of this article, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permits conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in section 82-237 of this article. 
(i)  Notice of termination. Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 82-245(3) of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-246. - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Injunctive relief. When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may petition the court or court of like jurisdiction through the county's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the county for at least $1,000.00 a day for each violation. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(2)  The director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the county. 
(3)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(4)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of at least $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or both. 
(2)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least $1,000.00 a day per violation or be subject to imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under law. 
(3)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or both. 
(4)  In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not more than $5,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or both. 
(d)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the county's enforcement response plan. However, the director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-247. - Supplemental enforcement action. 
(a)  Performance bonds. The director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the county, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(b)  Liability insurance. The director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
(c)  Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(d)  Public nuisance. A violation of any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director. Any person creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the applicable provisions of the Code of Law of Fulton County governing such nuisances, and may be required to reimburse the county for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-248. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 82-237(a)(1) of this article or the specific prohibitions in sections 82-237(a)(2)c. through 82-237(a)(2)g. and 82-237(a)(2)i. through 82-237(a)(2)q. of this article if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the county was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(b)  Bypass. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section: 
a.  "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
b.  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (3) and (4) of this section. 
(3)  a.  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director, at least ten calendar days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
b.  A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five calendar days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(4)  a.  Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless 
1.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
2.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
3.  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (b)(3) of this section. 
b.  The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (4)a. of this section. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-249. - Wastewater treatment rates. 
The county shall operate and maintain the POTW in accordance with and federal regulations and from time to time as deemed necessary shall expand, upgrade or otherwise improve the POTW. The costs of operation, maintenance and improvements shall be born by the county, except where and/or federal funding may be available to support certain improvements. The funding for operations, maintenance, upgrades, expansions and improvements shall be collected through user fees, surcharges, connection fees and other water/sewer related charges. A fee schedule has been established by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners and is evaluated and revised from time to time to reflect actual cost of operating, maintaining and improving the POTW. A current fee schedule has been published and made available in the Fulton County Public Works Department. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-250. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Pretreatment charges and fees. The county may adopt from time to time reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the county's pretreatment program which may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(5)  Surcharge fees for higher strength wastewater for compatible pollutants; 
(6)  Charges for costs incurred by the county due to an industry's noncompliance which results in damages, obstructions, or any other impairment to the POTW or environment, or any expense of whatever character or nature to the county. 
(7)  Other fees as the county may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the county. 
(b)  Industrial waste surcharge for compatible pollutants. 
(1)  The county, at its discretion, shall charge and assess all IU's discharging industrial strength wastewater into the county sewerage system. The surcharge shall be in addition to any sewer service charges, for those wastes containing pollutant concentrations consistently greater than any of the following: 
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER CONCENTRATIONS: 
a.  Chemical oxygen demand (COD) 350 mg/L 
b.  Total suspended solids (TSS) 200 mg/L 
c.  Phosphorous (P) 5.0 mg/L 
d.  Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) 25.0 mg/L 
(2)  IU's subject to surcharge fees may still be required to pretreat their discharge if their discharge exceeds any of the limitations shown in appendix A1 for other regulated pollutants or if there is insufficient capacity at the receiving POTW. 
(3)  The mass limits in Appendix A1 define the total mass load allocated to industry for compatible pollutants at each POTW and is based on each facility's overall design criteria minus the current and planned future domestic loading. An appropriate safety factor is already built into these figures. The difference between the total figure and the existing permitted industrial load shall be used to calculate the remaining capacity available for new industries or expansion of existing industries. 
(4)  Allocation of the mass based discharge parameters shall be on a first come, first serve basis and each IU shall be issued a permit allowing a monthly average and daily maximum mass discharge for each pollutant permitted. Once permitted, the mass allowed in the discharge permit is added to the total industrial inventory for the appropriate POTW, thereby reducing the remaining available capacity allowed for future industrial use. However an industry which fails to utilize a significant portion of its permitted discharge may be subject to a reduction so as not to tie up capacity that might otherwise be available to new or expanding IUs. 
(5)  The county shall have the right to reduce an IU's discharge permit for any parameter, for reasons including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Operational problems or emergency at the POTW; 
b.  Reduction in capacity at the POTW, 
c.  Order of or federal regulatory agency; 
d.  Failure of the industry to comply with its discharge permit; 
e.  Failure of the IU to control surges or slug loadings; 
f.  Failure of the industry's discharge to realize a significant portion of the mass load allocated to it. 
(6)  Where TKN test results are not available or feasible, the TKN shall be calculated based on the ammonia-nitrogen test (NH 3 ) which shall be taken as 60 percent of the TKN, unless the value of the organic nitrogen component can be shown. 
(7)  At the county's discretion, IU's subject to surcharge may be issued discharge permits with specific limitations for flow and concentration in addition to mass of pollutants in the discharge. Application for any increase in discharge limits shall be made in writing to the county. Unauthorized increases in discharge shall be subject to enforcement actions, as outlined in section 82-245 of this document. 
(8)  Surcharge fees for the compatible pollutants and other fees such as may be reasonable and appropriate shall be established and revised from time to time in the Fulton County fee schedule. 
(9)  Industrial surcharges shall be billed separately from other sewer service charges. Invoices will be sent either monthly or bi-monthly and payment shall be received within 30 days. Payments not received within 30 days will be assessed interest at 1.5 percent per month. Failure to pay surcharges may result in enforcement actions as outlined in section 82-245. 
(10)  The amount of the surcharge, which is hereby charged and assessed against all IUs discharging industrial wastewater into the county sewerage system, shall reflect the cost incurred by the county in handling excess COD, TSS, P, and TKN. This surcharge shall include a proportionate share of charges for maintenance and operation of the water pollution control facilities including depreciation, solids handling, disposal and other incidental expenses. IU's shall also be responsible as provided in subsection 82-250(b)(8), or the cost of sampling and analysis required to determine the concentration, C, used in calculating the surcharge fees. 
(11)  The surcharge amount will be based on the number of pounds (lbs.) of pollutant discharged over and above domestic strength wastewater for the four compatible pollutants and shall be calculated using the following formula: 
S = U * (C - L) * F * 8.34 
Where: 
S  = the surcharge amount in dollars. 
U  = the unit charge (cost/lb) established in the Fulton County fee schedule for a particular pollutant (COD, TSS, P, & TKN above). 
C  = the concentration in milligrams per liter of the permitted pollutant, as either measured or estimated by methods approved by the county and the IU. 
L  = the domestic wastewater concentration limit for the surcharge pollutant (COD, TSS, P, and TKN given above). 
F  = the volume of flow (expressed in millions of gallons) discharged during the billing period from the IU as either measured or estimated by methods approved by the county and the IU. 8.34 = the "density" of water (lbs. per gallon). 
(12)  The unit cost for each pollutant shall be determined annually by the director in order that the above factors may correctly represent current treatment and handling costs. 
(13)  IU's may choose to pre-treat their discharge to the domestic strength concentrations indicated above in lieu of paying surcharge fees. In such cases, design and construction of pretreatment facilities shall be reviewed, and permitted by the county and shall be subject to all other provisions of these regulations as appropriate. IU's which provide pretreatment to avoid paying surcharge fees may still be subject to surcharge fees where the pretreatment facility fails to lower pollutant levels to domestic concentrations. 
(14)  Industries which discharge only wastewater generated from restrooms and do not discharge process wastewater shall be exempt from the surcharge requirements (even though their wastewater may exhibit higher than domestic concentrations for some compatible pollutants) provided they have met the following criteria: 
a.  A request is made in writing to the director to be exempt from surcharge fees on this basis. 
b.  They provide the county with adequate documentation showing that their discharge is only connected to restroom plumbing and there is no process water in use. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-251. - Commercial wastewater pretreatment. 
(a)  General provisions; non applicability to residential users. 
(1)  This section pertains to fat, oil and grease (FOG), grit, and any other wastes of commercial origin which may be discharged to the POTW and sanitary sewer. This section of the article shall regulate commercial waste generators only and not residential users. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section, wastes of commercial origin are those generated by restaurants, institution kitchens, and other food service establishments, as well as car maintenance, automobile dealerships and car/truck wash facilities. All commercial waste generators involved in the preparation of food for commercial purposes shall provide an approved fat, oil, grease (FOG) pretreatment system such as a grease trap, provided that the excess FOG is floatable and can be effectively removed. All commercial facilities with vehicle servicing or car washing will be required to provide a pretreatment system such as an oil separator and/or sand trap to remove oil waste prior to discharging to the sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Pretreatment equipment installation, maintenance, and grease disposal requirements. 
(1)  All users involved in the preparation of food for commercial purposes shall provide approved fat, oil, grease (FOG) removal equipment such as separators or traps, if: 
a.  The user generates a wastewater which contains greater than the quantity of FOG permitted in these regulations, and/or, 
b.  The excess FOG is floatable and can be effectively removed in an oil/grease separator or trap, then said user shall be required to install an oil/grease separator. 
(2)  Oil/grease traps shall be required for commercial and industrial establishments where it has been determined by the director that they are necessary to prevent discharge to the sewer system in quantities that may adversely affect the operation of the system. 
(3)  Alternative pretreatment systems include automatic waste removal equipment and shall be used only after evaluation and authorization by the director. 
(4)  Commercial car and truck washing facilities which discharge to the county sewer shall provide grit and oil removal as d elsewhere in these regulations. 
(5)  All oil/grease separators shall be designed and installed in accordance with county standards. The user shall submit plans to the county for review and comment. The installation shall be subject to the county's inspection prior to placing in service. 
(6)  Grit and oil/grease separators shall be installed in accordance to the current official plumbing code used by the county. 
(7)  When required by the county, the user shall install a suitable manhole on the discharge to the sewer to allow for observation, sampling and measurement of wastewaters. This manhole shall be installed at the user's expense and shall be maintained to be safe and accessible to the county at all times. 
(8)  It shall be a violation of these regulations when a person: 
a.  Allows commercial waste that emits noxious or offensive odors or is unsanitary or injurious to public health or property to spill, overflow or be discharged onto public or private property. 
b.  Allows commercial waste to be removed from a facility under his/her control except by a transporter holding a valid and current license/permit for pumping in the State of Georgia. 
c.  Allows commercial waste generated at a facility under his/her control to be disposed of at a site not permitted by a LGA or the division. 
d.  Allows commercial waste generated at a facility under his/her control to enter the county sewerage system which exceeds the limitations set forth in section 82-237(a)(1). 
(c)  Operation and maintenance of pretreatment system. 
(1)  All oil/grease, and grit separators shall be maintained by the user, at the user's expense, in continually efficient operation at all times. The user shall service each separator frequently and repair as necessary, to ensure that the effluent discharge does not exceed the limits set forth in section 82-237(a)(2) of this article. The user shall maintain records of said service and make available to the director upon request. 
(2)  It shall constitute a violation of this article to introduce chemicals, acidic or caustic substances which emulsify or otherwise temporarily dissolve fats, oils and grease to the extent that it later solidifies in the county sewer line, pump station or treatment plant. Use of any other substances, including enzymes and special bacteria is solely at the discretion of the user. Prior to the use of any biological products, the user shall inform the county in writing their intent to add such products to their pretreatment system. 
(3)  The county shall have the authority to prohibit the addition of any substance, including enzymes and bacteria used for maintenance of a grease trap if it is discovered that said substance causes damage to or interferes with the operation or maintenance of the POTW, creates a public nuisance or odor, or presents a potential hazard to personnel. 
(4)  If upon inspection, it is determined that a grease trap is in need of cleaning, the only acceptable means shall be to pump out the grease for disposal as provided elsewhere in this document. Applying heavy doses of chemicals, enzymes or bacteria to the grease trap will not be allowed as a substitute for pumping and removing the material from the trap. 
(5)  Installation of a mechanical system to continuously or intermittently apply solutions of enzymes, special bacteria or other agents to the sewer shall not be allowed in lieu of an acceptable grease trap. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Construction permit. No portion of a pretreatment system shall be installed, repaired, altered, modified or replaced until a pretreatment construction permit has been issued by the county. A fee will be required for review of plans. Permits issued for new construction shall become void 18 months after the date of issuance if the system has not been installed. However, if building construction has commenced, the system construction permit shall be valid for an additional 90 calendar days beyond the 18-month expiration date. Permits for system repairs shall become void after 90 calendar days from the date of issuance. A construction or repair permit for a pretreatment system shall be transferred to another person if the transferee files an amended application providing all corrected information and proof of ownership of the property or tenant occupancy within 60 calendar days after the transfer of ownership, and all information pertaining to the sitting, location, and installation conditions or repair of a pretreatment system remains the same. There is no fee associated with the processing to the transfer. The date of the construction or repair permit shall not be amended, but shall run from the date of original issuance prior to the transfer. 
(2)  Construction revision permit. The applicant shall be the permit holder and shall be held responsible for all information supplied to the county. The signed application, site evaluation, and system design plans when required, serve as the basis by which the county determines the issuance of a construction permit. In the event of a change in any information given in the application which served as basis for issuing a construction permit, the permit holder will immediately file an amended application detailing such changed conditions. If the new conditions are determined to be in compliance with county engineering standards, the construction permit shall be amended. If the new conditions are determined to be in non-compliance with the county engineering standards, the permit shall no longer be valid. 
(3)  Commercial waste permit. A commercial waste permit shall be required by any commercial waste generator discharging to the county sanitary sewer and POTW. The permit will be valid for one year from the date of issuance and is not transferable. The permit must be placed in a location visible to inspections. If the owner of a pretreatment system remains the same but the ownership of the building changes, a site tenant is still operating within the permit guidelines. No new building tenant shall open for business until the county has approved the change of tenancy, and inspected the pretreatment system to see if it is still within the guidelines of the original operating permit (see section "commercial waste permits issuance"). 
(4)  Voiding a permit. If the system is improperly modified or damaged, the county shall undertake administrative action to revoke the permit. The county shall prohibit the further or continued use of a system when the permit has become void. The contractor, engineer or licensed plumber will be responsible to do a permit revision and present corrected plans for review. If a larger system is required based on project modifications another final inspection will be required once the system installation has been completed. 
(e)  Pretreatment inspections. 
(1)  New construction. Before covering with earth and before placing a pretreatment system into service, a person/company installing or constructing any portion of a pretreatment system shall notify the county prior to completion of the construction activities and shall have the system inspected by the county for compliance with the requirements of this article. A final inspection fee will be required. The county shall make every reasonable effort to make a complete inspection of system construction, modification, replacement or alteration within two (2) working days after notification to the county that the system is ready for inspection. A repair shall be inspected by the county to determine compliance with construction permit standards prior to final covering of the system. If the system constructed is approved by the county, an "inspection approval" notice will be given to the installer. If the system installation does not pas the construction inspection, then the installer shall make all required corrections and notify the county within seven (7) calendar days for a re-inspection of the system. A re-inspection fee shall be charged to the installer for additional inspection(s) if the contractor has failed to correct the items an inspector has required at the preliminary inspection. Final installation approval shall not be granted until the county has confirmed that the installation is in compliance with plans and specifications submitted with the permit application. If no final construction inspection can be documented of the commercial waste generators pretreatment system, then the certificate of occupancy on the project will not be released. 
(2)  Existing pretreatment systems. The county will perform an annual inspection of all pretreatment systems permitted to operate in the county. The inspections will be conducted to make sure the commercial waste generator is following the maintenance criteria set forth in this article and the waste generator is operating under the conditions of the permit. Those facilities found in non-compliance will be required to correct all violations within seven calendar days of notification. However, if the violation requires a repair, replacement or installation of a pretreatment system, then the commercial waste generator will have 45 calendar days to comply. All repairs, replacement and installations will require approval by the county. 
(f)  Location and installation. 
(1)  Pretreatment systems will be located and installed closest to the discharge source of the commercial waste. A subsurface pretreatment system must be located or installed no more than 50 feet from the discharge source. A subsurface pretreatment system installed beyond 50 feet must have approval by the county. 
(2)  Pretreatment systems will be located and installed so that proper maintenance of the system does not create sanitary nuisances or health hazards and does not impact the environment. 
(3)  Pretreatment systems must be located and installed so that they are accessible for maintenance. No heavy kitchen equipment, canisters, dumpster or trash compactor can block access to the pretreatment system. 
(4)  Interior grease traps will be installed at the point source such as a three- to four-compartment sink, dishwasher, or any kitchen equipment where grease must be collected prior to discharge to building waste line. Interior grease traps will be located above the floor. Recessed grease traps must have prior approval for installation. All interior grease traps must have a flow control valve and a vent. The flow control valve shall be placed on the inlet side of the grease trap. The vent line will take all odors out of the building. 
(5)  Pretreatment systems installed and located that experience a rusting of parts (e.g. pretreatment system located under a kitchen sink) which may impair the opening of the system for inspection, will require the commercial waste generator to provide access to the system. If the commercial waste generator cannot provide access, then they will be in violation. Inspector can require the unit replaced if it has deteriorated from corrosion. 
(6)  Pretreatment systems installed and located to the outside of a building will discharge to the sanitary sewer line. The test manhole is the last discharge point of the pretreatment system before the sanitary sewer. The sanitary sewer connection from the pretreatment system will not be allowed to connect to the site sanitary sewer line by going under or through the building. The connection to the sanitary sewer line must be kept to the exterior of the building structure. The connection from the building to the pretreatment system will be a direct straight line. One 90- or 45-degree angle will be allowed with a clean out if a straight line is not obtainable. The test manhole will be located a maximum of four feet from the last tank in the pretreatment system and must have an invert in the test manhole. Prefab concrete or brick construction is allowed. 
(7)  All pretreatment systems installed subsurface in multi-level parking decks must be located on the ground level of the structure and must be located so they are accessible for maintenance and inspection. 
(8)  Installation of alternative interior pretreatment system will be allowed for commercial waste generators where an upgrade, repair, or installation of a pretreatment system is required and a subsurface system is not possible. However, the commercial waste generator must meet the following criteria for an alternative pretreatment system to be installed: 
a.  The facility must be located in an existing building structure 15 years or older, where written documentation is submitted by a licensed engineer, contractor or master plumber to verify a subsurface pretreatment system is impossible to install due to existing under ground utilities, 
b.  The facility is not located in new commercial development, 
c.  The facility provides written documentation by a licensed engineer, contractor or master plumber that the sanitary sewer tie in of a subsurface pretreatment cannot be reached by the installer, 
d.  The facility's pretreatment system is found to be inadequate and an alternative system will upgrade the current pretreatment system to bring the facility into compliance. 
(9)  Any subsurface pretreatment system requiring installation of more than one single tank will lace the tanks in tandem; one single line. The multiple tanks must be installed so the commercial waste from the building will flow from tank to tank. The distance from tank to tank will not be greater than 12 inches (refer to Fulton County standard detail 671). 
(g)  Design of pretreatment system. Oil water separators grease traps, and sand traps will be required for commercial and industrial establishments as a pretreatment system where it is determined by the county that they are necessary to prevent oil and grease waste discharge to the sanitary sewer system in quantities that may adversely affect the operation of the sewer system and the county POTW. The user shall submit plans to the county for review and comment. The installation shall be subject to the county's inspection prior to placing in service. 
(1)  Subsurface pretreatment systems shall comply with the structural requirements as indicated on the Fulton County standard 671 or 671A and this article. All subsurface pretreatment systems must comply with the engineering standards indicated on the standard detail, as well the current plumbing code used by the county. 
(2)  For the sizing of pretreatment systems by specific generators source, refer to generator source charts, tables I and II. Systems currently installed will not change unless the pretreatment system is found to be: 
a.  Inadequate for the facility's current operation. 
b.  In violation due to a commercial waste generator failing to provide documentation for maintenance of the current system and an inspection reveals an upgrade or repair is required. 
c.  Located in a spill area and the commercial waste generator has failed to maintain the pretreatment system, which results in a fine from the county or clean up is required and an inspection reveals the current system is inadequate or in need of repair. 
d.  Installed incorrectly and not per plumbing code used by the county or engineering standards. The existing system shall be corrected where possible. If unable to correct, then the system must be replaced. 
(3)  Subsurface pretreatment systems will have manhole covers over the inlet and outlet of the system (refer to standard detail 671). The concrete lid of tank will have circular openings for the placement of manhole covers. The manhole covers must be at least two feet in diameter. All openings on the pretreatment system will be core drilled. 
(4)  Any 3,000-gallon pretreatment system can be installed in two sections provided the center section has been sealed properly where no leakage can occur. The maximum size for any single tank installation will be 3,000 gallons on commercial sites where a greater system is not required for spill containment. All 3,000-gallon tanks shall have a minimum of two manhole openings for access to the tanks for cleaning and inspection. The subsurface pretreatment system will be made of prefab concrete tanks or its equivalent and will be a solid continuous structure where no sealing or binding of the middle section of the tank is allowed. The tank cannot be fabricated in two sections on tanks less than 1,500 gallons. A baffle wall is required in the tanks and the baffle wall must be fabricated as a permanent fixture. A slide structure will not be allowed as a baffle wall. A three- to five-inch diameter hole in the baffle wall must have a PVC elbow pipe turned down a maximum two feet from the bottom of the tank (refer to standard detail 671). 
(5)  A subsurface pretreatment system will have a standard manhole suitable for observation, sampling, and measurement of wastewater. This manhole shall be installed at the user's expense and shall be maintained to be safe and accessible to the county at all times. This manhole is called the test manhole and is considered part of the overall pretreatment system (see Fulton County standard 650). 
(6)  Subsurface pretreatment systems installed must be certified as a grease trap or an oil water separator. A septic system will not be allowed in lieu of the required pretreatment system. Interior pretreatment systems must have PDI certification and the gallon (GPM) capacity must be labeled on the unit. To verify type and size of tank purchased, an inspector can request a copy of the invoice for the pretreatment system installed. 
(7)  All pretreatment systems that are subsurface will be brought to finished grade using pre-cast concrete cones. Brick work will also be allowed if the depth is no more than four feet to reach grade. The depth of the pretreatment system will determine how the brick work should be built. The standard core hole in the top of a pre-cast pretreatment system lid is two feet. The brick work will be three feet in diameter around the core opening. The three-foot base will allow entry to the pretreatment system for maintenance. When using bricks, once 80 percent of the height has been achieved to the two-foot manhole opening, you must corbel in the brickwork in small increments (see Fulton County standard 650). 
(8)  An alternative interior pretreatment system shall be used only after evaluation and authorization by the county. Any alternative pretreatment system unit authorized by the county for use must have product support for maintenance and operation of the system. The equipment must be available for sale and the supply must be readily available for installation. The use of an alternative system will require established procedures for routine maintenance, operational surveillance, and environmental monitoring to assure the system continues to function properly. Any fees incurred for quality assurance of this unit will be the total responsibility of the commercial, waste generator. The sizing of the grease trap will be based on the manufacturer's recommendations, but it must be equivalent to a subsurface pretreatment system gallon capacity where required. 
(9)  A grease trap is used for the collection of kitchen waste discharge only. No can wash areas, no dumpster, no mop sinks, no food grinders and no floor drains in mechanical rooms, bathrooms, or discharge from food coolers. Commercial waste generators that have micro-brewery facilities may be subject to additional discharge requirements (see appendix B3, food service piping layout). 
(10)  Installation of a mechanical system to continuously or intermittently apply solutions of enzymes, special bacteria or other agents to the sewer shall not be allowed in lieu of an acceptable pretreatment system. 
(11)  It shall constitute a violation of this article to introduce chemicals, acidic or caustic substances which emulsify or otherwise temporarily dissolve fats, oils and grease to the extent that it later solidifies in the county sewer lines, pump stations, or POTW. If a commercial waste generator uses enzymes and bacteria for pretreatment maintenance and it is discovered that said substance causes damage to or interferes with the operation or maintenance of POTW, creates a public nuisance or odor, or presents a potential health hazard, then these additives will be prohibited. Use of any other substances, including special enzymes and bacteria is solely at the discretion of the commercial waste generator. 
(12)  Grit, sand traps and oil water separators shall be installed in accordance to the current official plumbing code used by the county engineering standards (refer to the commercial waste generator source Table II in this article), 
(13)  Any strip retail shopping center or office building showing subsurface pretreatment systems at designated buildings or structures will only be allowed discharge by a single tenant or food service to that system. No multiple users will be allowed. The only exception to this condition is a shopping mall with a food court where pretreatment systems are installed and maintained by the mail corporation or management leasing. 
(h)  Maintenance of pretreatment systems. 
(1)  Pretreatment systems shall be maintained by the commercial waste generator at their expense, to assure continually efficient operation at all times. The commercial waste generator shall. maintain records of said service and make available all records to the county upon request (refer to the manifest section of this article). The commercial waste generator must service their pretreatment system frequently or repair their system to maintain the following: 
a.  A 25 percent tank retention capacity rule (see explanation below).* 
b.  A top sludge cap less than two inches in tank. 
c.  A suspended solids content of less than two inches on the bottom of tank. 
d.  A pretreatment system able to maintain a daily discharge limit of 250 mg/l to sanitary sewer. 
e.  A pretreatment system where no sludge deposits of grease or oil waste accumulate in a test manhole or create a grease/oil waste stream to the sanitary sewer. 
f.  A pretreatment system that does not create any obnoxious odors and poses no threat to public health and welfare. 
g.  A pretreatment system that does not cause back-ups to kitchen sinks or any interior kitchen or building plumbing. 
h.  A pretreatment system that causes no manhole overflows no accumulation of oil/grease in the county sanitary sewer system, or affects the water quality of the county's POTW facilities. 
* The 25 percent rule requires that the depth of oil and grease (floating and settled) in a trap shall not be equal to or greater than 25 percent of the total operating depth of the trap. The operating depth of the trap is determined by measuring the internal depth of the tank. If the tank is measured with more than two feet of floating top solids or more than two feet of settled solids, the tank is in violation. 
Commercial pretreatment inspectors shall have the authority to adjust any facility's maintenance schedule if upon inspection it is determined the maintenance schedule of the pretreatment system is not controlling the discharge of grease/oil waste to the sanitary sewer. 
(2)  The following maintenance schedule shall be required for pretreatment systems operating in the county: 
a.  Subsurface systems (grease trap, oil water separator, sand trap): 

 
b.  Interior systems (grease trap, oil separator, sand trap): 

 
c.  Automatic grease recovery systems (grease trap): 

 
(3)  New commercial waste generators that are permitted for new pretreatment installation shall be required to provide the county with a notarized statement for the maintenance of their pretreatment system based on the maintenance schedule stated in this article. 
(4)  Commercial waste generators located in an area that have experienced a spill where a county sanitary sewer system has been impacted or a manhole has overflowed due to grease/oil accumulation must provide the county with a maintenance schedule to prevent this from occurring again. If the maintenance schedule is found to be inadequate or does not adhere to the maintenance schedule required by the county for that specific pretreatment system, the county shall have the right to amend that commercial waste generators' maintenance schedule to control any further commercial waste discharge that could impact the sanitary sewer system, manhole or pretreatment system. 
(5)  Any commercial waste generator(s) found to be in violation for failure to maintain their pretreatment system in a spill area shall be assessed one-half the cost for clean up and/or fined by the county due to commercial waste impacting the environment or sanitary sewer system. Additional fines may be imposed by the state. 
(6)  Any commercial waste generator found not adhering to any maintenance standards as established by this article will be in violation. 
(7)  Any commercial waste generator requesting a deviation from a pretreatment system maintenance schedule as stated in this article shall submit their request in writing. The written request must include documentation that verifies that the pretreatment system has been operating within the guidelines for a year as stated in section 82-251(h)(1) and the modification of the maintenance schedule will not change the compliance status of the pretreatment system. 
(8)  A commercial waste generator who operates a food service in their establishment, but the food service is not considered their main business income will be required to cease their food operation if they violate any parts of this article. Once the generator has come into compliance the food service operation can resume. 
(i)  Manifests for commercial waste disposal. 
(1)  A commercial waste generator shall not allow a transporter to remove waste from their facility without a current commercial waste hauler permit issued by the state or local governing authority. In addition they: 
a.  Shall not permit a transporter to remove commercial waste from his premises until the transporter has presented a non-hazardous manifest to the generator to document pumping activity. This manifest will require signatures from the generator, transporter and disposer in order to maintain and establish accountability. The manifest should be a multi-copy form. 
b.  Shall ensure the manifest form used to document the transportation and disposal of commercial waste generated in the county contains the following information as a minimum: 
1.  Generator information: 
Name and physical address of facility 
Volume of waste pumped 
Date and time of pumping activity 
Signature of authorized representative 
Print name 
2.  Transporter information: 
Name and physical address of company 
County or issued commercial waste FOG permit 
Driver certification number 
Volume of waste pumped 
Name and signature of driver 
Print name 
3.  Disposer information 
Name and physical address of facility 
State, county, city or federal permit number of site 
Volume of waste received 
Signature of authorized representative 
Print name 
c.  Upon receipt of the completed copy of the manifest from the transporter, the generator must mail a copy of the manifest within five days to the following: 
d.  Shall accurately complete and sign the generator information section of the manifest to ensure that the transporter has noted on the manifest, the number of gallons of waste removed; and verify the generator information is correct. 
e.  Shall keep a copy of all manifests for a period of three years on site and shall make available for inspection by the county. 
f.  Shall report any spills to the county upon becoming aware of a spill that could impact any surrounding areas such as storm drains, adjacent streams or ground surface where the transporter has removed waste from the facility's pretreatment system. Failure to notify the county of a spill will constitute a violation and fines will be assessed to the commercial waste generator as well as the transporter. 
(j)  Commercial waste permit issuance. An annual permit will be required for all pretreatment systems existing and new. A fee will be charged for this permit. The permit fee will be based on the type of pretreatment system at the site. Failure to apply for a commercial waste permit shall be a violation. The generator's environmental board of health food service permit may be suspended until the permit is obtained. 
(1)  All commercial waste permits shall be issued annually from January 1—March 31. Any existing facility obtaining a permit after March 31 will be charged a 25 percent penalty fee. A new facility opening after the annual permit period will not pay a penalty unless it has been determined that the facility has been opened for more than 30 days. The 25 percent penalty fee shall apply. A new facility applying for a commercial waste permit after the permitting period will not pay a prorated fee. The following fee schedule details the cost of an annual permit based on type of pretreatment system. 
Annual Permit Fee Schedule per Facility 

 
(2)  Permit conditions shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Permit duration; 
b.  Permit fee; 
c.  Permit transfer; 
d.  Frequency of inspections; 
e.  Pretreatment requirements; 
f.  Maintenance requirements; 
g.  Compliance schedules; 
h.  Requirements for maintenance records and submission of reports; 
i.  Right of entry; 
j.  Review of upgrades or repairs of a pretreatment system; 
k.  Other conditions deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this article or other applicable ordinance, laws, and regulations. 
(k)  Abandonment of systems. 
(1)  Wherever the use of a subsurface pretreatment system is discontinued due to a business closing or relocating, and the system is connected to the sanitary sewer, the commercial waste generator shall follow the following procedure: 
a.  Contact the commercial pretreatment inspection group (770) 641-6700 (phone number) before vacating the property. 
b.  Resolve all outstanding violations. 
c.  Clean the pretreatment system before vacating the business and submit a manifest to the county to substantiate the cleaning of the system. 
(2)  If the commercial waste generator fails to clean the pretreatment system and/or resolve outstanding violations it shall be considered a violation of this article. Management or property leasing will be notified. No commercial waste generator shall be allowed to occupy the facility until it is brought into compliance. If the existing pretreatment system is not adequate based on the new business operation, then the new commercial waste generator shall upgrade the pretreatment system. If the building or tenant space vacated will not be used for another commercial waste generator, then management leasing or the building owner shall follow the following tank abandonment procedures: 
a.  Collapse tank or fill pretreatment system with sand. 
b.  Seal over manholes so they are no longer accessible. 
c.  Disconnect or reroute the kitchen waste line from the building to the pretreatment system. 
d.  Contact the county to inspect the abandoned system prior to a new business opening. 
(l)  Construction prohibitions. It shall be the responsibility of persons under this rule to see that work contracted for and performed by them or under their supervision is carried out in conformance with the requirements of the county engineering standards and this article. Persons contracted for installation of pretreatment systems must be a licensed contractor or master plumber in the state and their license must be current. Inspectors shall have the authority to request a copy of the license when approving all pretreatment system installations. 
(m)  Construction violations. The following will constitute a construction violation: 
(1)  No contractor shall construct, alter, modify, repair, or install a pretreatment system without receiving a permit from the county; 
(2)  No contractor shall install, modify or repair a pretreatment system which will violate standards set forth in this article, without evidence that a variance has been granted; 
(3)  No contractor shall perform services which will cause or increase the likelihood of pollution to sanitary sewer, storm drains or POTW and pose a threat to the health and safety of the public; 
(4)  Each contractor shall be responsible for maintaining records of services as required by this article and provide a copy of those records to the county upon request. Example of this would be an invoice verifying the purchase of the pretreatment system; 
(5)  Contractor initiating work to install, upgrade, or repair a system where no permit has been issued by the county. A permit is issued after construction is started but prior to completion of the contracted work. No site inspections performed; 
(6)  Contracted work is completed without a permit having been issued, or no permit application was received until contracted work was completed, resulting in missed inspection(s); 
(7)  Failure to call for required inspection(s); 
(8)  Abandoning, without good cause, a project in which the contractor is engaged or is under contractual obligation to perform. The failure of a contractor to perform work without just cause for 90 consecutive days shall create a presumption that the contractor has abandoned the project; 
(9)  Gross negligence, incompetence, or misconduct which: causes monetary or other harm to a customer, or physical harm to any person. Example of such a violation would be the illegal disposal of a generator's waste when repairing a pretreatment system. 
(10)  Pretreatment system is not installed by a license contractor or master plumber. 
(n)  Notification of violation. When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a commercial waste permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 15 calendar days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(o)  Violations and penalties. When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a commercial waste permit or any order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue a citation to such user in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation and each day a violation continues, shall constitutes a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(1)  Unpaid citations shall after 30 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of 25 percent. Failure by generator to pay designated citation 30 business days after citation has been issued shall result in the revocation of the generator's commercial waste permit. 
(2)  Issuance of a citation shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action. 
(3)  The following shall be considered violations of this article and the responsible person or company will be assessed fines accordingly: 
a.  A licensed contractor, engineer or plumber who installs, modifies, or repairs a pretreatment system without a pretreatment permit, or is working on the installation of a pretreatment system, and obtains a permit after work has commenced. No inspections performed. 
b.  Commercial waste generator who has a pretreatment system installed without submitting plans for review; no permit application is received or on file and installation of system is completed. No final inspections of project performed. 
c.  Failure to call for required inspection(s) when a renovation or upgrade of a pretreatment system is required. 
d.  Commercial waste generator is in violation for failure to maintain their pretreatment system. 
e.  Commercial waste generator fails to provide the county with a manifest or maintenance documentation for their pretreatment system. 
f.  Commercial waste generator fails to inform the county a spill has occurred during pumping of a pretreat ment system and it impacts the sanitary sewer, storm drain or environment. 
g.  Commercial waste generator fails to apply for the required commercial waste permit for a pretreatment system in the county. 
(4)  Any violations do not negate their existence. The county shall have the right to use other laws that may be applicable when determining violations. 
(p)  Citations and administrative appeal. 
(1)  Citations. 
a.  Citations shall be issued when the commercial waste generator fails to correct the same violation after a notice of violation has been issued and the commercial waste generator demonstrates willful neglect or non-compliance with this article. Any citations issued will be required to be paid in 30 calendar days from the day of issuance. A citation must be in writing and must describe the particular nature of the violation, including specific references to the provisions of this article violated and the time frame for correction. Refusal of the citation will not negate its issuance. 
(2)  Administrative appeal. 
a.  Generators desiring to dispute citations must file a written request for the director to reconsider the citation along with full payment of the citation amount within 15 calendar days of citation issuance. Where a request has merit, the director may convene a hearing on the matter. If the citation has been paid and the director rules in favor of the generator, all money shall be returned to the generator. If the recipient fails to execute their right to contest the citation, the county will conclude the recipient has waived their right and they must pay the initial citation fine and/or the maximum fine. 
b.  The county may reduce or waive the fine imposed by the citation after consideration of the gravity of the violation, the person's attempts at correcting the violation and the commercial waste generator's history of previous violations. However, violations that occur due to a spill or illegally discharging to the county sanitary sewer system will not be waived or reduced. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
Sec. 82-252. - Commercial waste transportation. 
This section of the article provides regulations for the transporting of commercial waste in the county. Any transporter found in violation of any section of this article shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per violation. 
(1)  General requirements for transporters. 
a.  No person shall vacuum or pump grease traps, sand traps, oil water separators or grit traps for the purpose of transporting commercial waste to a disposal site without a valid commercial waste hauler permit by a local governing authority in the state. 
b.  Transporters of liquid waste shall use only those disposal sites meeting the state, federal or county licensing and permit requirements to receive such waste. 
c.  A transporter shall not commingle hazardous waste with liquid waste or chemical toilet waste, or commingle grease waste with septic waste. 
d.  A transporter must remove the entire contents of any tank or pretreatment system that is serviced. 
e.  A transporter shall not dispose of liquid waste or chemical toilet waste into grease traps, grit traps, sand traps, septic tanks, POTW, sanitary and storm drains. 
(2)  General requirements for transporters with disposal sites. 
a.  A transporter owning its own disposal site and operating under the same company name will be required to supply the county with a monthly report of all facilities pumped. This report will be in addition to the non-hazardous liquid waste manifest required for waste generators. This requirement is only for those person(s) and companies performing services under a single company name where they are considered the transporter and the disposer. The report will be due on the tenth day of every month to the regulating authority for all those facilities serviced by the transporter serviced in the county. 
b.  A person/company that owns, operates or is in control of a disposal site receiving liquid waste in the state must provide following: 
1.  A manifest accurately completed and signed in the disposal section to the transporter. 
2.  Maintain the manifests for a period of three years and make all records available for inspection by the county upon request. 
(3)  Manifests. There is hereby created a manifest system consisting of a multi-part non-hazardous waste manifest, which shall be used to document the generation, transportation and disposal of liquid waste generated in the county. See section 82-251(i) for the required information for a manifest document. 
A manifest shall be used a follows: 
a.  A transporter shall utilize a manifest for each location serviced; shall present the manifest to the generator to complete and sign the generator's section; shall present the manifest to the disposer to complete and sign the disposers' section of the manifest. 
b.  The transporter and generator shall sign their designated sections of the manifest. 
c.  The transporter shall leave the first part of the manifest with the generator; 
d.  The disposer shall sign the manifest at the time of waste disposal from the transporter. 
e.  The transporter shall leave a copy of the manifest with the disposer. 
f.  The transporter shall keep a copy of the completed manifest for three years and shall make it available for inspection by the designated person(s) of the director. The transporter shall also maintain a maximum of 30 days of manifests on their vehicle. 
g.  The transporter shall deliver to the waste generator, a completed manifest with all required signatures 30 calendar days after pumping activity has occurred. 
(4)  Transporter commercial waste permit. 
a.  A person/company that transports commercial waste is required to register with the state to receive a registration number before applying for a transporter permit. The registration shall be a one time occurrence. The charge for the transporter permit shall be $250.00 for the first truck and $100.00 for each additional truck payable to the local governing authority or the state. The transporter permit is renewed annually. 
b.  A transporter's permit shall be current and a copy shall be provided to the county prior to performing all pumping activity, if the permit was not obtained in the county. 
c.  The transporter's pumping privileges shall be suspended in Fulton County if the transporter has continuous violations of this article or regulations and the transporter has failed to pay any fines as the result of violations that have occurred. The suspension shall last for the permit year. If the transporter has not resolved all violations prior to the next permit year, the suspension shall continue. The county shall notify the state of the enforcement action taken against the transporter. 
d.  The transporter only needs to obtain commercial waste permit for wide pumping from a local governing authority (LGA). 
(5)  Transporter violations. 
a.  Illegally discharging liquid waste of chemical toilet waste to grease traps, grit traps, sand traps, septic tanks, POTW, sanitary sewer and storm drains. 
b.  Falsifying manifest documentation to generator, disposal site and local governing authority. 
c.  A direct cause of a major or minor spill due to illegally discharging to the sanitary sewer or storm drains. 
d.  A transporter pumping non-hazardous liquid waste without a current commercial waste permit or registration. 
e.  A transporter trunk leaking non-hazardous commercial waste on streets, highways and ground areas that pose a threat to the public health and welfare. 
f.  A transporter service involved in illegal business practices that causes harm to the generator, monetary or otherwise (example: charging for pumping but not actually performing service). 
g.  A transporter company or individual fails to provide the customer or county with the required pumping documentation. 
h.  A transporter company or an individual that impacts the environment while pumping a generators' pretreatment system, however impact does not classify as a spill, but creates waste residue during a pumping activity and waste is visible on ground surface. If the transporter fails to clean up waste so it does not impact storm drainage areas or the environment, then this shall constitute a violation. 
i.  It shall be a violation for a commercial waste hauler to violate the rule listed under department of natural resources; section 391.3-6-.24 that regulates the transporting of commercial waste in the state. 
(6)  Administrative appeal. See section 82-251(16)(b) for citations issued due to a violation. 
(7)  Responsibility of corporation or associations. 
a.  In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by natural persons, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation or association legally responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting in behalf of a corporation or association and within the scope of his or her office of employment. 
b.  Any person, operator or owner who shall violate any provision of this article, or who shall fail to comply with any provision hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. 
c.  Any person found to be guilty of violating provisions of this article shall become liable to the county for any expense, loss, or damage incurred by the county for the purpose of clean-up and disposal of waste illegally dumped or discharged which impacts the county environmentally. An administrative fee equal to one-half of the assessed clean up and costs shall be levied by the county against the guilty person, association or corporation. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-253. - Enforcement of other laws, rules, or regulations not limited. 
Nothing in this article shall limit the authority of any, local agency, or departments of the county to enforce any other laws, rules, regulations, or ordinances relating to water or sewer services. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-254. - Effect on other duly enacted ordinances, rules and resolutions. 
Nothing in this article is intended to repeal any other duly enacted ordinance, resolution, or parts of ordinances or resolutions of the county, except where such ordinance, resolution, or parts of ordinances or resolutions are in direct conflict with this article. Any such repeal under this section shall be to the extent of such conflict only and no further. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 82-255. - Inter-basin transfers in north Fulton County. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, in order to preserve the low-density and rural character of the area as well as to avoid adverse impact upon Fulton County's sewage/wastewater treatment facilities; 
(1)  No properties located within Fulton County and lying within the Etowah River basin shall be permitted to connect to the Fulton County sewerage system; and 
(2)  No inter-basin transfers of wastewater from the Etowah River basin to any basin served by the Fulton County sewerage system shall be permitted, except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), below. 
(b)  Property west and north of State Route 9, in north Fulton County, located between Windward Parkway and the Forsyth County line, may connect to the Fulton County sewerage system if a portion of the property fronts or abuts State Route 9 and the property is wholly located in District 2, Second Section, in one or a combination of the following land lots: 757, 758, 759, 826, 831, 898, 903, 970, 975, 1041, 1042, 1048, 1111, 1112, or 1113. 
(c)  In addition to the above, legal lots of record as of March 1, 2006, and which are at least partially contained within the above-listed land lots, may connect to the Fulton County sewerage system. 
(Res. No. 06-0774, 7-19-06) 
APPENDICES 
Appendix A1 - Local Limits: North Fulton County Industrial Pretreatment Limits Big Creek and John's Creek WRPs 
Industrial Discharge Limits 

 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Appendix A2 - South Fulton County Industrial Pretreatment Limits Camp Creek WRP 
Industrial Discharge Limits, mg/L 

 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Appendix A3 - Organics Discharge Limits Based on Fume Toxicity 
Maximum Allowable 

 
The maximum levels listed above are based on fume toxicity standards from the EPA "Guidance Manual on the Development and Implementation of Local Discharge Limits under the Pretreatment Program", December 1987. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Appendix A4 - Combined Waste Formula 
Combined Waste Stream Formula 
Alternative limit calculation; for the purposes of these formulas, the "average daily flow" means a reasonable measure of the average daily flow for a 30-day period. 
Alternative concentration limit: 

CT  = the alternative concentration limit for the combined waste stream. 
C i  = the categorical Pretreatment Standard concentration limit for a pollutant in the regulated stream I. 
F i  = the average daily flow of the stream I to the extent that it is regulated for such pollutant. 
F D  = the average daily flow from (a) Boiler blow down streams, non-contact cooling streams, storm water streams, (b) sanitary waste streams, © process waste streams exempted from Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
F T  = the average daily flow through the combined treatment facility (includes F i , F D , and unregulated streams). 
N  = the total number of regulated streams. 
Alternative mass limit: 
M T  = the alternative mass limit for a pollutant in the combined waste stream. 
M i  = the categorical Pretreatment Standard mass limit for a pollutant in the regulated stream 1 (the categorical pretreatment mass limit multiplied by the appropriate measure of production). 

F i  = the average flow of stream I to the extent that it is regulated for such pollutant. 
F D  = the average daily flow through the combined treatment facility (includes F i , F D , and unregulated streams). 
N  = the total number of regulated streams. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Appendix A5 - Groundwater Remediation Criteria 
Discharge Limits For gasoline contaminated sites (BTEX) 

 
For sites contaminated by petroleum, other than gasoline, such as diesel, kerosene or waste oil, the discharge shall meet the BTEX limits above and the limits for the polynuclear aromatics (PAHs) given below. 

 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Appendix B1 - Minimum Treatment Requirements for Commercial Facilities 
 Generator Source Chart — Food Service  Table I 

 
* Wherever an exterior grease trap is required but installation is not possible, an interior pretreatment system shall be installed that equals or exceeds the minimum. Alternate system shall be approved by the County. 
** Additional grease traps will be required if it is determined that, due to the number of food establishments in the food court, the seating schedule will not provide adequate trap capacity needed. 
Generator Source Chart — Motor Vehicle Washing and Maintenance  Table II 

 
*** Reclaim systems can be used in conjunction with oil/water separator systems or can be used alone as a pretreatment system. However, the reclaim system must have a tank capacity for oil/water separation prior to discharge to sanitary sewer. Car maintenance shops with no floor drains or discharge to sanitary sewer through service area trench drains will be required to supply the county in writing their plan for dry clean up. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Appendix B2 - Typical Food Service Piping Layout 

(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Appendix B3 - Fee Schedule for Commercial Pretreatment 
1.  Plan review for pretreatment system (new construction, existing facility renovation) ..... $100.00 
2.  Plan review (permit revision) (project changes for previously approved plan) ..... $50.00 
3.  Site evaluation of a pretreatment system (under change of operation or ownership) ..... $50.00 
4.  Re-inspection fee for modifications, repair and replacement of Existing pretreatment systems in violation ..... $50.00 
4.  New pretreatment system installation inspection (new construction) ..... $100.00 
5.  Re-inspection fee for new construction installation per visit ..... $50.00 
6.  Revision to commercial waste permit during a permit year ..... $50.00 
7.  A copy of permit inspection report (reissued) (new construction) ..... $5.00 
•  Fee schedule can be modified as needed outside this document.  Those changes must be approved by the Board of Commissioners. 
(Res. No. 06-1167, 11-15-06) 
Chapter 86 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; ordinances pertaining to traffic and vehicles, ch. 78; resolutions pertaining to traffic and vehicles, ch. 174. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 86-1—86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, adopted May 3, 2006, repealed and reenacted art. II to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Res. No. 05-0291, § 1(Exh. A), adopted April 6, 2005. See the Code Comparative Table—Ordinances and Resolutions for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 

Sec. 86-31. - Operation of taxicab to be in compliance with article. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall operate a taxicab in unincorporated Fulton County except in accordance with the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 86-32. - Administration of article. 
This article shall be administered by the Director of the Fulton County Department of Finance, who may act through designees. 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 86-33. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Line jumping. Taxicabs shall be placed on stands only from the rear and shall be moved forward and to the front of the stand immediately as space becomes available by the departure or movement or preceding taxicabs. Violation of this rule constitutes line jumping and shall be grounds for suspension of a taxi driver's permit. 
Operator means any person, firm, or corporation in the business of transporting passengers in taxicabs. 
Taxicab means any passenger-carrying vehicle used in the business of transporting passengers for hire which does not have fixed termini, including but not limited to, any unmarked automobiles used in the business of transporting passengers for hire by contract or requested special services that do not have fixed termini. 
Taximeter means a device that automatically calculates, at a predetermined rate, and indicates the charge for hire of a vehicle. Taxicabs operating with nonelectronic taximeters shall be furnished with a sign approved by the director of finance immediately adjacent to the taximeter which explains the way the fare shall be calculated if the taximeter reaches its highest fare before the passenger's destination is reached. This sign shall be pointed out to the passenger by the driver at the beginning of the trip. 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 86-34. - Operations deemed to be doing business in Fulton County. 
A taxicab shall be deemed to be doing business in Fulton County when its original terminus, that is to say, the place from which it operated and is subject to calls, shall be located in unincorporated Fulton County. 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 86-35. - License fees for annual operation and taxi driver's permit. 
License fees are hereby levied as follows: $350.00 per annum for each taxicab maintained or operated, and a fee of $150.00 per annum for each taxi driver's permit. The business occupation tax shall be in accordance with the current business occupation tax ordinance. The following criteria must be met to maintain a taxicab license: 
(1)  Establishment and maintenance of an office in an commercially zoned area of unincorporated Fulton County. 
(2)  Submission of a copy of current lease or proof of ownership of office space. 
(3)  Establishment and maintenance of a publicly listed telephone number. 
(4)  Maintain the name and home address of each driver affiliated with the company. 
(5)  Maintain off-street parking lot capable of accommodating all company vehicles. 
(6)  Maintain a file for each vehicle containing proof of current insurance. 
(7)  Possess a valid six-month auto insurance policy. 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 86-36. - Requirements for operation. 
(a)  Required. No person, firm, or corporation shall conduct the business of operating taxicabs in unincorporated Fulton County until the person, firm, or corporation has first applied for and obtained an occupation tax certificate and a taxicab license. The applications for the occupation tax certificate and taxicab license shall be made to the business director of finance upon forms provided by the director of finance for that purpose. The taxicab licenses for vehicles shall be issued by the director of finance. 
No person shall operate a taxicab in unincorporated Fulton County until the person has first applied for and obtained a driver's permit. Permits for drivers will be issued by the Fulton County Police Department. 
(b)  Description of business. The application for taxicab license shall contain a detailed description of the equipment to be used in the business and the name of the operators thereof, the point of original terminus of the business, and the address and telephone number of the office or call station from which the business is operated. 
(c)  Indemnity insurance. No taxicab license shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof shall file with the director of finance a policy of indemnity insurance in some indemnity insurance company authorized to do business in this state, which policy shall have limits equal to or in excess of the following sums for each taxicab operated: 
(1)  For bodily injury to each person, $50,000.00; 
(2)  For bodily injury to all persons sustained in any one accident, $50,000.00; 
(3)  For property damage and liability for baggage of passengers, $25,000.00. 
The policy shall be conditioned to protect the public against injury or damage proximately caused by the negligence of the holder of such license. Each driver shall be listed on the policy at the time of application. Additional drivers or new drivers hired after issuance of the taxicab license shall be covered by a rider to the policy prior to the issuance of a driver's permit. 
(d)  Age of vehicles. The operator is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business is no more than six years old. By December of each year, automobiles of a model year seven years prior to that year must be replaced. 
(e)  Annual renewal. All fees for taxicab license and taxi driver's permits are due no later than June 30 of each year. 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 86-37. - Inspections. 
(a)  A certificate of inspection completed on forms provided by the director of finance and issued by an ASE certified mechanic shall be posted in the taxicab at all times certifying that the taxicab and equipment therein are safe and in compliance with applicable law. This certificate must be renewed every 90 days, and the operator of any taxicab business shall be required to keep his/her taxicab and equipment therein in safe condition conforming to all laws under penalty of having his/her taxicab license suspended or revoked. 
(b)  The director of finance shall conduct inspections at least once per quarter to ensure that all taxicabs present a clean environment for passengers. The interior of each taxicab shall be maintained in a clean condition, free of foreign mailer and offensive odors. There shall be no lifter in the vehicle or trunk and the seats shall be kept clean and without holes or large wear spots. 
(c)  Each taxicab must produce proof of taximeter inspection and calibration for issuance and renewal of taxi decal. 
(d)  The director of finance or police department may conduct random inspections to ensure the safety and welfare of the public. 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 86-38. - Additional equipment. 
The operator of a taxicab business shall register with the director of finance each additional piece of equipment put in use, and same shall be subject to inspection and registration as herein provided. 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 86-39. - Drivers; qualifications. 
It shall be the duty of all operators to file with the director of finance the names and addresses, age and physical description of the persons employed as drivers. All drivers shall hold licenses from the state department of public safety as drivers of vehicles for hire, and taxicab driver's permits issued by the Fulton County Police Department. No person shall be employed or shall drive a taxicab who has, within the past five years, been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any sexual offense as set out in Title 16, Chapter 6 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or the offense of driving under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol, or to any open container violations, or to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages or possession or receiving the stolen property, violence, or the violation of a spirituous, vinous, or malt beverage statute, or if the driver has been convicted of an offense of causing death by vehicle. No driver can be issued a taxi driver's permit, if the driver has received three or more moving violations in the preceding twelve-month period. 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 86-40. - Taxi stands; parking. 
Operators and drivers of taxicabs shall not park taxicabs in any congested area as defined by the regulations of the county commissioners at any place other than the place or places designated as "taxi stand." The parking of taxicabs shall be subject at all times to the direction of police officers should such direction be necessary or desirable for the relief of an emergency traffic condition. 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 86-41. - Information to be displayed. 
(a)  Information to be displayed inside taxicabs at all times: 
(1)  The operator is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business shall have posted in a conspicuous place, on the inside thereof, the name and photograph of the driver of the taxicab. 
(2)  The operator is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business shall have posted in a conspicuous place, on the inside thereof, a map or street guide of Fulton County. 
(3)  The operator is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business shall have posted in a conspicuous place, on the inside thereof, a current certificate of inspection issued by an ASE certified mechanic certifying that the taxicab and equipment therein are safe and in compliance with applicable law. 
(4)  The operator is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business shall have posted in a conspicuous place, on the inside thereof, a schedule of fares. 
(b)  Information to be displayed outside taxicabs at all times: 
(1)  The operator is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business bears on the outside thereof a numbered decal to be furnished by the director of finance. 
(2)  The operator is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business bears on the outside thereof the name of the company and business telephone number. The name of the company must be permanently affixed to the taxicab. 
(3)  The operator is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business bears on the outside thereof a dome light on the roof. The dome light must be at least six inches in height, permanently affixed to the roof, and bear the term "taxi" or the company name. 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 86-42. - Operators responsible for violations by drivers. 
To the extent provided by law, operators are responsible for violations of this article by their taxicab drivers whether such drivers are direct employees or independent contractors. 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 86-43. - Notice of denial of license. 
In the event that an application is denied, the director of finance shall provide the applicant with written notice of the denial of the taxicab license. The notice of denial shall include the grounds for denial. 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 86-44. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  No license issued hereunder may be transferred. 
(b)  Each license granted hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation for violation of any rule or regulation of Fulton County now in force or hereafter adopted. 
(c)  Whenever the director of finance determines there is cause to suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder, the director of finance shall give the licensee ten-day advance written notice of intention to suspend or revoke the license. A hearing will be scheduled wherein the licensee may present a defense to the suspension or revocation before the board of commissioners or such board as the board of commissioners may designate. The ten-day written notice shall include the time, place, and purpose of such hearing, and a statement of the charges upon which such hearing will be held. After the hearing, the board may suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder if any of the grounds set forth below exist. A license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by the board of commissioners or their designee and a taxi driver's permit may be suspended or revoked by the Fulton County Police Department upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The original application or renewal thereof contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(2)  For failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article; 
(3)  For failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license or permit under this article; 
(4)  Having four or more moving traffic violations in any twelve-month period; 
(5)  Refusing to accept a client solely on the basis of race, color, national origin, religious belief, sex or sexual orientation. Sexual orientation shall mean the state of being heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual. Operators and drivers shall not refuse to accept a client unless the client is obviously intoxicated or dangerous; 
(6)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse or allowing a driver to operate in the unincorporated area of the county in violation of the provisions of this article; 
(7)  Not taking the most direct route; 
(8)  The establishment or driver is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; or 
(9)  For violation of any part of this article. 
After the director of finance makes a recommendation to the board of commissioners to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the board of commissioners, or such board as the board of commissioners may designate, will conduct a hearing to hear evidence relevant to the alleged violation. At the hearing, the director of finance proceeds first and presents all evidence and argument in support of the recommendation to suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder. Board members will have the right to ask questions at any time. After the director of finance makes his/her presentation, the licensee or the licensee's legal counsel, will present evidence and argument as to why the license issued hereunder should not be suspended or revoked, board members will have the right to ask questions at any time. After hearing all of the evidence and arguments of the parties, the board will render a decision. The board's decision is subject to review by a petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 86-44.5 - Enforcement and fines. 
All legal entities with jurisdiction in unincorporated Fulton County including the Fulton County Police, MARTA Police, sheriff's department and its licensed designees shall have the authority to inspect taxis and issue citations to drivers and owners of taxis. 

 

 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 86-45. - No proration of license fee. 
License fees shall not be prorated. Taxi drivers permit fees shall not be prorated. 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 86-46. - Repealer; exceptions. 
All resolutions providing for taxicab license fees and taxi driver's permits in conflict with this article are hereby repealed, provided, however, that nothing herein shall affect any resolution providing for occupation or business taxes. 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Sec. 86-47. - Intent of article. 
It is the intent of this article to regulate the operation of taxicab businesses as set forth in this article upon all businesses operating in the unincorporated area of the county consistent with the requirements of the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. In the event that the regulations and/or fees imposed hereby shall not be authorized on any business and practitioner or regulation and/or fee shall be imposed only to the extent authorized by law. The invalidity of any part of this article shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion hereof. In the event that this article may not be enforced against any class of business mentioned herein, such inability to enforce the same shall not affect its validity against the other business specified herein. 
(Res. No. 06-0468, Exh. A, 5-3-06) 
Subpart B - CODE OF RESOLUTIONS 
Chapter 101 - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND COUNTY GOVERNING AUTHORITY 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 101-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The resolutions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Resolutions of Fulton County" or as the "Code of Resolutions of Fulton County, Georgia." The Code may be also cited in an abbreviated form as follows: "C.R.F.C. (reference to portion to be cited) (1996)." 
(Code 1983, § 21-1-1) 
Sec. 101-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to all resolutions adopted by the board of commissioners, unless the context requires otherwise: 
Generally. Ordinary meanings shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case words shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. The definitions of terms found in generally accepted dictionaries are prima facie evidence of meaning. In making interpretations of resolutions, the courts shall look diligently for the intent of the board of commissioners, as gleaned from the minutes of meetings reflecting the approval of motions by the board of commissioners, recitals found in ordinances, and statements of policy and intent adopted by the board of commissioners. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the board of commissioners may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, such provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Captions, maps, etc. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Code and any caption, illustration, map, chart, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
Adequate. The word "adequate" means equal to what is required, suitable to the case or occasion, fully sufficient, proportionate, satisfactory. 
Aforesaid. The word "aforesaid" usually means next before, unless the context requires a different signification. 
All. The word "all" means everyone, or the whole number of particulars. 
Also. The word "also" means "in like manner," "likewise," "in addition," "besides," "as well," "further," "too." 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
At. The term "at" may mean "in," "near," "within," or "about." Its primary idea is nearness, and it is less definite than "in" or "on." 
Board of commissioners. The term "board of commissioners" means the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Resolutions of Fulton County as designated in section 101-1. Such Code is subpart B. 
Computation of time. When a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  And indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  Or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singularly or in any combination. 
(3)  Either…or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singularly but not in combination. 
County. The word "county" means Fulton County, Georgia. When appropriate, the term "county" means a designated department, officer or employee thereof. 
Delegation of authority. Unless otherwise restricted by state law, whenever a provision appears requiring a county officer or county employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Department. The word "department" means an administrative department of county government. When appropriate, "department" means the director of the department or the director's designee. A department is not a legal entity capable of suit. 
Director. The word "director" refers to the director of an administrative department of county government or the director's designee. The term is synonymous with department head and appointing authority. 
Following. The word "following" means next after. 
Gender. A word importing one gender includes all other genders. 
Includes or including. The word "includes" or "including" shall not be construed to limit a term to the specified examples, but is intended to extend the meaning of a term to all instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons, or officers, may be executed by a majority of them. 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent, or employee. 
May. The word "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The word "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The word "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular and plural number include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. An "oath" includes an affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions, or other agencies of the county by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions, or other agencies of the county. 
Ordinance. The word "ordinance" means any legislation enacted by the board of commissioners that is capable of enforcement through the imposition of fines or penalties. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The word "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, partnership, and body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
Preceding. The word "preceding" means next before. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The words "real property" include lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Resolution. The word "resolution" means a policy statement or directive or course of action adopted by the board of commissioners at a regularly called meeting. 
Shall. The word "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. A "signature" or "subscription" includes the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The word "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street or road. The word "street" or "road" includes any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other public highway in the county, including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof. 
Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Until a certain day. The term "until a certain day" includes all of such day. 
Week. The word "week" means seven days. 
Whereas. The term "whereas" means "considering that." 
Will. The word "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1983, § 21-1-2) 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 101-3. - Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, and references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1983, § 21-1-3) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 101-4. - Territorial applicability. 
(a)  Except as specifically provided otherwise, this Code only applies in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(b)  Where the county provides service to an incorporated area, the resolutions relating to such service apply in that incorporated area. 
(Code 1983, § 21-1-9) 
Sec. 101-5. - Effect of repeal of resolution. 
(a)  The repeal of a resolution does not revive any resolution previously repealed. 
(b)  The repeal of a resolution does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution, or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the repealed resolution. 
(Code 1983, § 21-1-4) 
Sec. 101-6. - Amendments; effect of new resolution; amendatory language. 
(a)  All resolutions adopted subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, by resolutions, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from repealed pages affected thereby. The subsequent resolutions as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent resolutions until such time that this Code and subsequent resolutions numbered or omitted are readopted anew by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of the Code of Resolutions of Fulton County is amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of Resolutions of Fulton County is amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) numbered _____ to read as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article, or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1983, § 21-1-6) 
Sec. 101-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of commissioners. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of resolutions adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest resolution included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in resolutions and parts of resolutions included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the resolutions material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings, and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this resolution" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the resolution incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of resolution sections inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of resolution material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 101-8. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section. 
(Code 1983, § 21-1-5) 
Sec. 101-9. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing legislation. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of legislation existing as of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 101-10. - Repealer. 
All resolutions inconsistent with this Code are repealed. The absence of a resolution from this Code does not make the resolution inconsistent with this Code. 
Secs. 101-11—101-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY GOVERNING AUTHORITY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to general provisions and county governing authority, ch. 1; ordinances pertaining to officers and employees, § 2-36 et seq.; resolutions pertaining to officers and employees, § 102-81 et seq.; clerk to board of commissioners, § 102-111 et seq.; resolutions pertaining to personnel, ch. 154. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— County governing authority, § 1-36 et seq. 
State Law reference— County governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 101-36. - Vice-chairman. 
(a)  The term of office of the vice-chairman of the board of commissioners is one year. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall select a vice-chairman at the first regular meeting held in January, and the vice-chairman selected shall be authorized to preside at meetings of the board of commissioners in the absence of the chairman and fulfill all of the duties of the chairman due to the death or vacancy of the chairman. The board member selected to serve as vice-chairman shall be chosen from the members of the board of commissioners on a rotation based on seniority, from amongst members who have not currently served in that capacity. If two or more board members are of equal seniority and without prior or current service as vice-chairman, the selection shall be made on the basis of the numerical order of the respective districts. No board member shall serve a second year as board vice-chairman, until all members have served at least one year. 
(c)  The chairman of the board of commissioners or the vice-chairman, in the absence of the chairman, shall have the authority to execute contracts, deeds, and other documents on behalf of Fulton County, where the same have been approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1983, § 22-1-4; 91-RM-010, 1-2-91; 99-0102, § 1, 1-6-99; 18-0062, 1-24-18) 
Sec. 101-37. - Mandatory drug testing of commissioners. 
Members of the board of commissioners shall submit to voluntary drug testing by the agency designated by the Fulton County Board of Health twice each year. 
(Mo. of 1-4-89; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
Cross reference— Drug testing of public safety and law enforcement employees and employees carrying firearms, § 154-8. 
Sec. 101-38. - Budgetary controls over expenses. 
(a)  Staffing. All staffing for each individual commissioner's office shall exist and be implemented in accordance with the provisions contained in exhibit A attached the resolution adopted on February 17, 1988, and incorporated herein entitled "Commissioner's Personal Staff Members." Each commissioner may have his or her clerical staff persons selected with the assistance of the clerk to the commission. 
(b)  Office cost centers. The director of finance immediately shall establish a separate cost center for each commissioner's office with separate expense accounts for furniture, equipment, stationery, postage, long distance telephone charges, and general office supplies. The commission chairperson is allocated an annual budget for his or her office's cost center in the amount of $10,000.00, and each other commissioner is allocated an annual cost center budget of $6,000.00. 
(c)  Transportation. The county shall lease an automobile for the use of the commission chairperson. The county's payment obligation under said lease shall not exceed $350.00 per month. The county also shall pay for gasoline, maintenance, and repair for said automobile. Each other commissioner may utilize an automobile from the county motor pool for transportation as needed in order to accomplish specific commission-related business (which purpose and the expected duration thereof shall be so designated at the time said automobile is checked out from the motor pool). At the conclusion of each said use, said commissioner shall be reimbursed by the county for all documented expenses (e.g., gasoline, oil, tire repair, etc.) incurred in connection with said use of said automobile by said commissioner. For travel by a commissioner in his or her personal automobile for specific commission-related business, said commissioner shall be reimbursed by the county for incurred mileage expense at the prevailing U.S. Internal Revenue Service rate of allowance. Said commissioner shall submit a written request for said reimbursement and shall designate therein the specific commission-related purpose for said travel. The county shall pay no commissioner automobile expenses or charges except as provided in this subsection. Other than as provided in this subsection for the commission chairperson, the county shall not lease automobiles for the use of commissioners. The county manager, county attorney, and finance director hereby are authorized and directed immediately to review all existing such automobile leases and to negotiate their cancellations in such a manner that the county will not be prejudiced. Any such currently leased automobiles for which such lease cancellation cannot be achieved shall be assigned to the county motor pool for general use. 
(d)  Travel. Each commissioner is allocated an annual travel budget of $50,000.00 for specific commission-related business outside of Fulton County, including professional conferences and conventions. The finance director shall establish a separate travel account for each commissioner. Travel per diem for food and lodging shall be paid from said travel accounts when documented by the submission of receipts or other proofs of payment of said incurred expenses. Prior to undertaking each period of county travel status hereunder, said commissioner shall submit a written memorandum of travel to be maintained by the finance director with said commissioner's travel account. Said memorandum of travel shall specifically designate the travel destinations, the commission-related business and purposes of said travel, and the planned duration of said travel. Said memorandum shall also comply with Fulton County's Personnel Policy and Procedures for travel, training, parking automobile allowance and mileage reimbursement, No. 209-16. Funds allocated to annual travel budgets may be transferred from the travel expense account to any other operating account of the commissioner's office. Funds from the operations accounts, other than risk management-related accounts, may be transferred into the travel and training budget. 
(e)  Monthly report. The finance director shall provide to each commissioner a monthly budget status report regarding all of said commissioner's accounts. 
(Res. of 2-17-88; Ord. No. 18-1040, 12-19-18) 
Sec. 101-39. - Recitation of Pledge of Allegiance. 
The Pledge of Allegiance shall be recited at meetings of the board of commissioners after the opening prayer. 
(Res. of 10-5-88) 
Sec. 101-40. - Placement of rezoning actions on agenda. 
Rezoning actions, including applications for use permits or modifications to conditions that have been previously heard or considered by the board of commissioners but deferred to a future agenda, shall be placed on such future agenda ahead of new rezoning cases which have not been previously presented to the board of commissioners for consideration. 
(95-0225, 2-15-95) 
Cross reference— Zoning, app. B. 
Sec. 101-41. - Committee of the whole. 
The commission shall not appoint various committees, but will act as a committee of the whole, with all seven members holding frequent conferences with those connected with the various phases of the county government and the public. 
(Code 1983, § 22-1-1) 
Sec. 101-42. - Presentation of proclamations. 
All proclamations shall be presented at the first meeting of the board of commissioners which takes place on the first Wednesday of each month. Proclamations will be presented at the recess meeting commencing with the first recess meeting of the board of commissioners in May 1995, beginning promptly with presentations not to exceed 10:30 a.m. 
(95-0623, 5-17-95) 
Secs. 101-43—101-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE 

Sec. 101-61. - Meeting times and places. 
All meetings of the Fulton County Board of Commissioners shall be held in the Assembly Hall of the Fulton County Government Center, 141 Pryor Street, S.W., Atlanta, Georgia 30303. In accordance with state law, the first meeting of the month shall be held without exception. In the event that there is no quorum present at the scheduled starting time for that meeting, the chair shall wait 30 minutes to see whether a quorum will be present. If a quorum is not obtained after this waiting period, the chair shall adjourn the meeting and readvertise it in accordance with state law. Meetings are held at 10:00 a.m. on the first and third Wednesday of each month unless special circumstances dictate a different meeting date, time, or place. In the event that special circumstances dictate a different meeting date, time, or place, the public shall be duly notified in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 50, ch. 14 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.), the Georgia Open Meetings Law. The board holds regularly scheduled work sessions on the second Wednesday of each month at 2:00 p.m. or immediately following the board's scheduled meeting. 
(93-RC-701, Rule 1, 1-19-94) 
Sec. 101-62. - Open meetings. 
(a)  All meetings of the Fulton County Board of Commissioners shall be held in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 50, ch. 14 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.), the Georgia Open Meetings Law. The public shall be granted access to all meetings at all times except closed executive sessions. The law states that where a quorum of the governing authority or agency thereof are present, and where official action is to be discussed or taken, the meetings must be open and the public granted access. 
(b)  Exceptions to the Georgia Open Meetings Act, O.C.G.A. tit. 50, ch. 14 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.), are as follows: 
(1)  Staff meetings for investigative purposes under duties and responsibilities imposed by law; 
(2)  Meetings where future acquisition of real estate is being discussed; 
(3)  Meetings when the appointment, employment, disciplinary action, or dismissal of a public officer or employee is being discussed; or complaints or charges against a public officer or employee are being heard, unless the employee requests a public meeting; 
(4)  Most discussions with attorneys for the county are excluded from the open meetings law; and 
(5)  Where tax matters made confidential by Georgia law are being discussed. 
(93-RC-701, Rule 2, 1-5-94) 
State Law reference— Exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 101-63. - Presiding officer and rules for debate. 
(a)  Generally. In accordance with the Fulton County Code of Laws, the chair of the board of commissioners is responsible for the orderly conduct of the board during the meeting and serves as the presiding officer. In order to ensure a fair, orderly, and efficient meeting, the chair must enforce the rules of procedure adopted by the board. In the absence of the chair, the vice-chair shall preside. Where a quorum is present and neither the chair or vice-chair is present, the board may designate an acting presiding officer. Meetings are conducted in accordance with these procedural rules, applicable state law, and Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. Where a commissioner raises a procedural question and these rules are silent, and in the absence of a specific statute, ordinance, or resolution, the question shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, so long as the provision used to answer the question is not in violation of local, state or federal laws. 
(b)  Debate. All resolutions, contracts, and items of business which require board approval prior to the expenditure of funds, as well as any other item which requires board action, shall be acted upon by the board only after a commissioner makes a motion and receives a second to the motion. A motion and proper second is recorded by the clerk. Each commissioner, by virtue of his/her election to the board, has the right and obligation to debate any and all issues which come before the board for consideration. However, to ensure an orderly and efficient meeting, each commissioner shall observe the following rules in regards to debate: 
(1)  The chair, as presiding officer (or vice-chair in the chair's absence), shall call for discussion on an item. No debate on an item should begin until the item has been sounded by the clerk to the commission (the clerk), or in the clerk's absence, the chief deputy clerk. 
(2)  Once the item has been properly moved and seconded, the chair shall call for discussion. 
(3)  Thereafter, the chair shall open debate by recognizing each commissioner who wishes to speak for a period not to exceed ten total minutes, with the additional stipulation that no commissioner shall hold the floor for more than five consecutive minutes of their allotted time. However, at the opening of each board meeting, a commissioner may ask their colleagues to waive the normal time limits on issues they deem need more time. The board will vote on each request before the agenda begins and decide among themselves what additional amount of time to allot to each commissioner. The developmental services director or the board's designee shall be the official timekeeper for the board. 
(4)  If a commissioner believes that debate on an issue is too lengthy or that a vote should be called for immediately on an issue, he or she can "call the question" or "move the previous question." This motion is out of order if it is made while another commissioner has the floor or if the maker of the motion is not recognized by the chair. This is a motion that is not debatable and requires a second. Once the motion has been properly made and seconded, the chair shall immediately stop debate on the issue being debated and announce that there is a call the question motion on the floor. Immediately thereafter, the chair shall call for a vote on the call the question motion, not on the main motion. If the call the question motion fails, debate on the issue may continue, and then the chair may allow debate on the issue to resume. If it passes, the chair must immediately call for a vote on the issue which was the subject of the call the question motion. 
(5)  Any action by the board, including final action on applications for changes in land use status, but excluding a reconsideration of any action previously considered, i.e., motions to adjourn, motions to suspend the rules, an affirmative vote to lay on the table, or to take from the table, shall be subject to a motion to reconsider. After a motion to reconsider is made, a motion to rescind must also be made. After the motion to rescind is made, the matter would be appropriate for an additional passed motion and discussion thereon. Such motions can only be made by a member of the prevailing side on the original action. A motion to reconsider may be made immediately after it fails to prevail but in no case can it be made any later than the next scheduled board of commissioners meeting. A motion to reconsider is debatable only if the action being reconsidered is debatable. Upon passage of a motion to reconsider, the subject matter shall be considered anew without regard to previous board action. No reconsideration can be made on a zoning request at a subsequent meeting. 
(6)  Any zoning matter which is deferred or on which discussion is otherwise postponed by the board shall be heard at the next appropriate scheduled zoning meeting. Zoning matters are heard only on the first meeting of the month, in accordance with a schedule set by the director of developmental services. Ordinarily, no new zoning cases are heard in January. 
(93-RC-701, Rule 3, 1-5-94) 
Sec. 101-64. - Quorum. 
A quorum must be present for the transaction of business of the board. In accordance with the Georgia law, four of the seven elected commissioners must be present to constitute a quorum. It is the duty of the chair to enforce this rule. Any commissioner may raise a point of order if that commissioner believes that a quorum is not present. If during the course of a meeting a quorum is lost, the board cannot transact business. If, however, members of the board are in the commissioners' conference room adjacent to the assembly hall and are able to hear the business of the board through the public address system, the board has not lost a quorum. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the chair must adjourn the meeting. 
(93-RC-701, Rule 4, 1-5-94) 
Sec. 101-65. - Voting. 
Four members of the board of commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The affirmative vote of at least four members shall be required for said board of commissioners to take official action. Each commissioner shall record his or her vote by using the voting machine and should not vote by voice or by requesting that the clerk's staff manually record their vote. 
(93-RC-701, Rule 5, 1-5-94) 
Sec. 101-66. - Agenda, preparation of; public comment. 
(a)  The Fulton County Board of Commissioners holds a regular meeting (first Wednesday of the month) and a recess meeting (third Wednesday of the month). The agenda is prepared by the clerk's office in concert with the county manager's office. The deadline for submitting items for regularly scheduled board of commissioners' meetings to the clerk's office for inclusion on the next agenda is 10:00 a.m. on Friday prior to the meeting. A final copy of the agenda is distributed to the commissioners, county attorney, county manager and appropriate staff by 2:00 p.m. on the Friday preceding the scheduled meeting of the board. Copies are also made available to the public at that time. A post agenda is provided after the meeting. The post agenda is a precursor to the final minutes and reflects actions taken by the board at a particular meeting. Post agendas/preliminary minutes are distributed by the clerk's office within 48 hours of a meeting. 
(b)  The agenda preparation procedure is as follows: 
(1)  Any commissioner wishing to place an item on the agenda may do so and should submit a memorandum to the clerk stating the item to be placed on the agenda. Any supporting documents germane to the item should also be submitted. 
(2)  Adding of items to the agenda during the meeting is disfavored. Where there is a showing of an emergency or extraordinary circumstances exist, an item may be added to the agenda when it is adopted during the meeting by four affirmative votes. A motion shall be properly made and must carry to add each item to the agenda on the day of the meeting. That item shall appear on the post agenda under the "added during the meeting" heading. 
(3)  Under the public comment section of the agenda, members of the public may be placed on the agenda to discuss a particular item of importance. To do so, the member of the public should first contact the office of the county manager who will ensure that the relevant department heads and other individuals have been contacted in an attempt to resolve the issue. In the event that the issue cannot be resolved by the county manager in consultation with the department heads, the citizen may then contact any commissioner so that commissioner may place that person on the agenda. The commissioner should then inform the clerk by memorandum stating the subject to be discussed, the person who will discuss it, a contact address, and a phone number for the person who will discuss the matter. Any supporting material germane to the item being discussed should also be submitted. 
(4)  Whenever any agenda item, via resolution, seeks board approval of a written agreement, a copy of the written agreement shall be attached to the agenda item or resolution and shall be distributed by the clerk as with other agenda items. Upon approval of the item, the clerk shall include a copy of the written agreement in the official minutes of the board meeting at which such approval occurred. 
(93-RC-701, Rule 6, 1-5-94; Res. No. 08-0255, 3-5-08) 
Sec. 101-67. - Consent agenda. 
The Fulton County Board of Commissioners uses a consent agenda which lists items of routine nature, such as renewal of grants, subdivision confirmations, refund reports, etc. Any items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval and for which debate is not expected, should be placed on the consent agenda. Items may be removed from the consent agenda for further discussion, but may not be added. The consent agenda is adopted with one motion. 
(93-RC-701, Rule 7, 1-5-94) 
Sec. 101-68. - Decorum. 
All commissioners are expected to conduct themselves in a courteous and respectful manner. Commissioners seeking information from staff should do so within the confines of proper decorum. A commissioner shall not speak until recognized by the chair and likewise shall not interrupt another commissioner's remarks. All comments made by a commissioner shall directly address the motion or item being discussed. The chair shall enforce the rules of decorum and if a commissioner believes that a particular rule is being broken he/she shall raise a point of order when recognized by the chair. A second on a point or order issue is not required, and the chair may either rule on the question or allow the board to decide the issue by majority vote. Any commissioner shall have the right to express dissent from or protest against any resolution or action of the board and have the reason entered into the minutes. 
(93-RC-701, Rule 8, 1-5-94) 
Sec. 101-69. - Public hearings and participation. 
(a)  In accordance with law and policy, the board frequently conducts public hearings on a number of matters and issues. These public hearing rules are intended to ensure that the public has the opportunity to fairly participate in the meeting while promoting the orderly, efficient, and effective flow of the meeting. 
(b)  Rules for conducting public hearings are as follows: 
(1)  The chair shall announce that the public hearing on a matter is now open and should call forth those persons who wish to speak in favor, against, or otherwise on the particular issue. The chair shall inform the public that all comments by proponents, opponents, or the public shall be made from the podium and that any individual making a comment should first give their name and address. The chair shall also inform the public that comments will only be received from the podium. 
(2)  Members of the public who wish to speak should complete a speaker's card and should hand it to a representative of the clerk's office. Members of the public are expected to adhere to the rules of decorum outlined herein and should be informed of such at the beginning of the public hearing by the chair. There should be no vocal, boisterous, or other disruptive demonstrations which will disrupt the orderly flow of the meeting. Any persons engaging in this type of behavior shall be ruled out of order by the chair and shall, at the chair's discretion, be removed from the assembly hall. 
(3)  Time. At hearings on proposed rezonings, use permit, modification and/or concurrent variance petitions, as well as amendments to the text of the Fulton County Zoning Resolution (hereinafter "land-use petitions"), proponents and opponents are allowed ten minutes per side to present data, evidence and opinions. Each side's time period may be divided among multiple speakers in whatever manner desired. In the event a public hearing is conducted and final action on a land-use petition is deferred by the board of commissioners, a second public hearing (conducted under the same rules as set forth above) will be allowed when the petition is again considered by the board of commissioners following the deferral. No land-use petition shall be the subject of more than two public hearings before the board of commissioners, regardless of the number of times final action is deferred by the board of commissioners, unless four or more members of the board of commissioners vote to conduct such additional public hearing(s). 
(4)  Once the public hearing has concluded, the chair shall so announce, and the board shall convene into open executive session to make its decisions. 
(5)  As a general rule, members of the public do not speak on agenda items unless those items have been advertised for public hearing, have been placed in the public hearing segment of the agenda or unless the board, by four affirmative votes, has decided that public participation is necessary in its deliberative process. The board shall follow its public hearing rules when such participation is warranted. 
(93-RC-701, Rule 9, 1-5-94; Res. No. 00-0570, 4-19-00) 
Sec. 101-70. - Amendments. 
Any amendment to this division by a commissioner shall be submitted to the clerk in writing one week before the designated meeting. The proposed amendment shall be included on the agenda for that meeting and distributed to all commissioners. All amendments require four affirmative votes by the board for adoption. 
(93-RC-701, Rule 10, 1-5-94) 
Sec. 101-71. - Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings. 
Commissioners shall hold one session on the first Wednesday of every month at the county site in the courthouse building or in such office as shall be prepared for them, provided that a majority of said board may convene in extraordinary session whenever in their judgment it may be necessary. A regular meeting, except the first meeting of the month required by state law, may be canceled, rescheduled, or moved to a new location within the county site by the chair for any reason. Whenever the chair cancels, reschedules, or moves the regularly scheduled meeting, it must be done in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 50, ch. 14 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.) the Georgia Open Meetings Act which requires that notice of the change is posted for at least 24 hours at the place of the regular meeting. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to either the legal organ of the county or a newspaper having a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the board. Other special meetings known as special call meetings may be scheduled by the chair at the request of four commissioners. Special call meetings are also governed by the notice requirements set forth above. When emergency circumstances occur, the board may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice. When such meetings are held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the county, or a newspaper with at least the general circulation of the legal organ, and to each member of the board as soon as practical. The notice shall include those subjects expected to be discussed at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given. 
(93-RC-701, Rule 11, 1-19-94) 
State Law reference— Due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 101-72. - Executive sessions. 
Executive sessions of the board may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted by O.C.G.A. tit. 50, ch. 14 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.), the Georgia Open Meetings Act requirements. Where a meeting is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to the Georgia Open Meetings Act requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exception shall be open to the public. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the board taken in a public meeting. The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the commissioners present, those voting for the executive session, and the reasons for the session. Only necessary staff shall be present at the executive session. 
(93-RC-701, Rule 12, 1-5-94) 
Sec. 101-73. - Suspending the rules of order. 
Rules of order may be suspended where a motion to suspend is properly moved and seconded. Rules of order in this context means suspending the order of business, moving an item up or down on the agenda, or removing an item from the agenda. Four affirmative votes shall be required to suspend the rules of order. Rules governing a quorum, voting methods and requirements, the notification to commissioners of meetings, and rules necessary for compliance with state and/or federal law may not be suspended. 
(93-RC-701, Rule 13, 1-5-94) 
Sec. 101-74. - Parliamentarian. 
The county attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for the board, and in that capacity will answer point of order questions when directed by the chair. 
(93-RC-701, Rule 14, 1-5-94) 
Chapter 102 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 102-1. - Personal property left in county buildings. 
The county shall not be responsible for any personal funds, property, or articles left in county buildings. 
(Code 1983, § 23-3-37) 
Sec. 102-2. - Property set aside for 12 months' support; refunds; exceptions. 
(a)  When the county advertises for sale through its own initiative, the fi. fa. against any property which has been set aside for a widow's 12 months' support and such property is purchased at the sale so advertised, the county will refund to the purchaser the amount of the bid. 
(b)  Whenever any person shall buy and have transferred to himself any tax or sewer fi. fa. and it shall be determined that such property has theretofore or is thereafter set aside as a widow's 12 months' support, the county will not refund the money paid for such property by the bidder at the sale or any part thereof. 
(c)  The policies of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall apply both to tax fi. fa. and to sewer fi. fa. 
(Code 1983, § 26-2-4) 
Sec. 102-3. - System for official mapping and surveying landmark monuments established; amendment; availability of information; land disturbance; replacement of monuments. 
(a)  A system of Fulton County official mapping and surveying landmark monuments is hereby established. The term "monument" used in this section, shall consist of one azimuth monument and one GPS monument per location, positioned and identified as outlined in the Fulton County Monument Specifications, a copy of which was attached as agenda item no. 91-RC-473. 
(b)  The official system of Fulton County mapping and surveying landmark monuments is that system documented by the maps and tables attached to agenda item no. 91-RC-473 and made a part hereof. 
(c)  As new mapping and surveying monuments are established in Fulton County, the official system of Fulton County mapping and surveying monuments may be amended periodically, by official action of the board of commissioners. 
(d)  The Fulton County Department of Public Works, under its authority to permit the disturbance of land, shall keep a current copy of the maps and tables attached hereto available, for the purpose of permitting land disturbance. Such mapped and tabulated information shall be made freely available to the public. Fees will be imposed for the purchase of copies of the official maps and map tables. 
(e)  All maps or site drawings accompanying application for the disturbance of land shall be compared to the official system of Fulton County mapping and surveying monuments. 
(1)  If, in the opinion of the Fulton County Department of Public Works, a monument which is part of the official system of Fulton County mapping and surveying monuments is endangered by the proposed land disturbance, the utility, developer, landowner, or governmental agency shall be notified and disturbance shall not be permitted until the utility, developer, landowner, or governmental agency shall pay to the county a fee to replace said monument. This fee shall be based upon 105 percent of a per monument replacement cost, to be negotiated by the county on a yearly basis with a registered land surveyor, qualified to set monuments to Fulton County Standards. 
(2)  For any proposed development of 25 or more acres, the developer will pay the fee to set one new monument by Fulton County, as defined by the Fulton County monument specifications. This fee shall be paid prior to a land disturbance permit being issued. 
(f)  The Fulton County Department of Public Works shall have the authority to require the utility, developer, landowner, or governmental agency to replace damaged or disturbed monuments, as outlined in subsection (e) of this section, or stop all land disturbance activity, until such time as proper fees have been paid to replace the damaged or disturbed monument. 
(g)  The Fulton County Department of Public Works shall require that each final plat submittal state: 
(1)  Property developed is referenced to an existing monument, as outlined in this section. 
(2)  No monuments are disturbed. 
(3)  Any new or relocated monuments are established in accordance with this section. 
(91-RC-473, §§ 1—7, 8-21-91) 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to planning, ch. 58; resolutions pertaining to planning, ch. 158. 
Sec. 102-4. - Public comment period prior to land acquisition or other initiatives. 
Prior to the acquisition of land or other initiatives related to the construction of a public project in residential areas, a public comment period will be allowed so as to provide the citizens the opportunity to express concern and gather information pertaining to the impact of the proposed project on the surrounding community. 
(94-RM-131, 3-2-94) 
Sec. 102-5. - Multiple representation by legal counsel. 
Attorneys representing Fulton County boards and/or authorities for a fee shall not engage in multiple representation of such boards and/or authorities, that is, simultaneously represent for a fee more than one board or authority that is either directly or indirectly funded and/or related to the operation of Fulton County government. The county attorney is hereby delegated the responsibility of reviewing counsel assigned to these various boards and authorities and report to the board of commissioners any incidences of multiple representation, and to notify any person that he/she is in violation of this section. 
(96-1044, 9-18-96) 
Secs. 102-6—102-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90; records management programs for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99. 

Sec. 102-41. - Adoption of Georgia Records Act. 
The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County does hereby adopt the Georgia Records Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq.) and the rules and regulations established pursuant to said act as a basis for establishing a county records management program. 
(Code 1983, § 23-8-1) 
Sec. 102-42. - Plan adopted. 
The board of commissioners hereby adopts a records management plan of Fulton County which is incorporated herein and made a part of this Code by reference. The records management officer or his designee shall distribute a copy of the plan to all elected officials and department heads throughout the county government. 
(Code 1983, § 23-8-6) 
State Law reference— Local records management plans, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99. 
Sec. 102-43. - Data processing department responsible for administering article. 
The data processing department is responsible for the administration of the records management program, and the director of the department is designated as the records management officer for Fulton County. He will act for and on behalf of the county in directing and coordinating all records management matters. 
(Code 1983, § 23-8-2) 
State Law reference— Mandatory provisions, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99(e)(1). 
Sec. 102-44. - Records retention schedules. 
Records retention schedules previously approved by the state records committee, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-18-93, are hereby ratified and adopted by the board of commissioners as if they had originally been approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1983, § 23-8-3) 
State Law reference— Records retention schedules required, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99(e)(2). 
Sec. 102-45. - Records committee membership. 
There is hereby created and established a local records committee consisting of the county manager, the county attorney, the director of finance, the superior court chief judge, the state court chief judge, and the records management officer or their designees. It shall be the duty of this committee to review, approve, disapprove, amend, or modify records retention schedules submitted to the records management officer by county officers or their designees for approval. Such retention schedules, once approved by this committee, shall have the same force and effect as if approved by the full board of commissioners. A retention schedule may be determined by four members of the committee. The records management officer (or his designee) shall serve as chairman of this committee as required. 
(Code 1983, § 23-8-4) 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 
Sec. 102-46. - Official archival depository designated. 
The Atlanta Historical Society is hereby designated the official archival depository for Fulton County. 
(Code 1983, § 23-8-5) 
Sec. 102-47. - Disposition of records. 
All records not required for day-to-day office operations shall be either destroyed, be transferred to the Fulton County Records Center, or be transferred to the Atlanta Historical Society. No records, however, shall be alienated or destroyed except in accordance with the provisions of this article and the Georgia Records Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq.). 
(Code 1983, § 23-8-7) 
Secs. 102-48—102-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to general provisions and county governing authority, ch. 1; ordinances pertaining to officers and employees, § 2-36 et seq.; code of ethics, § 2-66 et seq.; county governing authority, § 101-36 et seq. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Officers and employees, § 2-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Constitutional officers generally, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-81. - Defense of officers and employees and payment of claims and judgments. 
(a)  Definitions. Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section govern the construction of this division: 
Arises after June 1, 1998 means that this division is intended to apply to all claims and proceedings arising after June 1, 1998, unless prior to June 1, 1998, (1) the county attorney or his/her staff has entered an appearance as counsel of record for the employee in a proceeding or (2) the employee has requested a defense in writing and has been advised by the board or the county attorney in writing that he/she will be provided with a defense in a particular claim and/or proceeding. 
Board means the board of Commissioners of Fulton County, Georgia. 
Claim includes all claims presented against an employee prior to institution of a proceeding. 
Employee means the members of the governing body of Fulton County, supervisors, employees, and other elected or appointed officers and their appointees and employees. 
"No sum" is intended to exclude payment of any sum whatsoever including but not limited to compensatory damages, punitive damages, attorneys fees and costs. 
Proceeding means any matter of a civil nature in or before any court or agency of this state or of any other state or of the United States. 
(b)  Defense of employees. Whenever any claim is made or proceeding is brought against an employee, either against him asserting personal liability for damages or expenses arising out of the performance of his duties or in any way connected therewith, whether based on negligence, violation of contract rights, or violation of civil, constitutional, common law, or other statutory rights and including, professional disciplinary proceedings, whether federal, state, or local, Fulton County shall, upon his timely written request, provide for his defense unless otherwise limited by the terms of this division. 
(c)  Grounds for refusal of defense. 
(1)  The county shall refuse to provide for the defense of a claim or proceeding brought against an employee if it determines that: 
a.  The act or omission did not arise out of and in the course of his employment; 
b.  The employee acted or failed to act because of actual fraud, corruption, or actual malice on his part; 
c.  Provision of a defense against the claim or proceeding would not be in the best interests of Fulton County; 
d.  The proceeding is a criminal prosecution; provided, however, that a defense shall not be refused where the criminal prosecution is one for an alleged violation of the Georgia Open Records Act or Georgia Open Meetings Act, and it is determined that the charged employee, officer, or elected official has acted in good faith to comply with the subject Act and has substantially complied with all county policies relating to the subject Act, which determination shall be made by the board of commissioners; 
e.  The request was not timely made; 
f.  The claim arises out of an act or omission at a time when the employee was under the influence of drugs or intoxicants; or 
g.  The act or omission giving rise to the claims was in direct disobedience of an order or instructions of a superior or in contravention of established county policy. 
h.  The employee fails to cooperate in the defense of a claim or proceeding which arises after June 1, 1998. 
(2)  The determinations required by this section shall be made by the board. For any claim or proceeding that arises after June 1, 1998, the board may refuse, at any time, prior to or after the approval or assumption of the defense, to provide for the defense of an employee if it is determined that any of the grounds for refusal set forth in this section exist. 
(3)  Upon approval of the defense of a claim or proceeding against an employee, the board shall refer the matter to the county attorney for disposition. In the event two or more employees or groups of employees are involved, and the interest of one employee or group of employees conflicts with the interests of another employee or group of employees, the board shall specify which employee or group of employees shall be represented by the county attorney and shall authorize other employees or groups of employees to employ counsel at the expense of the county. However, the selection and compensation of such other counsel shall be subject to the prior approval by the board. 
(d)  Payment of judgments; compromise and settlement of claims. 
(1)  Where defense of a claim or proceeding against an employee is provided by this division, all final judgments awarded to courts of competent jurisdiction against the employee in proceedings to which this division applies or any amount payable under any settlement of such proceeding or of claims in accordance with this division shall be paid by the county as hereinafter provided. All compromises of claims or proceedings governed by this division shall be submitted to the board for its prior approval. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, payment of settlements, compromises, judgments and claims shall be limited as follows for any claim or proceeding which arises after June 1, 1998. 
a.  No sum shall be paid on behalf of any employee who admits, in any sworn statement, administrative, judicial or other legal proceedings, to knowingly and intentionally violated state or federal law and/or the county's policies and procedures. 
b.  Whenever there is a final determination by a court of competent jurisdiction that the officer or employee, with respect to the act or failure to act giving rise to the subject claim, acted or failed to act because of actual fraud, corruption, or actual malice, the officer or employee shall be required to reimburse the county any amounts paid in defense of the claim, and any amounts paid as a judgment, compromise, or settlement of such claim. 
(e)  Exclusions. There is excluded further from the operation of this article any claim or proceeding as to which insurance is provided by Fulton County. 
(f)  Construction of section. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to constitute a waiver of any type of immunity afforded by law. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to constitute the elected or appointed officials and their appointees and employees as employees of Fulton County except for purposes of this division. 
(Code 1983, § 22-4-4; 95-0106, 1-18-95; 98-0723, 5-20-98; 99-0874, 6-16-99; 00-1533, 12-20-00) 
State Law reference— Defense and indemnification of governing body, O.C.G.A. § 45-9-20 et seq. 
Sec. 102-82. - Selection of outside counsel. 
(a)  The selection of outside counsel to represent the county, any elected or appointed officer or official, employee, board, agency, or office (collectively, "county-related entities") shall be made by the board of commissioners, upon consultation with, and recommendation from, the Fulton County Attorney. 
(b)  Fulton County shall not retain or engage any outside attorney or law firm to represent a county-related entity if such outside attorney or law firm represents any person or entity in any pending claim or lawsuit against Fulton County and/or any other county-related entity, except as provided in section 102-371.5 (employment of law firms with suits pending against the county). 
(c)  In the event that any county-related entity purports to retain or engage any outside attorney or law firm in violation of subsection (a) herein, whether the outside attorney or law firm was retained by the county-related entity to represent any person or entity in any pending claim or lawsuit against Fulton County and/or any other county-related entity, or for any other matter, any and all financial obligations, damages, or claims resulting from such purported retention or engagement shall not be paid from taxpayer funds, the county treasury or other funds included within any budget approved by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners. 
(d)  In the event that, as of the effective date of this section 102-82, any county-related entity is utilizing the services of an outside attorney or law firm whose retention or engagement would be prohibited by this section, such representation shall be transitioned to other legal counsel in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection (a) above within 60 days of the effective date of this section. 
(e)  The Fulton County Attorney shall be authorized to waive the provisions of subsection (b) above on a case-by-case basis, if the county attorney determines that 1) such representation is not prohibited by the Rules of Professional Conduct of the State Bar of Georgia, 2) the separate representation does not involve a claim for any monetary damages against the county and/or other county-related entity, and 3) otherwise will not adversely affect the interests of Fulton County or any other county-related entity. 
(15-1114, 12-16-15) 
Secs. 102-83—102-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLERK TO BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— County governing authority, § 101-36 et seq. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Clerk to board of commissioners, § 2-106 et seq. 

Sec. 102-111. - Duties of deputy clerk. 
Wherever in this division the word "clerk" appears, the same shall include the deputy clerk, who shall serve in the absence of the clerk, and where the provision of this division refers to any action of the clerk in furnishing or otherwise transmitting minutes or excerpts therefrom, without certification, the term "clerk" shall include the deputy clerk. 
(Code 1983, § 22-3-6) 
Sec. 102-112. - Procedure for keeping minutes; attendance at commission meetings. 
It shall be the duty of the clerk of the county commission, or in his absence, the deputy clerk, to attend all meetings of the county commission and to keep faithful and accurate records of all such meetings. 
(Code 1983, § 22-3-1) 
Sec. 102-113. - Preparation of minutes. 
It shall be the duty of the clerk, after the adjournment of the meeting or after a recess in any session thereof, if such meeting is not adjourned, to prepare in written form, the minutes of such meeting, using as his sources therefor, any notes, memoranda, or other materials which may be available as an aid to his memory, of all transactions which occurred at such meeting and the action of the county commission thereon, which written record shall be prepared and reduced to writing by the clerk independently under his own oath of office and without interference from any other employee or officer of Fulton County, including the commissioners of Fulton County, provided nothing herein shall operate to prohibit or prevent the clerk from using the services of any clerk or stenographer in writing the minutes. 
(Code 1983, § 22-3-2) 
Sec. 102-114. - Copies of minutes to be furnished to county officers. 
It shall be the duty of the clerk, upon the preparation of the preliminary draft of such minutes, to furnish a copy of the same to the county manager, county attorney, and to such other county officers and heads of departments as may be entitled to the same. 
(Code 1983, § 22-3-3) 
Sec. 102-115. - Alteration of minutes. 
After the clerk shall have prepared the original draft of the minutes as described in the preceding sections, he shall not thereafter alter, change, or modify the same except upon orders of and approval by the county commission in a subsequent regular or called meeting, and the fact of such alteration, change, or modification shall itself be noted on the minutes before final approval and ratification of the same by the county commission. 
(Code 1983, § 22-3-4) 
Sec. 102-116. - Certification of minutes. 
The clerk is hereby prohibited from certifying any minutes of the county commission or excerpts therefrom until and unless the minutes from which such excerpt is taken have been ratified and approved by the county commission; provided, however, the clerk may furnish a copy or excerpt of a preliminary draft of the proposed minutes of the county commission without a certification; provided, however, where such excerpts are prepared and furnished by the clerk, there shall be noted thereon that the same are not official minutes but are tentative and as such are not binding on the county or any officer thereof. 
(Code 1983, § 22-3-5) 
Secs. 102-117—102-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COUNTY ATTORNEY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— County attorney and law department, § 2-191 et seq. 

Sec. 102-146. - Suits for collection of accounts. 
The legal department shall have blanket authority to proceed by suit on behalf of Fulton County to collect all accounts for ratproofing and similar services turned over to the legal department, where the department is unable to collect without legal procedures. 
(Code 1983, § 22-4-1) 
Sec. 102-147. - Title searches. 
The county attorney is hereby authorized to arrange title searches for such properties as he shall deem to warrant such searches. 
(Code 1983, § 22-4-2) 
Sec. 102-148. - MARTA eminent domain proceedings. 
(a)  Upon a request by MARTA to acquire property by eminent domain proceedings, Fulton County will employ its regular staff of county attorneys and assistant county attorneys to handle such proceedings and represent Fulton County in connection therewith, and such attorneys will handle all stages of such proceedings on behalf of Fulton County including the initial hearing before a special master or assessors and appeals to the superior court or appellate courts. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall pay its attorneys for such MARTA condemnation work at an hourly or other rate which shall be commensurate with the rate charged by other competent attorneys for similar work in the community, which pay shall be in addition to the retainer received by such attorneys from Fulton County, all to be reimbursed to Fulton County along with other expenses by MARTA. 
(Code 1983, § 22-4-3) 
Sec. 102-149. - Quarterly status report. 
The county attorney shall develop and submit a quarterly status report of all actions brought against county employees or elected officials in their individual capacity where the employee or elected official is being represented by the office of the county attorney. The status report shall be presented to the board of commissioners in executive session at their regular meeting on the second Wednesday of the month at the end of each quarter. 
(93-RC-047, 1-27-93) 
Secs. 102-150—102-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COUNTY CHAPLAIN 

Sec. 102-181. - Appointment; removal. 
The chaplain shall be appointed by the board of commissioners without term and shall be removable only for cause after public meeting. 
(Code 1983, § 23-2-11) 
Sec. 102-182. - Travel allowance. 
The chaplain shall receive the regular allowance for transportation prescribed for employees of Fulton County. 
(Code 1983, § 23-2-12) 
Sec. 102-183. - Religious services. 
It shall be the duty of the chaplain to plan and administer a program of nonsectarian religious services at all correctional and rehabilitation institutions of Fulton County, Fulton County Jail, and other places prisoners are confined in Fulton County, with the exception of the juvenile detention department, and through his personal efforts, with the cooperation of chaplains on contract and such volunteers as he may enlist and appoint, to provide opportunities for divine worship to all such inmates. 
(Code 1983, § 23-2-13) 
Sec. 102-184. - Direction of other chaplains. 
All services and activities requiring a chaplain shall be under the direction of the county chaplain and no additional compensation shall be authorized for chaplaincy services except those provided under contract by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1983, § 23-2-14) 
Sec. 102-185. - Supervision of entertainment programs. 
It shall be the duty of the chaplain to plan, promote, and supervise occasional entertainment and educational programs for inmates confined in the Fulton County correctional and rehabilitation institutions and jail. 
(Code 1983, § 23-2-15) 
Sec. 102-186. - Inspections of facilities. 
It shall be the duty of the chaplain to visit and observe the correctional and rehabilitation institutions and jail of Fulton County, excluding those institutions set apart for youthful offenders, and to consult the inmates thereof and from time to time to suggest and recommend to the county commissioners and to the Warden of Fulton County and to the chief jailer such changes in methods of operation, discipline, diet, privileges, and programs as he may deem advisable, necessary, and beneficial to the inmates and to the officials in charge of such institutions. 
(Code 1983, § 23-2-16) 
Cross reference— County jail, § 146-61 et seq. 
Sec. 102-187. - Official representative. 
The Chaplain of Fulton County shall serve as the official religious representative of Fulton County in all matters and on all occasions where a representative of Fulton County is desirable and/or necessary, and as such, shall also investigate, evaluate, and deal with religious groups in proposed undertakings that shall benefit the inmates and/or families of inmates incarcerated in the Fulton County correctional and rehabilitation institutions and jail. 
(Code 1983, § 23-2-17) 
Sec. 102-188. - Communication between inmates and families; emergency or special privileges. 
The chaplain shall attempt to provide communications between inmates and their families concerning genuine needs of the inmate and his or her family, and shall try to alleviate such genuine needs that lie within the jurisdiction, authority, and means of the chaplaincy office. The chaplain shall investigate and make recommendations concerning application for emergency or special privileges for the well-being of the inmate and his family and also for the well-being of the security division of the institution. 
(Code 1983, § 23-2-18) 
Cross reference— County jail, § 146-61 et seq. 
Secs. 102-189—102-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - COUNTY HISTORIAN 

Sec. 102-221. - Office created; duties. 
(a)  The office of Official Historian of Fulton County is hereby created. The term of the office shall be at the will of the board of commissioners, and the office shall carry no salary. 
(b)  The duties of the official historian shall be as specified from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1983, § 23-2-41) 
Secs. 102-222—102-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to taxation, ch. 74; county jail welfare fund, § 146-81 et seq.; resolutions pertaining to taxation, ch. 170. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Finances, § 2-226 et seq. 
State Law reference— County finance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-251. - Use of revenue from Fulton County Special Services District. 
(a)  Revenues derived from the Fulton County Special Services District shall be used only to defray costs for the following services furnished within such district: police protection and services; fire protection and services; licenses, inspections and enforcement of building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes; recreation; planning; zoning; sanitation; and indirect costs for the operation of public works camps for the costs of services rendered by inmates in such camps within and for the benefit of such district. 
(b)  In adopting a budget for the expenditure of revenues derived from the Fulton County Special Services District, allocations for expenditures for services within the district shall be made in a manner that is fair and equitable to all citizens residing throughout the district so that the same standard of services shall be provided to all such citizens. 
(94-RM-262, 5-18-94) 
Sec. 102-252. - Employee services fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a fund to be known as the employee services fund, into which shall be deposited all revenues derived from commissions on sales from vending machines permitted by Fulton County on premises owned or used by Fulton County and its employees, agents, and invitees. The purpose of the fund is to benefit Fulton County by improving employee morale by funding certain employee-oriented functions and events and other charitable purposes not otherwise provided by the public or other available funds. 
(b)  The management of the fund and all disbursements from the fund shall be under the control and supervision of a committee composed of the county manager, the director of finance, the director of personnel, and the chairman of the board of commissioners, or his or her designee. The committee shall elect its own chairperson from among its members and shall meet at least once annually to plan for future operations of the fund and disbursements therefrom. All actions of the committee shall be recorded in public minutes, and such minutes of the committee shall be authorization for any disbursements from the fund. 
(c)  The duties of the committee shall be to: 
(1)  Establish general policies in regard to new vending machines and operations on Fulton County premises, provided that nothing herein shall authorize the committee or any member thereof to enter into any contract or otherwise bind Fulton County with respect to the existence or operation of any vending machine, except as specifically permitted by the board of commissioners; 
(2)  Establish policies with regard to the use of and disbursements from the fund; 
(3)  Appoint a Fulton County employee who shall be responsible for all vending machine commission revenues pursuant to the policies approved by the committee. The person so appointed shall have continual responsibility for vending machine operations and commission revenues therefrom or related to the fund. All commissions from vending machine revenues shall be deposited promptly into the fund not less than once weekly; 
(4)  Designate persons authorized to sign and approve disbursements from the fund; and 
(5)  Take all other action necessary to accomplish the purposes of the fund and this section. 
(d)  All funds shall be deposited and maintained in a separate segregated fund on Fulton County's general ledger system in the name of the employees services fund, and shall be considered separate and distinct from all other county funds. The director of finance shall serve as treasurer for the fund and shall be responsible to establish an adequate system of recordkeeping for the funds to reflect all receipts and disbursements. 
(e)  All purchases and other disbursements from the fund shall be made by the persons designated as provided above. All financial records relating to the fund shall be approved and audited by the internal audit division of the department of finance and shall also be subject to the general Fulton County audit. 
(93-RC-571, §§ 1—5, 10-20-93) 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 
Sec. 102-253. - Senior/multipurpose centers; use of funds generated by vending machines and rentals. 
(a)  All current and future senior/multipurpose centers may contain vending machines, the proceeds of which shall remain with the nonprofit corporation which operates the facility for programs at the facilities. All the current and future senior/multipurpose centers, located in Fulton County, may be leased to residents of the community and private corporations in accordance with a fee schedule developed by the department of human services which is based on reasonable and similar real estate rental rates. 
(b)  All funds generated from rental proceeds and from vending machines located in senior/multipurpose centers in Fulton County shall be returned to the budgets of the nonprofit corporations which operate the facilities and are responsible for the operation of programs within the facilities, with funds generated being used as program income. These funds shall be specifically used for the enhancement and expansion of senior services, and not to increase salaries or purchase equipment. All income generated from the rental of the senior/multipurpose centers shall not offset the current level of funding, and future funding increases, provided to the human services department for the operation of senior and aging services and programs. 
(95-1329, 11-1-95) 
Secs. 102-254—102-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Budgets, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 102-286. - Public hearings on proposed budgets. 
(a)  Commencing with the 1992 budgetary preparation process, there shall be, prior to the adoption of a proposed budget, three public hearings on the proposed budget. One hearing shall be held at the North Annex, one hearing shall be held at the South Annex, and one hearing shall be held at the Fulton County Government Center. The purpose of these hearings shall be to receive comment from citizens of Fulton County on the proposed budget. 
(b)  After the adoption of a proposed budget, but prior to the adoption of a final budget, a public hearing, in accordance with 1953 (Jan.-Feb. Sess.) Ga. Laws (Act No. 350), page 2815 (see pt. I, § 2-261 et seq.) shall be held at the Fulton County Government Center for purposes of receiving comment from members of the public on the adoption of a final budget. 
(c)  Prior to the setting of the millage rate by the board of commissioners for each fiscal year, there shall be held a public hearing for purposes of receiving comments from members of the public on the proposed millage rate, and said meeting shall be held at the Fulton County Government Center. 
(d)  The schedule for the public hearings referred to herein shall be posted and advertised on or before October 1, of each year, and in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Laws of Fulton County. 
(e)  The clerk to the board of commissioners shall make available, at each of these public hearings, copies of the proposed budget for distribution to members of the public. 
(91-FM-120, 8-14-91) 
Sec. 102-287. - Balanced budget. 
(a)  The budget commission shall submit to the board of commissioners a budget limiting combined expenditures to the level of the prior year, plus the actual amount of anticipated revenue relating to growth in the general digest, subject to providing additionally for those emergencies and contingencies that, if not provided for, would result in the departments of Fulton County failing to perform the duties imposed upon them by law. 
(b)  If the budget commission's budget does not reflect subsection (a) of this section, then an alternative budget shall be presented to the board of commissioners to reflect the wishes of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 9-7-88) 
Sec. 102-288. - Target plan to address present and future needs of county. 
(a)  The Fulton County board of commissioners, upon adoption of the 1988 annual budget, will commence a three-year target plan to address the present and future needs of Fulton County and obligations thereto. The Fulton County board of commissioners, upon adoption of the 1988 annual budget, reviews all projects both proposed and presently under construction to ascertain existing and anticipated expenditures for such projects, including personnel requirements, physical facilities, and other cost. 
(b)  The Fulton County board of commissioners shall direct the county manager to conduct detailed departmental reviews with consultation from the Fulton County board of commissioners regarding: 
(1)  Internal operations of county departments; 
(2)  Staffing; and 
(3)  Recommendations for reduction in employees through attrition as a result of the internal audit or transferal of an employee position due to the results of the internal audit. 
(c)  The Fulton County board of commissioners shall direct the county manager to conduct an assessment of the physical buildings and facilities of Fulton County and the costs assailed thereto. 
(d)  The Fulton County board of commissioners shall direct the county manager to conduct an assessment of Fulton County's financial responsibility to the Fulton/DeKalb Hospital Authority. 
(e)  The Fulton County board of commissioners, after the adoption of the 1988 annual budget, shall direct the county manager to provide recommendations on increases in licenses and fees. 
(f)  The Fulton County board of commissioners shall direct the county manager to provide recommendations on an increase in other fees (alcohol licenses, courts, etc.). 
(g)  The Fulton County board of commissioners shall direct the county manager to report on taxation or legislation, if any, from the Georgia General Assembly. 
(h)  The Fulton County board of commissioners shall direct the county manager to review growth in the tax digest. 
(i)  The Fulton County board of commissioners shall direct the county manager to prepare legislation for a payroll tax or similar city tax to the Georgia General Assembly in future sessions of that body. 
(j)  The Fulton County board of commissioners shall direct the county manager to report on the status of the tax appraisal package between the City of Atlanta and Fulton County. This process should be expedited. 
(k)  In addition to the actions of the budget commission, the Fulton County board of commissioners shall be provided a monthly analysis of actual expenditures and actual revenues in comparison to the annual budget. 
(l)  The Fulton County board of commissioners shall convene in July 1988, and by July 15 of each succeeding year to conduct a midyear budget analysis of financial conditions of Fulton County. 
(m)  The Fulton County board of commissioners shall direct the county manager to facilitate the purposes and intent of this section and to direct appropriate personnel to carry out this study in a detailed and timely manner. 
(Res. of 2-3-88) 
Sec. 102-289. - Adoption of zero base budgeting concept. 
Fulton County adopts the zero base budgeting concept for all future budgets. 
(91-RM-266, 6-12-91) 
Sec. 102-290. - General fund and special services district fund reserve balances. 
(a)  There is hereby established fund balance reserves in the general fund and special services district fund as set forth in this section. 
(b)  The general fund balance reserve shall be established as follows: 
(1)  Commencing with the 1995 fiscal year budget, a reserve of 5.4 percent of general fund budgeted expenditures shall initially be established, the initial reserve. This percentage represents approximately $18,300,000.00 in 1995. 
(2)  Each subsequent year through 1998 an additional one percent of budgeted expenditures shall be reserved to the extent such amount is available from revenues exceeding budgeted amounts and/or expenditures which were less than budgeted amounts in the immediately preceding year. 
(3)  The "minimum reserve" for the general fund is established at no less than 16.66 percent of budgeted expenditures, representing on average two months of expenditures and allowing Fulton County sufficient resources to operate until annual tax anticipation note proceeds can be received. 
(4)  A goal reserve of 20 percent of budgeted expenditures for the general fund is established. As part of the budgeting process each year until the goal reserve is established, the budget commission and Board of Commissioners of Fulton County shall consider increasing the fund balance reserve by one percent to the extent such amount is available from revenues exceeding budgeted amounts and/or expenditures which were less than budgeted amounts in the immediately preceding year. 
(5)  The fund balance reserve may be reduced only in the following situations: 
a.  If budgeted revenues for any fiscal year are not collected and actual expenditures cause an operating deficit for that year; 
b.  If a natural disaster occurs within the boundaries of Fulton County, and the board of commissioners approves the use of the reserve to pay for the costs of such disaster; or 
c.  If the board of Commissioners of Fulton County determines that an unforeseeable emergency situation exists and approves the use of the fund balance reserve to pay for the emergency situation. 
(c)  The special services district fund fund balance reserve shall be established as follows: 
(1)  Commencing with the 1995 fiscal year budget, a reserve of 10.6 percent of special service district fund budgeted expenditures shall initially be established, the initial reserve. This percentage represents approximately $6,700,000.00 in 1995. 
(2)  Each subsequent year through 1998 an additional one percent of budgeted expenditures shall be reserved to the extent such amount is available from revenues exceeding budgeted amounts and/or expenditures which were less than budgeted amounts in the immediately preceding year. 
(3)  The minimum reserve for the special services district is established at 16.67 percent of budgeted expenditures, representing on average two months of expenditures. Unlike the general fund, the special services district cannot borrow operating monies through a tax anticipation note. A fund balance reserve at 16.67 percent of budgeted expenditures will allow the fund to have sufficient cash flow resources to sustain operations until tax revenues are received. 
(4)  A goal reserve of 20 percent of budgeted expenditures for the special services district fund is established. As part of the budgeting process each year until the goal reserve is established, the budget commission and Board of Commissioners of Fulton County shall consider increasing the fund balance reserve by one percent to the extent such amount is available from revenues exceeding budgeted amounts and/or expenditures which were less than budgeted amounts in the immediately preceding year. 
(5)  The fund balance reserve may be reduced only in the following situations: 
a.  If budgeted revenues for any fiscal year are not collected and actual expenditures cause an operating deficit for that year; 
b.  If a natural disaster occurs within the boundaries of the Special Services District of Fulton County, and the board of commissioners approves the use of the reserve to pay for the costs of such disaster; or 
c.  If the board of Commissioners of Fulton County determines that an unforeseeable emergency situation exists and approves the use of the fund balance reserve to pay for the emergency situation. 
(95-0105, §§ I—III, 2-15-95; 15-0078, 1-21-15) 
Secs. 102-291—102-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 13-0052, adopted Jan. 23, 2013, repealed the former art. V, §§ 102-351—102-361, 102-386—102-391, 102-401—102-403, 102-421—102-423, 102-456—102-458, 102-466—102-472, and enacted a new art. V as set out herein. The former art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1983, §§ 23-6-1—23-6-4, 23-6-6, 23-6-7, 23-6-21—23-6-23; a resolution of Nov. 16, 1988; Ordinance No. 90-RCM-365, adopted April 18, 1990; Ord. No. 91-RC-096, adopted Feb. 20, 1991; Ord. No. 92-RC-455, Oct. 21, 1992; Ord. No. 94-RC-365, adopted July 20, 1994; Ord. No. 95-1161, Sept. 20, 1995; Ord. No. 95-1104, adopted Nov. 4, 1995; Ord. No. 96-0450, April 25, 1996; Res. No. 98-1001, adopted July 15, 1998; Ord. No. 99-0960, §§ 1—7, adopted July 7, 1999; Res. No. 99-1484, adopted Dec. 1, 1999; Res. No. 99-1532, adopted Dec. 1, 1999; Res. No. 00-0979, adopted July 19, 2000; Res. No. 00-0981, adopted July 19, 2000; Res. No. 02-0729, adopted June 19, 2002; Ord. No. 03-1290, adopted Nov. 5, 2003; Res. No. 06-0148, adopted Feb. 15, 2006; Res. No. 09-0209, adopted Feb. 4, 2009; Res. No. 09-0294, March 4, 2009; Res. No. 10-0694, Aug. 18, 2010; Res. No. 10-0942, Sept. 15, 2010; and Res. No. 11-1094, adopted Dec. 7, 2011.  Res. No. 13-0433, adopted June 5, 2013, clarified the repeal of §§ 102-401—102-103, 102-421—102-423, 102-456—102-458. 
Cross reference— Requirement for art in public places in contracts for construction, acquisition or renovation of county buildings, § 126-68; human relations, ch. 142. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Purchasing, § 2-306 et seq. 
State Law reference— Public works contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-10-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 102-351. - Definitions. 
Addenda/Addendum is a written amendment to an invitation to bid or request to proposal that changes the project specifications and is issued prior to bid opening which becomes a part of the specifications for the project. 
Advertisement means public notice inviting bids or proposals on a specified project. The advertisement must include such details/specifications so as to enable the public to know the extent and scope of the work to be done. Plans and specifications must be available on the first day of the advertisement, and they must be open to inspection by the public. All notices must advise potential bidders/offerors of any mandatory prequalification requirements, any pre-bid/proposal conferences, and/or any federal requirements. All projects shall be published in the county's legal organ and on the Fulton County website under "Bid Opportunities." 
Aggrieved bidder means any actual bidder, offeror or contractor that has submitted a bid/proposal for a particular procurement who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract may protest to the purchasing agent. 
Alternate bid means the amount stated in the bid or proposal to be added to or deducted from the base bid or base proposal if the corresponding change in project scope or alternate materials or methods of construction is accepted. 
Amendment means a change, addition, alteration, correction or revision to a bid or proposal or contract document. 
Annual contract means any contract entered into for a period of one year or multiple one-year periods (including options to renew for additional one-year periods), with a contractor or a vendor, to provide the county upon request with a specified product or service at a predetermined price or rate. 
Award means approval by the board of commissioners, to begin the contracting process with the most responsive and responsible bidder. 
Base bid or base proposal means the amount of money stated in the bid or proposal as the sum for which the bidder or proposer offers to perform the work. 
Best value means a procurement method that emphasizes value over price. The best value may not be the lowest cost, generally achieved through the request for proposal (RFP) method. 
Bid means the formal process allowing prospective vendors to compete for goods and services sought by the county. 
Bid acceptance means the acceptance of bids delivered to the purchasing agent at the time, place, and under the conditions contained in the invitation for bids and as further stipulated in the specifications document. 
Bid bond means a form of bid security executed by the bidder as principal and by a surety to guarantee that the bidder will enter into a contract within a specified time and maintain the bid prices submitted with his/her original bids and furnish any required payment and/or performance bonds. 
Bid guaranty means a certified check, bid bond, cashier's check, for a sum of money deposited with the county by a bidder to guarantee that the bidder will enter into a contract within a specified time and maintain the bid prices submitted with his/her bid and furnish any required payment and/or performance bonds. 
Bid opening means the public opening of bids received and accepted and the reading aloud of the name of each bidder and the amount of bid in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation to bid. For RFP openings, only the names of the proponents are read aloud. 
Brand name or equal specification means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturer's names or catalogue numbers to describe the standard of quality, performance and other salient characteristics needed to meet county requirements and which provides for the submission of equivalent products from any manufacturer. 
Business means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, firm or any other private entity. 
Change order means an alteration, addition, or deduction from the original scope of work as defined by the contract documents to address changes or unforeseen conditions necessary for project completion. 
Clock calibration means coordination of the bid clock with the time as indicated by the National Bureau of Standards. 
Collusion means a secret agreement, whether expressed or implied, to commit a fraudulent, deceitful, unlawful, or wrongful act. 
Collusive bidding means a violation of antitrust statues that consists of a response to a solicitation by two or more persons who have secretly agreed to circumvent laws and rules regarding independent and competitive bidding. 
Competitive process is the process by which a local government solicits a public works construction contract through either the bid method or the proposal method. 
Competitive sealed bidding means a method of soliciting public works construction contracts whereby the award is based upon the lowest responsive, responsible bid in conformance with the provisions of this article. 
Competitive sealed proposal means a method of soliciting public works contracts whereby the award is based upon criteria identified in a request for proposals in conformance with the provisions of subsection (c) of Code section 36-91-21. 
Construction means the process of building, altering, repairing, remodeling, improving or demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property. It does not include the routine maintenance of existing structures, buildings or real property. 
Construction delivery method is a method of building a project. 
Construction management at risk is a construction delivery method in which the local government hires a construction manager at risk. 
Construction manager agency serves as an advisor and agent of the local government, as well as coordinates the design and construction teams on project. 
Construction manager at risk serves as an advisor and agent of the local government, coordinates the design and construction team, as well as is responsible for the construction of a project. 
Contract means all types of agreements, including purchase orders, regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement or disposal of supplies, services, construction, professional or consultant services, and for the transfers of interest in real property. 
Contract documents means the various parts of the contract including, but not limited to the contract agreement, the bid form, the payment and performance bond, any required insurance certificates, general and specific conditions and the specifications of the project. 
Contract file means the grouping of all written determinations and other records pertaining to the solicitation, award or performance of a contract or purchase order in a designated file maintained by the county purchasing agent. 
Contract modification means any written alteration in the terms of the contract including, but not limited to, the scope, manner of performance, specifications, delivery point, time and rate of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity, or other provision of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the contract. 
Contract sum means the amount bid as adjusted by all contract modifications. 
Contractor means any person or entity having a contract with the county. 
Cost data factual information concerning the cost of labor, material, overhead and other cost elements that are expected to be incurred or which have been actually incurred by the contractor in performing the contract. 
County shall mean Fulton County, Georgia, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, and shall include all agencies, establishments or officials of the government. 
Countywide contract means a contract for a specified service(s) executed for use by any agency within the county. 
Data means recorded information, regardless of form or characteristics. 
Days shall mean calendar days. 
Debarment means the exclusion of a person or company from participating in a procurement activity for an extended period of time, as specified by law, because of previous illegal or irresponsible action. 
Designee means an authorized representative of a person holding superior position of responsibility. 
Discussions means an exchange of information or other manner of negotiation during which the offeror and the county may alter or otherwise change the conditions, terms and price of the proposed contract. Discussions may be conducted in connection with competitive sealed proposals, sole source and emergency procurement. Discussions are not permissible in competitive sealed bidding, except to the extent permissible in the first phase of multistep sealed bidding, when all competitive bids exceed available funds but the responsive bid does not exceed such funds by more than five percent or as otherwise permitted by applicable law. 
Emergency means any situation resulting in imminent danger to the public health, welfare or safety or the loss of an essential government service. 
Encumbrance means an obligation, chargeable to a budget appropriation, by a user department to pay for a specific procurement. 
Evaluation criteria means factors relating to management capability, technical capability, method of meeting performance requirements, price, and other material considerations specified in the request for proposal that will be considered in determining to whom a contract will be awarded. 
Fast track is a construction delivery method where construction of a project begins as soon as the first phase of design documents is complete. 
Fidelity bond means a form of insurance that secures an employer up to the amount stated in the bond for losses caused by dishonest acts of its employees. 
Final completion means the completion of all work as required in accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract documents. 
Firm means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, joint venture or other legal entity permitted by law to practice or offer professional or consultant services. 
Governing authority means the official or group of officials responsible for governance of a governmental entity. The Fulton County board of commissioners is the governing authority for the county. 
Governing entity means Fulton County Government ("county"). 
Invitation to bid (ITB) means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting sealed bids. 
Invoice means the document provided by vendors to the county as a demand for payment of goods or services provided under the provisions of a contract awarded by the county. 
Inspection means an authorized representative of the county, or of the county's architect/engineer, assigned to make all necessary inspections, test, and reports of the work performed or being performed. 
Materials means any substance(s) specified for use in the performance of the contract work. 
May denotes permissive. 
Multiterm contracts means a contract executed for a specific period with the option to renew for additional periods of time. 
Offer means a proposal by an offeror submitted when procurement is made by a source selection method other than competitive sealed bidding. 
Offeror is a person, firm or entity that submits a proposal under the proposal method. 
Owner means Fulton County Government, Georgia ("county"). 
Notice to proceed means a written notice to the contractor to begin the actual contract work, stating, if applicable, the date on which the contract time begins. 
Payment bond means a bond provided by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, payable to the county which guarantees to the county that all costs incurred by the contractor relating to the performance of the contracted services for the use and protection of all subcontractors and all persons supplying labor, materials, machinery, and equipment in the prosecution of the work provided for in the public works construction contract. 
Performance bond means a bond provided by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, for the faithful performance of the contract and to indemnify the governmental entity for any damages occasioned by a failure to perform the same within the prescribed time. Such bond shall be payable to, in favor of, and for the protection of the county for which the work is to be done and guarantees to the county that the services contracted for will be performed in accordance with the terms and conditions specified in the contract document. 
Prebid or preproposal conference means a meeting scheduled prior to the opening of bids/proposals at which attendance by potential bidders/offerors may be optional or mandatory, to clarify the solicitation and respond to prospective bidder/offeror inquiries. 
Prequalification means required standards imposed in the best interest of the county as a condition of bidding, which must be met by an interested bidder in order to qualify to respond to an invitation for bids or a request for proposal. 
Prequalification process means a requirement that any prospective bidder or offeror meet certain minimum qualifications related to the project or the quality of work before being eligible to submit a bid or proposal. 
Procurement means buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring any supplies, services or construction. Also includes all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supply, service or construction, including a description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contracts, and all phases of contract administration. 
Professional and consultant services means those services within the scope of the practices of architecture, professional engineering, planning, landscape architecture, land surveying, the medical arts, management analysis, accounting or auditing, law, psychology or any other similar kind or type of professional practice. In the context of the Local Government Public Works Construction Law, it means those services where the other party is not responsible for construction. 
Program manager or project manager is a person, firm or county employee that oversees or manages a construction project. 
Proposal means solicited submission of information from a prospective contractor which states how that offeror intends to perform certain work, its technical and business qualifications, it's proposed delivery, warranty, other terms and conditions as those might differ from or supplement the county's solicitation requirements, and any other information requested by the county's solicitation. 
Proposal guaranty is a certified check or other security payable to the local government to ensure that the successful bidder will execute the contract on which he bid similar to a bid bond. 
Proposer means one who submits a proposal. 
Public works construction means the building, altering, repairing, improving, or demolishing of any public structure or building or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property. 
Purchase description means the words used in a solicitation to describe the supplies, services or construction to be purchased, including specifications attached to or made a part of the solicitation. 
Purchase order means a short form of contract which is issued by the purchasing agent at the written request of the using agency for the procurement of supplies, goods or services. 
Purchasing agent means the Director of the Fulton County department of purchasing and contract compliance, the principal purchasing official for the county. 
Qualification-based selection means a way of selecting professional services or offerors under the proposal method in which the professional or offeror is selected prior to consideration of price. 
Quotation means a bid more than $2,499.99 and less than $49,999.99. 
Request for proposal means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals. 
Requisition means a document utilized by a using agency to request that a purchase order or contract be entered into for a specific need. 
Responsible bidder or responsible offeror means a person or entity that has the capability in all respects to perform fully and reliably the contract requirements. 
Responsive bidder or responsive offeror means a person or entity that has submitted a bid or proposal that conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids or request for proposals. 
Retainage is the portion of the total contract amount that a local government retains from the contractor until the project is totally complete. 
Road includes highways, roads, streets, avenues, toll roads, detours, structures, sidewalks, facilities, shoulders, bridges, causeways, viaducts, ferries, overpasses, underpasses, railroad grade crossings, tunnels, signs, signals, markings, wayside parks, parking facilities, drainage ditches, canals, culverts, rest areas, truck weighing stations and scenic easements. 
Road construction is the planning, location, surveying, designing, supervising, inspecting, building, paving, striping, restriping, modifying, grading, widening, relocating, rebuilding or other major improvement of a substantial portion to an existing road. 
Scope of project means the work required by the original contract documents and any subsequent change orders required or appropriate to accomplish the intent of the project as described in the bid documents. 
Scope of work means the work required by the original contract documents and any subsequent change orders required or appropriate to accomplish the intent of the project as described in the bid documents. 
Service means the furnishings of labor, time or effort by a contractor, not involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are merely incidental to the required performance. This term does not include employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements. 
Service contract means a contract awarded for a type of service other than construction, professional or consultant service, such as janitorial, plumbing, security guard services, etc. 
Shall denotes imperative. 
Sole source means those procurements made pursuant to a written determination by the governing authority that there is only one source for the required supply, service, or construction item. 
Solicitation means an invitation for bid, a request for proposal, a request for quotation, or any other document issued by the county for the purpose of soliciting bids or proposals to perform a county contract. 
Specifications means any description of the physical or functional characteristics or of the nature of a supply, service or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing or preparing a supply, service or construction item for delivery. 
Subcontractor means any person undertaking part of the work of a contract under the control of the principal contractor. 
Substantial completion means the date when construction is sufficiently complete, in accordance with the contract documents, so the county can occupy or utilize the work or designated portion thereof for the use for which it is intended. 
Supplies means all property, including, but not limited to, equipment, materials, etc. 
Surety means the corporation, partnership, or individual licensed and authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, other than the contractor, executing payment, performance or bid bonds to be furnished to the county by the contractor. 
Using agency means any county entity that utilizes any supplies, services, construction, professional or consultant services procured under this article. 
Work means the furnishing of all labor, materials, tools, equipment and incidentals necessary by the contractor for completion and performance of all duties and obligations imposed by the contract documents. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-352. - Severability. 
If any section or part of a section of this article or any application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other sections of a section or application of this article which can be given effect without the invalid section or part of a section or application, and to this end the section and parts of sections of this article are declared to be severable. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-353. - Interpretation purposes and policies. 
(a)  Interpretation. This article shall be construed and applied to promote its underlying purposes and policies. 
(b)  Purposes and policies. The underlying purposes and policies of this article are to: 
(1)  Simplify, clarify, consolidate and modernize the law governing procurement for this county; 
(2)  Permit the continued development of procurement policies and practices; 
(3)  Provide centralized procurement for this county; 
(4)  Provide for increased public confidence in the procedures followed in public procurement; 
(5)  Ensure the fair and equitable treatment of all persons who deal with the procurement system of this county; 
(6)  Provide increased economy in county procurement activities and to maximize to the fullest extent practicable the purchasing value of public funds of the county; 
(7)  Foster effective broad-based competition for public procurement within the free enterprise system; 
(8)  Provide safeguards for the maintenance of a procurement system of quality and integrity; and 
(9)  Obtain in a cost-effective and responsive manner the materials, services and construction required by county agencies in order for those agencies to better serve this county's businesses and residents. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-354. - Application of article. 
This article applies only to contracts solicited or entered into after the effective date of the resolution from which this article is derived, unless the parties agree to its application to a contract solicited or entered into prior to the effective date. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-355. - Supplementary general principles of law applicable. 
Unless displaced by the particular sections of this article, the principles of law and equity, including the uniform commercial code of the state, the law merchant, the law of real property and the law relative to capacity to contract, agency, fraud, misrepresentation, duress, coercion, mistake or bankruptcy, shall supplement this article. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-356. - Good faith actions. 
This article requires all parties involved in the negotiation, performance or administration of county contracts to act in good faith. The term "good faith" means honesty in fact in the conduct or transaction concerned and the observance of reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-357. - Procurement records. 
(a)  Contract file. All determinations and other written records pertaining to the solicitation, award or performance of a contract or purchase order shall be maintained by the county in a contract file by the purchasing agent. 
(b)  Retention. All procurement records shall be retained and disposed of by the county in accordance with state retention guidelines and schedules for local governments and approved by the board of commissioners. If a contract is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from a federal agency, all procurement records pertaining to that contract shall be maintained for three or four years, as applicable, from the closeout date of the assistance agreement or the final disposition of any controversy arising out of the assistance agreement. 
(c)  Public access. Procurement information shall be a public record to the extent required by the laws of the state. 
State Law reference— Records management programs for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-358. - Compliance with federal requirements. 
When the procurement or real estate transaction involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the procurement or real estate transaction shall be conducted in accordance with any applicable mandatory federal law and authorized regulations which are not reflected in this article. Notwithstanding, where federal assistance or contract funds are used in a procurement or real estate transaction, requirements that are more restrictive than federal requirements shall be followed. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-359. - Construction of water treatment plant. 
The construction and operation of a water treatment plant and appurtenances in North Fulton County, as a joint venture of the county and Fulton County, being necessary to serve the joint needs of the county and Fulton County in ensuring an adequate supply of potable water for their citizens, the Atlanta-Fulton County Water Resources Commission is authorized to contract for goods and services and to make purchases of real and personal property, in connection with the water treatment plant and appurtenances, subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  The funds for the purchase of goods and services are available to the commission in line item appropriations of its approved budget. 
(2)  Such contracts or purchases of goods and services do not exceed $50,000.00, except that contracts exceeding that amount are authorized: 
a.  For goods or services for which the entity providing the goods or services is listed by name in its approved budget; or 
b.  When the chair of the commission certifies that emergency circumstances exist and that failure to contract for goods or services to correct such circumstances would result in the loss of operations of the facilities and that insufficient time is available to secure specific approval of the contract by the City of Atlanta and Fulton County. 
(3)  Such contracts are made pursuant to purchasing and minority participation procedures as determined by the commission. 
(4)  Regardless of the amount and when jointly authorized by resolution of the county council and of Fulton County, all contracts that are reasonable and necessary for the construction of the water treatment facilities and appurtenances, including professional and consultant contracts, may be executed, provided that the funds for the contracts are available to the commission in line item appropriations of its approved budget. 
(5)  All pertinent requirements of the joint venture agreement for the making of contracts and purchases have been met. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Cross reference— Management of the joint venture, § 102-675. 
Sec. 102-360. - Limitation on task orders authorized under fast track and standby annual contracts. 
For fast track and standby annual contracts, any using agency may expend up to $1,500,000.00 under an annual contract individually or in the aggregate with any one contractor. Task orders exceeding $500,000.00 must be presented to the board of commissioners for approval prior to the issuance of the notice to proceed. Task orders exceeding $100,000.00 must be presented on the consent agenda to the board of commissioners on a quarterly basis as part of the large contracts report. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Board Policy 05-0369, 4-20-05. 
Sec. 102-361. - Multiple awards; limitations on multiple awards. 
(a)  Multiple awards. Unless otherwise provided in this section, or unless otherwise provided by law, two or more offerors may be awarded separate county contracts, at the discretion of the county, on the basis of one solicitation for the same or similar work, supplies or services if the county reserves the right to do so in the solicitation. Multiple contracts may be awarded, at the discretion of the county, for the procurement of annual contracts for supplies, annual contracts for construction, annual contracts for services, and annual contracts for professional and consultant services. Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, however, if multiple awards are not anticipated in a solicitation prior to the deadline established for receipt of bids, proposals or quotations, multiple awards shall not be made under that solicitation. 
(b)  Prohibition against multiple awards for the procurement of construction, services or professional and consultant services that are not annual contracts. Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, or unless otherwise provided by law, multiple county contracts shall not be awarded under one solicitation for the procurement of construction, services or professional and consultant services which are not annual contracts. 
(c)  Inapplicability. This section shall not apply to the purchase, sale or disposition of real estate, nor shall this section apply to grant agreements, intergovernmental agreements or emergency procurements. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
DIVISION 2. - PROCUREMENT ORGANIZATION 

Sec. 102-362. - Creation of Fulton County department of purchasing and contract compliance. 
There is hereby created in each county in this state having a population of 550,000 or more according to the United States Census of 1970, or any future United States census, a county purchasing department, which shall be set up, established and maintained under the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners or other county authority. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-363. - Appointment and qualifications of purchasing agent. 
The county manager shall appoint the purchasing agent. The purchasing agent shall have relevant, recent experience in public procurement and in the large scale procurement of supplies, services, or construction, and shall be a person with demonstrated executive and organizational ability. 
(1)  Tenure and removal. The county purchasing department shall be under the direction and supervision of a county purchasing agent who shall be appointed by the board of commissioners or other county authority. Said purchasing agent shall be subject to removal from office by the appointing authority at any time during his tenure of office for just cause. 
(2)  Compensation. The compensation of said county purchasing agent shall be an annual salary, payable monthly, fixed by the county authority and paid out of the county treasury. 
(3)  Vacancy; appointment of successor. In the event of a vacancy in the office of county purchasing agent, by death, resignation or otherwise, the said county authority is authorized to appoint a successor to serve as county purchasing agent until the expiration of his term of office. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. I, §§ 2-306, 2-307, 2-310, and 2-311. 
Sec. 102-364. - Authority of the purchasing agent. 
(a)  Principal purchasing official. The purchasing agent shall serve as the principal purchasing official of the county. 
(b)  Power to adopt operational procedures. Consistent with the provisions of this Code, the purchasing agent may adopt operational procedures governing the internal functions of the department of purchasing and contract compliance. 
(c)  Duties. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the purchasing agent shall in accordance with regulations: 
(1)  Procure or supervise the procurement of all supplies, services, and construction needed by the county; 
(2)  Establish and maintain programs for the inspection, testing and acceptance of supplies, services and construction; and 
(3)  Ensure compliance with this Code and implementing regulations by reviewing and monitoring procurements conducted by any designee, department, agency or official delegated authority. 
(4)  Prepare and keep on file in his office specifications for all supplies, materials and equipment to be purchased by him, furnishing copies of the same to prospective bidders on request and to the agencies for which the purchases are made, and require certification from such agencies that deliveries are correct as to quality, quantity and conformance to specifications. 
(5)  Keep at all times a record of all purchases made by him and of all emergency purchases made by the agencies for which he is authorized to purchase, as well as the amount paid for each item so purchased. 
(d)  Regulations. The purchasing agent is authorized to adopt regulations, consistent with the Code, governing the procurement, management, control of any and all supplies, services and construction procured by the county. 
The regulations set out hereinafter shall govern the purchase of all supplies, materials, or equipment, and contracts for all work or labor to be done, required by any department, office, officer board, commission, or other agency of the county, payment for which is to be made from the county treasury, except the departments under the jurisdiction of the county board of education and the county board of public welfare, and public works contracts procured pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-10-1 et seq. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. I, § 2-312 and Pt. II, § 102-386. 
Sec. 102-365. - Delegation of authority by the purchasing agent. 
The purchasing agent may delegate authority to designees. 
The board of commissioners of the county or other county authority is also authorized to employ such assistants as may be necessary to maintain and carry out the functions of the county purchasing department and fix their salary. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. I, § 2-308. 
Sec. 102-366. - Centralization of purchasing authority. 
(a)  Purchasing agent. All supplies, materials and equipment shall be purchased or procured by the county purchasing agent, except those for the use of the departments under the jurisdiction of the county board of education and county board of public welfare, provided that in the event of an emergency requiring an immediate purchase involving an expenditure of less than $100.00, and does in fact present an emergency requiring immediate purchase, the county manager may, in writing, authorize the immediate purchase of the same by the county purchasing agent, without receiving written bids therefor, but before purchasing, the purchasing agent shall canvass such number of dealers an suppliers as the exigency of the situation will permit and shall make the purchase at the lowest obtainable price. 
(b)  Purchasing staff. Under the authority of the purchasing agent, the purchasing staff shall execute responsibilities at all bid openings which shall include coordination of clock calibration with the National Bureau of Standards, shall stamp all bids received and shall have any subsequent responsibilities as specified prior to and after all bid openings. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. I, § 2-313. 
Sec. 102-367. - Using agency requirements. 
(a)  Relationship with using agencies and other county agencies and departments. The purchasing agent shall maintain a close and cooperative relationship with the using agencies. The purchasing agent shall afford each using agency reasonable opportunity to participate in and make recommendations with respect to procurement matters affecting the using agency. Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, when in consultation with the using agency with respect to a procurement matter, the purchasing agent, in cooperation with the head of the using agency, shall consult and seek technical assistance, specialized knowledge and expertise from appropriate subject matter professionals or persons within the affected using agency and, if the knowledge and expertise required are not available within the using agency, then the purchasing agent shall consult and seek technical assistance, specialized knowledge and expertise from professionals or persons in other appropriate agencies and departments of the county. 
(b)  Requisitions. No expenditure for work, labor, supplies, materials or equipment under contract shall be made unless the necessity thereof be certified to by the agency for the use of which they are intended. All purchases made by the county purchasing agent shall be made only upon receipt of requisitions signed by such officers and employees of the several agencies of the county as may be designated for that purpose by the board of commissioners or other county authority. 
(1)  All using agencies, with the authorization of the head of the department under which the using agency operates, shall file with the purchasing agent detailed requisitions or estimates of the department requirements of supplies, services, construction, professional or consultant services in such manner and at such times and for future periods as the purchasing agent shall prescribe in writing and as follows: 
a.  Unforeseen requirements. A using agency may file with the purchasing agent at any time a requisition or estimate for any supplies, services, construction, professional or consultant services or real property, the need for which was not foreseen or anticipated when the estimates were filed under this subsection; and 
b.  Revisory power of purchasing agent. The purchasing agent shall examine each requisition or estimate and shall have the authority to revise it as to quantity, quality or estimated cost, provided that the needs of the using agency are met and revisions as to quality and quantity shall be made in accordance with standards and specifications established pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Estimates. All using agencies shall prepare an independent cost estimate for each project. The purchasing agent shall utilize the independent cost estimates for the evaluation of cost proposals and to assist the department of purchasing and contract compliance and evaluation committee in determining if proposals/bids are reasonably priced. 
(d)  Procurement forecast. All using agencies shall file with the purchasing agent, within 30 days after the adoption of the annual budget and quarterly thereafter, a procurement forecast of their needs for the procurement of services, supplies, construction, professional or consultant services for the ensuing fiscal year or calendar quarter. The purchasing agent shall utilize such forecasts for the scheduling of work activities and of procurements to be made by the department of purchasing and contract compliance. 
(e)  List of authorized signatures. Every head of a using agency shall provide the purchasing agent annually with a list of signatures of persons in the using agency who are authorized to sign requisitions on behalf of the using agency. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. II, § 102-388. 
Sec. 102-368. - Purchasing agent—bond. 
Said county purchasing agent shall for himself and his assistants give a blanket bond in the sum of $25,000.00, payable to the board of commissioners or other county authority, conditioned upon the faithful performance by said official and his assistants of all duties devolved upon them under this article and for the faithful accounting to such county authority for all goods, supplies and money that may come into their hands in their official capacities and to indemnify and save such county authority harmless for and on account of all of their acts in said positions, said bond to be given by said official before entering upon the discharge of his duties and maintained by said official during his entire term, and to be approved by said county authority and filed in the office of said county authority. The premium on said bond shall be paid out of the county treasury. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. I, § 2-309. 
Sec. 102-369. - Authority of county manager. 
No supplies, materials, or equipment shall be purchased, except by the authority of the county manager, nor shall any work or labor be engaged to be done except by authority of the county manager. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. II, § 102-387. 
Sec. 102-370. - Periodic reporting to board of commissioners. 
(a)  The purchasing agent shall submit to the board of commissioners, reports required on a monthly or quarterly basis the following information: 
(1)  All change orders or contract modifications authorized by the county manager pursuant to Board Policy 800-6, the dollar amount, and the reason; 
(2)  All cooperative purchasing; 
(3)  Contract compliance reports; 
(4)  First source jobs; and 
(5)  Other reports that are requested by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
DIVISION 3. - SOURCE SELECTION AND CONTRACT FORMATION 

Sec. 102-371. - No contact provision. 
(a)  Statement of policy. It shall be the policy of Fulton County that the evaluation and award process for county contracts shall be free from both actual and perceived impropriety, and that contacts between potential vendors and county officials and staff regarding pending awards of county contracts shall be prohibited, except as authorized herein, and that awards of county contracts to vendors other than vendors recommended by county staff should be temporarily held by the board of commissioners, and that such awards shall be supported by either a written report or an oral explanation of the award on the official minutes. 
(b)  Applicability. This policy shall apply to all Fulton County employees, officers, elected officials, and agencies. This policy shall apply to all county contracts to be awarded following the solicitation of bids, requests for proposals, or the solicitation of competitive sealed proposals, issued on or after March 1, 2006. 
(c)  Procedure. 
(1)  The purchasing agent, in conjunction with the user department, shall ensure that every solicitation of bids, request for proposals, and solicitation for competitive sealed proposals, issued on or after March 1, 2006, shall contain instructions stating substantially the following: 
a.  No person, firm, or business entity, however situated or composed, obtaining a copy of or responding to this solicitation, shall initiate or continue any verbal or written communication regarding this solicitation with any county officer, elected official, employee, or designated county representative, between the date of the issuance of this solicitation and the date of the county manager's recommendation to the board of commissioners for award of the subject contract, except as may otherwise be specifically authorized and permitted by the terms and conditions of this solicitation. 
b.  All verbal and written communications initiated by such person, firm, or entity regarding this solicitation, if same are authorized and permitted by the terms and conditions of this solicitation, shall be directed to the purchasing agent. 
c.  Any violation of this prohibition of the initiation or continuation of verbal or written communications with county officers, elected officials, employees, or designated county representatives, shall result in a written finding by the purchasing agent that the submitted bid or proposal of the person, firm, or entity in violation is not responsive, and same shall not be considered for award. 
(2)  Between the date of the issuance of any solicitation of bids or proposals for county contracts and the date of the county manager's recommendation to the board of commissioners for award of the subject contract, no county officer, elected official, employee, or designated county representative, except in the course of carrying out obligations as a member of or designated adviser to a vendor selection committee acting in accordance with the terms and conditions of the solicitation, shall initiate or continue any verbal or written communications regarding the solicitation with any person, firm or business entity, however situated or composed, or any such representative of same, who the officer, elected official, employee, or representative knows or should have known has obtained a copy of the solicitation and either has submitted or may submit a bid or proposal; provided, further, except for members of or designated advisers to a vendor selection committee, no county officer, elected official, employee (including staff members of elected officials), or designated county representative shall contact any member of 1) such a vendor selection committee; 2) the relevant user department; or 3) the county manager's office regarding a pending solicitation between the date of the issuance of the solicitation and the date of the county manager's recommendation to the board of commissioners for award of the subject contract, and all inquiries during this period regarding the solicitation shall be directed to the purchasing agent. 
(3)  In order to help ensure compliance with the terms of this policy, within two business days following the issuance of each solicitation of bids or proposals, the purchasing agent shall notify each member of the board of commissioners, the county manager, the head of each involved user department, and each then known county representative involved in the solicitation or expected to be involved in the solicitation review process, in writing, of the date of the issuance of the solicitation, the subject matter of the solicitation, and the due date for bids or proposals in response to the solicitation. 
(4)  Nothing contained in this policy shall be construed to prohibit any communication regarding any matter other than pending solicitations of bids or proposals and pending contract awards otherwise specifically covered herein. 
(5)  Except in cases where there is an emergency need as determined by four affirmative votes of the board of commissioners, whenever the board of commissioners fails to award a contract to the lowest responsible bidder, following a recommendation by the purchasing agent, and whenever, except in such cases of an emergency, the board of commissioners fails to award a contract to the vendor recommended by the vendor selection committee, following the solicitation of competitive sealed proposals, and there is an approved motion to award the contract to a person, firm, or entity other than the person, firm, or entity recommended by county staff, the decision to award the contract shall not be final until the award is also approved at the next following meeting of the board, at which time the board's decision to award the contract to a person, firm, or entity other than as recommended by county staff, shall result in a written report, to be prepared by each commissioner voting for the award, in conjunction with the county attorney, which report shall describe the basis of the award with reference to the terms and conditions of the solicitation or, in the alternative to such a written report, each commissioner voting for the award may immediately following the vote state publicly on the official minutes the basis for such commissioner's vote. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-371.5. - Employment of law firms with suits pending against county. 
The policy prohibiting Fulton County from employing law firms who have suits pending against the county is modified so that this prohibition is no longer applicable where the lawsuit filed against the county involves a zoning matter with no claims for damages of any kind, including attorneys' fees. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-372. - Methods of source selection. 
(a)  Competitive sealed bidding; 
(b)  Competitive sealed proposals; 
(c)  Competitive selection procedures for professional and consultant services; 
(d)  Qualification-based procedures; 
(e)  Prequalification of offerors (request for qualifications); 
(f)  Request for quotation; 
(g)  Small purchases; 
(h)  Award without competition (sole source); 
(i)  Emergency procurement; 
(j)  Renewal of annual licensing, maintenance and support agreements for intellectual property; and 
(k)  Disposition of county-owned real property. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-373. - Competitive sealed bidding. 
(a)  Conditions for use. 
(1)  If the several parts of the work or labor to be done or the supplies, materials and equipment to be furnished shall together or in part involve the expenditure of more than $50,000.00, such work or labor or supplies, materials, or equipment shall be procured only by contract on public letting founded on sealed bids under such regulations as shall be made by the board of commissioners or other county authority. 
(2)  Time permits the solicitation, submission and evaluation of sealed bids. 
(3)  The award will be made on the basis of price and other price-related factors. 
(4)  It is not necessary to conduct discussions with the responding offerors about their bids. 
(5)  There is a reasonable expectation of receiving more than one sealed bid. 
(6)  The terms of such contracts, subject to such regulations and in conformity with law, shall be settled by the county attorney as an act of preliminary specification to a proposal for bids. The purchasing agent and the board of commissioners may reject all bids if it shall deem it in the interest of the county so to do; if not, it shall, without other consent or approval, award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder 
(7)  Such bids shall not be accepted after the time limit stated in the proposal for bids and shall not be opened except in the presence of the purchasing agent, or the designee thereof, and the head of the agency requesting the items. Tie bids shall be decided by the agency letting the contract. 
(8)  Whenever a contract is awarded to another than the lowest bidder, the agency awarding the same shall file in its office and with said county authority a statement in detail of the reasons therefor. 
(b)  Public notice. 
(1)  General notice. An advertisement inviting bids shall be posted on an internet website of Fulton County, or a website designated by Fulton County for such purpose and clearly indicated for that purpose. In addition, the department of purchasing and contract compliance shall place an advertisement inviting bids in the county's legal organ and in any other medium. The public notice shall contain a general description of the supplies, services, construction or professional and consultant services to be procured and shall state the location of where appropriate solicitation documents may be obtained and the time and place of opening the documents. 
(2)  Additional notice in unusual or special circumstances. 
a.  Notice in trade or industry publications. When required supplies, services or construction are, in the determination of the purchasing agent in consultation with the using agency, either unusual in nature or highly specialized, the purchasing agent shall cause an advertisement to be placed in at least one trade journal or such other specialized industry publication of circulation in the county, whichever is appropriate and most likely to bring responses from qualified and available offerors. The advertisement shall be published once and at least 14 days preceding the date set for receipt of bids. The provisions of this subsection concerning unusual or special circumstances shall be used in addition to, and not in lieu of, the provisions of this section. 
b.  Assistance of using agency. The purchasing agent may rely upon the subject matter expertise and the assistance of personnel of the using agency who shall, prior to competitive solicitation, make a prompt written determination of the appropriate trade journal or specialized industry publication where the advertisement is to be placed. The written determination by the using agency shall be made sufficiently in advance such that notice and advertisement can be timely placed by the purchasing agent in the next available issue of a journal or industry publication, which will be published at least 30 days preceding the date set for receipt of bids. The using agency shall provide the necessary funds from its budget for the costs and expenses associated with advertisement in trade journals or such other industry publications. 
c.  Contents of notice. Notice of bid security, if required, shall be included in the public notice or the trade journal, or such other industry publication. The public notice shall contain a general description of the supplies, services or construction to be procured and shall state the date and location where solicitation documents may be obtained, and the time and place of opening of the bids. 
(c)  Receipt of competitive sealed bids. All bids must be delivered to and received by the purchasing agent or designated department of purchasing staff at the bid opening and stamped no later than 11:00 a.m. Eastern Time. 
(d)  Clock calibration. Prior to all bid openings, the purchasing agent or designated department of purchasing staff shall coordinate the clock calibration used in the bid process with the National Bureau of Standards. 
(e)  Bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The name of each offeror, the amount of each bid and such other relevant information as the purchasing agent deems appropriate shall be recorded. 
(f)  Bid acceptance. Bids shall be received by the purchasing agent or designated department of purchasing staff without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this article, provided that the bids are delivered to the purchasing agent at the time, place and under the conditions contained in the invitation for bids. 
(g)  Bid evaluation. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids and this Code. Those criteria, including but not limited to discounts, transportation costs and total or life-cycle costs, that will affect the bid and price and be considered in the evaluation for the award shall be objectively measurable. The invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. 
(h)  Correction or withdrawal of bids. 
(1)  Before bid opening, correction or withdrawal of bids may be allowed by the purchasing agent before the scheduled time and date of bid opening. The offeror may withdraw the bid, without revealing the amount of the bid, by submitting a new sealed bid or providing written notice of withdrawal before bid opening. Notice of withdrawal shall be received by the purchasing agent prior to bid opening. 
(2)  After bid opening, corrections in bids shall be permitted only to the extent that the offeror can show by clear and convincing evidence that a mistake of a nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and the bid price actually intended. After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interests of the county or fair competition shall be permitted. 
(3)  The purchasing agent may also exercise all rights a bidder may have to correct its bid provided in this section and may communicate with any bidder concerning the correction or withdrawal of its bid. 
(4)  Withdrawal. In lieu of bid correction, a low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid if: 
a.  The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document, but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or 
b.  The bidder submits evidence that clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made. 
All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids shall be supported by a written determination made by the purchasing agent. 
(i)  Tie bids. Whenever goods or services of any kind or description are to be obtained through an invitation for bids, for the purpose of making an award to the lowest responsible bidder where two or more bidders have submitted the lowest bid with each of said bids being otherwise equal with respect to cost, but only one such bidder has a business location within Fulton County, then the recommendation for award shall be in favor of the bidder having a business location within Fulton County. 
(j)  Award. In awarding any contract or determining the lowest responsible bidder for the purpose of awarding a contract, the agency awarding the contract may consider the vendor or bidder's quality of work, general reputation in the community, financial responsibility, previous experience in sales to the public, compliance with a small business enterprise program as adopted by the governing authority of the county or making a good faith effort to comply with the goals of such a program, and compliance with nondiscrimination and equal employment opportunity provisions as adopted by the governing authority of the county. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13; Res. No. 16-0864, 10-5-16) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. I, §§ 2-314 and 2-316. 
Sec. 102-374. - Competitive sealed proposals. 
(a)  Conditions for use. This method of solicitation shall be used when the use of competitive sealed bidding is not practicable under the circumstances or is not in the best interests of the and the following conditions apply: 
(1)  Price is not the determining evaluating factor; 
(2)  Discussions with offerors is required; 
(3)  Offerors are required to provide methods and approaches to perform the Specification of Statement of Work; 
(4)  Agency desires to conduct interviews with offerors; and 
(5)  "Best value" award is anticipated. 
(b)  Request for proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposal. 
(c)  Public notice. Adequate public notice of the request for proposal shall be given in the same manner as provided for competitive sealed bidding. 
(d)  Receipt of proposals. Proposals shall be opened in the same manner as competitive sealed bids, provided that there is no disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. A register of proposals received shall be prepared and made available for public inspection in the purchasing department. 
(e)  Selection. As provided in the request for proposal and under policies and procedures to be developed by the county, discussions may be conducted by the purchasing agent, in conjunction with the user department, with reasonable offerors who submit proposals determined by the purchasing agent, and written recommendation of the user department, to be reasonably qualified for being selected for award; such discussions shall be for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of and responsiveness to the solicitation requirements. Vendors who make offers, hereinafter referred to as offerors, shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals; and such revisions may be permitted after submission and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. The selection criteria may include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Relevant project experience demonstrating competence and capability to perform the services involved in the solicitation; 
(2)  Past performance of previous contracts with respect to time of completion and quality of services; 
(3)  Qualifications and experience of key personnel; 
(4)  Availability of key personnel; 
(5)  Technical/project approach, the quality and effectiveness of the proposed approach to accomplish the tasks identified in the scope of work; 
(6)  The fee or compensation demanded for the services; 
(7)  The ability to comply with the schedule for the performance of the services, as required by the county; 
(8)  Local preference; and 
(9)  Service disabled veterans preference. 
(f)  Evaluation. Section 102-380 shall govern the evaluation process and to the extent not in conflict with applicable state law, shall govern the size and composition of all vendor selection committees established for the evaluation of competitive sealed proposals obtained for goods and services of all kinds, including, without being limited to, design, construction, and operation services and contracts. 
(g)  Discussion with responsible offerors and revisions to proposals. Discussions may be conducted with responsible and responsive offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for any purpose in the best interests of the county, including the purpose of clarification to ensure full understanding of and responsiveness to the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals, and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining the best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. 
(h)  Award. The award shall be made by the board of commissioners to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined, upon written recommendation by the county manager, the purchasing agent and the user department, to be in the best interest of the county, taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposal. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. The contract file shall contain the name and complete identification of the successful offeror and the basis, in writing, upon which the award is made. 
(1)  When proposals are received from offerors pursuant to this section or when bids are received from bidders pursuant to section 102-373 of this article are unreasonable or unacceptable as to terms and conditions, or when the lowest responsible bid and offer exceeds available funds and it is determined in writing by the county manager and the purchasing agent, upon recommendations by the user department, that time or circumstances will not permit the delay required to resolicit competitive sealed bids and competitive sealed proposals, a contract may be negotiated and awarded by the board of commissioners pursuant to this section, provided that each responsible bidder or offeror who submitted a response to the original solicitation is notified of the determination and is given a reasonable opportunity to negotiate. The negotiated price shall be lower than the lowest responsible rejected bid and offer of any responsible bidder and offeror under the original solicitation, provided that the board of commissioners may reject all bids or proposals if it shall deem it in the best interest of the county to do so. 
(2)  Within five days of the award of the contract, the purchasing agent shall publish the name of the successful bidder or offeror on public display in a conspicuous place in the purchasing department so that it may be easily seen by the public. The public notice shall also show the price or amount for which the contract was let; the work, labor or service to be done; or the supplies, materials, or equipment to be furnished under the contract. All the information required to be placed on public display in a conspicuous place in the purchasing department shall also be recorded in a permanent book to be kept by the county in the purchasing department. Such permanent record shall also contain information recording the names of persons whose bids or offers were rejected. Such records shall always be subject to public inspection upon written notice to the purchasing agent and subject to a reasonable response period by the county. 
(3)  After contracts have been awarded, the purchasing agent shall certify to various user departments and agencies of the county government the sources of the work, labor, or service to be done or the supplies, materials, or equipment to be furnished by the contract. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. I, § 2-320. 
Sec. 102-375. - Competitive selection procedures for professional and consultant services. 
(a)  Conditions for use. This method of solicitation shall be used when the use of competitive sealed bidding is not practicable under the circumstances or is not in the best interests of the county and the following conditions apply: 
(1)  Price is not the determining evaluating factor; 
(2)  Discussions with offerors is required; 
(3)  Offerors are required to provide methods and approaches to perform the Specification of Statement of Work; 
(4)  Agency desires to conduct interviews with offerors; and 
(5)  "Best value" award is anticipated. 
(b)  Request for proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposal. 
(c)  Public notice. Adequate public notice of the request for proposal shall be given in the same manner as provided for competitive sealed bidding. 
(d)  Receipt of proposals. Proposals shall be opened in the same manner as competitive sealed bids, provided that there is no disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. A register of proposals received shall be prepared and made available for public inspection in the purchasing department. 
(e)  Selection. As provided in the request for proposal and under policies and procedures to be developed by the county, discussions may be conducted by the purchasing agent, in conjunction with the user department, with reasonable offerors who submit proposals determined by the purchasing agent, and written recommendation of the user department, to be reasonably qualified for being selected for award; such discussions shall be for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of and responsiveness to the solicitation requirements. Vendors who make offers, hereinafter referred to as offerors, shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals; and such revisions may be permitted after submission and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. The selection criteria may include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Relevant project experience demonstrating competence and capability to perform the services involved in the solicitation; 
(2)  Past performance of previous contracts with respect to time of completion and quality of services; 
(3)  Qualifications and experience of key personnel; 
(4)  Availability of key personnel; 
(5)  Technical/project approach, the quality and effectiveness of the proposed approach to accomplish the tasks identified in the scope of work; 
(6)  The fee or compensation demanded for the services; 
(7)  The ability to comply with the schedule for the performance of the services, as required by the county; 
(8)  Local preference; 
(9)  Service disabled veterans preference. 
(f)  Evaluation. Section 102-380 shall govern the evaluation process and to the extent not in conflict with applicable state law, shall govern the size and composition of the evaluation committees established for the evaluation of competitive sealed proposals obtained for goods and services of all kinds, including, without being limited to, design, construction, and operation services and contracts. 
(g)  Negotiations and award. The purchasing agent shall negotiate a contract with the most responsible and responsive short-listed offeror that the purchasing agent determines in writing to be fair and reasonable to the county. In making this decision, the purchasing agent shall take into account the estimated value, the scope, the complexity and the professional nature of the services to be rendered. Should the purchasing agent be unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with the offeror considered to be the most responsible and responsive at a price for the purchasing agent determines to be fair and reasonable to the county, negotiations with that offeror shall be terminated. The purchasing agent shall then undertake negotiations with the second most responsible and responsive short-listed offeror. If negotiations with the second most responsible and responsive short-listed offeror are unsuccessful, negotiations shall be terminated and the purchasing agent shall then undertake negotiations with the third most responsible and responsive short-listed offeror. Should the purchasing agent be unable to negotiate a contract with any of the short-listed offerors, the purchasing agent and the using agency may select from the additional offerors that were not short-listed in order of their responsibility and responsiveness and the purchasing agent may continue negotiations in accordance with this section until an agreement is reached. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. II, § 102-354. 
Sec. 102-376. - Qualification based selection procedures for architectural and engineering services for federally funded projects. 
(a)  Conditions for use. Fulton County shall use the competitive negotiation method for the procurement of engineering and design related services when Federal-Aid Highway Project (FAHP) funds are involved in the contract (as specified in 23 U.S.C. 112(b)(2)(A)). The solicitation, evaluation, ranking, selection, and negotiation shall comply with the qualifications-based selection procurement procedures for architectural and engineering services codified under 40 U.S.C. 1101-1104, commonly referred to as the Brooks Act. Engineering and design related services are defined in 23 U.S.C. § 112(b)(2)(A) and 23 CFR § 172.3 to include program management, construction management, feasibility studies, preliminary engineering, design engineering, surveying, mapping, or other related services. These other services may include professional engineering related services, or incidental services that may be performed by a professional engineer, or individuals working under their direction, who may logically or justifiably perform these services. In accordance with the requirements of the Brooks Act, the following procedures shall apply to the competitive negotiation procurement method: 
(b)  Pre-qualification of consultants. Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) requires consultants to be prequalified pursuant to GDOT Standard Specifications, Construction of Transportation Systems Section 102.01, Pre-Qualification of bidders. The county will verify that consultants responding to solicitations are pre-qualified. 
(c)  Qualification statements. Qualification statements shall be solicited through a request for proposals. 
(d)  Request for proposals. The request for proposals (RFP) shall provide all information and requirements necessary for interested consultants [proposers] to provide a response to the RFP and compete for the solicited services. The RFP shall: 
(1)  Provide a clear, accurate, and detailed description of the scope of work, technical requirements, and qualifications of consultants necessary for the services to be rendered. The scope of work should detail the purpose and description of the project, services to be performed, deliverables to be provided, estimated schedule for performance of the work, and applicable standards, specifications, and policies; 
(2)  Identify the requirements for any discussions that may be conducted with three or more of the most highly qualified consultants following submission and evaluation of proposals; 
(3)  Identify evaluation factors including their relative weight of importance in accordance with subparagraph (h)(1) of this code section; 
(4)  Specify the contract type and method(s) of payment to be utilized; 
(5)  Identify any special provisions or contract requirements associated with the solicited services; 
(6)  Require that submission of any requested cost proposals or elements of cost be in a concealed format and separate from technical/qualifications proposals as these shall not be considered in the evaluation, ranking, and selection phase; 
(7)  Provide a schedule of key dates for the procurement process and establish a submittal deadline for responses to the RFP which provides sufficient time for interested consultants to receive notice, prepare, and submit a proposal, which except in unusual circumstances shall be not less than 30 days from the date of issuance of the RFP; 
(8)  Prevent, identify, and mitigate conflicts of interest for employees of the county and the consultant in accordance with 23 CFR 1.33; and 
(9)  Require consultants to verifying suspension and debarment actions and eligibility of consultants. 
(e)  Public notice. Adequate public notice of the request for proposal shall be given in the same manner as provided for in competitive sealed bidding. The solicitation process shall be by public announcement, public advertisement, or any other public forum or method that assures qualified in-state and out-of-state consultants are given a fair opportunity to be considered for award of the contract. 
(f)  Solicitation. The procurement procedures may involve a single step process with issuance of a RFP to all interested consultants or a multiphase process with issuance of a request for qualifications (RFQ) whereby responding consultants are ranked based on qualifications and request for proposals are then provided to three or more of the most highly qualified consultant. Regardless of any process utilized for prequalification of consultants or for an initial assessment of a consultant's qualifications under an RFQ, an RFP specific to the project, task, or service is required for evaluation of a consultant's specific technical approach and qualifications. 
(g)  Receipt of proposals. Proposals shall be opened in the same manner as competitive sealed bids, provided that there is no disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. A register of proposals received shall be prepared and made available for public inspection in the purchasing department. 
(h)  Evaluation. Section 102-380 shall govern the evaluation process and to the extent not in conflict with applicable federal law, shall govern the size and composition of all evaluation committees established for the evaluation of qualification based proposals obtained for federally assisted architectural and engineering services and related services. The evaluation committee must evaluate the proposals in accordance with the evaluation criteria established and cited within the advertised solicitation document. 
(1)  Criteria used for evaluation, ranking, and selection of consultants to perform engineering and design related services must assess the demonstrated competence and qualifications for the type of professional services solicited. These qualifications-based factors may include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Relevant project/work experience demonstrating competence and capability to perform the services described in the solicitation; 
ii.  Past performance of previous contracts with respect to time of completion and quality of services; 
iii.  Qualifications and experience of key personnel; staff capabilities; specialized expertise; professional licensure; 
iv.  Workload capacity, technical/project approach, the quality and effectiveness of the proposed approach to accomplish the tasks identified in the scope of work (e.g., project understanding, innovative concepts or alternatives, quality control procedures); 
v.  The ability to comply with the schedule for the performance of the services, as required by the county; 
vi.  Project management techniques. 
(2)  Price shall not be used as a factor in the evaluation, ranking, and selection phase. All price or cost related items which include, but are not limited to, cost proposals, direct salaries/wage rates, indirect cost rates, and other direct costs are prohibited from being used as evaluation criteria. 
(3)  In-state or local preference shall not be used as a factor in the evaluation, ranking, and selection phase. State licensing laws are not preempted by this provision and professional licensure within a jurisdiction may be established as a requirement which attests to the minimum qualifications and competence of a consultant to perform the solicited services. 
(4)  While the contract will be with the prime consultant, proposal evaluations shall consider the qualifications of the prime consultant and any sub-consultants identified within the proposal with respect to the scope of work and established criteria. 
(5)  From the proposal evaluation and any subsequent discussions which have been conducted, the county shall rank, in order of preference, at least three consultants determined most highly qualified to perform the solicited services based on the established and published criteria. 
(6)  Notification must be provided to responding consultants of the final ranking of the three most highly qualified consultants. 
(7)  The county shall retain acceptable documentation of the solicitation, proposal, evaluation, and selection of the consultant. 
(i)  Selection. Following submission and evaluation of proposals as provided in the request for proposal and under policies and procedures developed by the county, oral interviews or discussions may be conducted by the purchasing agent, in conjunction with the user department, with at least three of the most highly qualified consultants. Such oral interviews or discussions shall be for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of the technical approach, qualifications, and capabilities provided in the response to the RFP and responsiveness to the solicitation requirements. Discussions may be written, by telephone, video conference, or by oral presentation/interview. Discussions following proposal submission are not required provided proposals contain sufficient information for evaluation of technical approach and qualifications to perform the specific project, task, or service with respect to established criteria. 
In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. 
(j)  Negotiations and award. Offerors must be ranked and selected without regard to cost. Cost will be negotiated with the most highly qualified consultant. The purchasing agent shall negotiate a contract for architectural and engineering services with the most highly qualified offeror at compensation that the purchasing agent determines in writing to be fair and reasonable to the county. In making this decision, the purchasing agent shall take into account the scope, complexity, professional nature and estimated value of the services to be rendered. 
(1)  Independent cost estimate. Prior to receipt or review of the most highly qualified consultant's cost proposal, the county shall prepare a detailed independent cost estimate establishing elements of contract costs, accepting indirect cost rate(s) for application to contracts, and assuring consultant compliance with federal cost principles. The independent cost estimate shall serve as the basis for negotiation and ensuring the consultant services are obtained at a fair and reasonable cost. 
(2)  Order of negotiation. The purchasing agent shall attempt to negotiate a contract, as provided in subsection (a) with the most highly qualified offeror. If the purchasing agent is unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with the offeror considered to be the most highly qualified offeror at a price the purchasing agent determines to be fair and reasonable to the county, the purchasing agent shall formally terminate negotiations with that offeror and then undertake negotiations with the next most qualified of the selected firms, continuing the process until an agreement is reached. If the purchasing agent is unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with any of the selected firms, the purchasing agent shall select additional firms in order of their competence and qualification and continue negotiations in accordance with this section until an agreement is reached. It is expected that negotiations will be completed in a reasonable time period and provide notice that the county has complete discretion to determine when to terminate negotiations and move to the next most highly qualified offeror. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13; 15-0208, Exh. A, 3-4-15) 
Sec. 102-377. - Local preference in contracting. 
Except as may otherwise be required by applicable state or federal law, in the contracting for goods and services of all kinds and description, when such goods or services are to be obtained, whether through an invitation for bids or a request for competitive sealed proposals, local preference shall be given to businesses having a business location within the geographic boundaries of Fulton County. 
(1)  The term business location means that the business has a staffed, fixed, physical place of business located within Fulton County and has had the same for at least one year prior to the date of the business' submission of its proposal or bid, as applicable and has held a valid business license from Fulton County or a county located within Fulton County for the business at a fixed, physical, place of business, for at least one year prior to the date of the business' submission of its proposal or bid as applicable. 
(2)  Whenever goods or services of any kind or description are to be obtained through the solicitation of competitive sealed proposals, local preference shall be included as an evaluation criterion to be considered by the vendor selection committee. In this regard, five percent of the total points available to each proposer shall be awarded on the basis of whether the proposer meets one of the following criteria, provide supporting documentation as required and certify under oath that it is eligible to receive the local preference points: 
a.  Business having a business location within the geographic boundaries of Fulton County. 
b.  Businesses where at least 51 percent of the owners of the business are residents of Fulton County but the business is located outside of Fulton County. 
c.  Businesses where at least 51 percent of the employees of the business are residents of Fulton County but the business is located outside of Fulton County. 
Proposers having a business location within Fulton County shall be entitled to and shall receive the local preference points provided for in this section. 
(3)  Whenever a proposal or bid is submitted by a partnership or joint venture, the local preference provided for in this section shall be awarded if the proposer or bidder, or any member of the proposer or bidder, defined as a business that is a signatory to the partnership or joint venture agreement, has a business location within Fulton County. No local preference shall be given on the basis of the business location of any other affiliated business, subcontractor, or consultant. 
(4)  In the event the affidavit or other declaration under oath is determined to be false, such business shall be deemed "nonresponsive" and shall not be considered for award of the applicable contract. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. II, § 102-358. 
Sec. 102-378. - Service disabled veterans business enterprise preference. 
(a)  Purpose. To expand and increase contracting opportunities for businesses that are owned and controlled by eligible veterans of the United States Armed Forces with service-connected disabilities and who have been honorably discharged. 
(1)  In the contracting for goods and services of all kinds and description are to be obtained through the solicitation of competitive sealed proposals (RFP), a veterans preference shall be included as an evaluation criterion to be considered by the vendor selection committee and such preference shall be given to a service disabled veteran business enterprise ("SDVBE") which is certified as such SDVBE by the office of contract compliance. 
(2)  The term "service-disabled veteran business enterprise" (SDVBE) means any business which is an independent and continuing operation for profit, performing a commercially useful function, and is 51 percent owned and controlled by one or more individuals who are disabled as a result of military service and who has been honorably discharged, designated as such by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs. 
(3)  Whenever goods or services are procured on behalf of Fulton County by the solicitation of competitive sealed proposals, and when considering two or more proposals, at least one of which is from a certified service-disabled veteran business enterprise, in awarding the contract for goods and services under this section, the evaluation committee shall give preference points to a certified service-disabled veteran business enterprise of two percent of the total points available on the technical portion of such proposal. 
(4)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein, this section shall not be construed as establishing a preference in contracting with any businesses, including SDVBEs, that are not otherwise responsive and responsible offerors as provided in this Code, the Fulton County purchasing regulations, and the request for proposals or applicable solicitation of goods and services. 
(5)  Each SDVBE seeking a veterans preference under this section shall certify under oath that it is eligible to receive the veterans preference points as set forth above as part of the submission of its proposal to Fulton County and, in the event that the affidavit or other declaration under oath is determined to be false, such business shall be deemed nonresponsive and shall not be considered for award of the applicable contract. 
(b)  The purchasing agent, in conjunction with the county manager, shall compile and maintain data concerning the underutilization and availability of SDVBEs in Fulton County and shall recommend to the board of commissioners such other and further amendments to this Code, policies, and procedures which may be necessary to implement the certification procedure for SDVBEs contemplated herein. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. II, § 102-361. 
Sec. 102-379. - Review of financial responsibility for request for proposals. 
(a)  Purpose. To establish procedures to determine the responsibility of a prospective proposer. 
(b)  Policy. It is the policy of the county to determine a firm's financial responsibility in order to determine the firm's capability to successfully perform the work. 
(c)  Procedure. The department of purchasing and contract compliance RFP solicitation documents shall include that the following documentation shall be required in request for proposals for submittal in order for the department of finance to complete its financial review: 
(1)  Provide financial statements for the last three years, including income statements, balance sheets, and any changes in financial position. 
(2)  Proposer's most recent Dun and Bradstreet, value line reports or other credit ratings/report. 
(3)  Identify any evidence of access to a line of credit or letter of credit. 
(d)  Evaluation. The department of purchasing and contract compliance and the department of finance shall conduct a financial evaluation as part of the financial responsibility determination for the proposer who submitted the best responsive proposal using the following criteria: 
(1)  Have adequate financial resources to perform the contract, or the ability to obtain them; 
(2)  Be able to comply with the required or proposed delivery or performance schedule, taking into consideration all existing commercial and governmental business commitments; 
(3)  Have a satisfactory performance record. A prospective contractor shall not be determined responsible or nonresponsible solely on the basis of a lack of relevant performance history; 
(4)  Have a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics; 
(5)  Have the necessary organization, experience, accounting and operational controls, and technical skills, or the ability to obtain them (including, as appropriate, such elements as production control procedures, property control systems, quality assurance measures, and safety programs applicable to materials to be produced or services to be performed by the prospective contractor or subcontractor); 
(6)  Have the necessary production, construction, and technical equipment and facilities, or the ability to obtain them; and 
(7)  Be otherwise qualified and eligible to receive an award under applicable laws and regulations. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-380. - Evaluation committee. 
(a)  Authority. This section, to the extent not in conflict with applicable state law, shall govern the size and composition of all evaluation committees established for the evaluation of competitive sealed proposals obtained for goods and services of all kinds, including, without being limited to, design, construction, and operation services and contracts and federal assisted qualification based proposals for architectural and engineering services. 
(b)  Evaluation committee guidelines. The evaluation committee (EC) has the authority to review and evaluate proposers' technical responses in response to a specific request for proposals (RFP). 
(c)  General guidelines. 
(1)  Identifying evaluation committee members. Members of the EC should have professional interest and expertise to evaluate proposals and make recommendations that could lead to the selection of one or more suppliers. The EC shall be comprised of three staff assigned by purchasing, from the user department(s); if necessary, two additional technical staff from multiple departments or use of outside experts; one nonvoting member from the finance department who shall assist purchasing with the determination of financial responsibility and analyzing of cost proposals; the purchasing staff member of the solicitation shall serve on the EC as an ex-officio member and will facilitate all evaluation and negotiation meetings. He/she may not score proposers' responses. 
(2)  EC member participation form. Prior to beginning the evaluation process, the purchasing staff member will send a confidentiality agreement to the individual EC members and each member shall return an executed copy. 
(3)  Initial review of suppliers' responses. After the official closing of the solicitation, the purchasing staff member will review received responses for compliance with the submittal criteria and content requirements and make a recommendation to the purchasing agent as to the responsiveness of the response. 
(4)  Submitting responses to the EC. The EC members who have executed the confidentiality agreement will be provided with all proposers' responses that passed the administrative review as well as the appropriate evaluation forms to capture scoring. The EC must comply with the scoring guidelines identified below. 
(5)  Independent and individual review. Each EC member will individually and independently review each proposer's response. The EC member must assign a written assessment to each question. In addition, the EC member must include a written comment justifying any assessment other than "adequate." During the initial review, the EC member should note any clarification questions the EC member suggests asking the proposer. After completing the initial evaluation, the EC member will submit the evaluation documentation and any identified clarification questions to the purchasing staff member. 
(6)  Scoring rating system. Each question's score will be multiplied by its assigned weight to obtain the applicable score for that proposer's response to the question. The following rating system applies: 

 
(7)  Convening EC committee meetings. After the purchasing staff member has consolidated each individual EC member's scores into the master evaluation spreadsheet, he/she will schedule a meeting for all EC members to meet and discuss initial scores. The EC members will discuss the individual scores and, as a result of the discussion, each member may adjust the member's individual scoring up or down as appropriate. There is no requirement that all EC members reach agreement on the score for a particular question/requirement. In the event the EC members do not reach agreement on a score for a particular question/requirement, the purchasing staff member will average the individual scores to determine the proposer's score for that particular question/requirement. 
(8)  Analyzing cost proposals. For RFPs, the purchasing staff and Finance staff members will analyze the cost proposals independently, but may perform the analysis concurrently with the EC's evaluation of the proposers' technical responses. These staff will not disclose the cost proposals or the cost analysis to the EC until after the technical proposals have been scored. The EC may elect to conduct oral interviews/presentations or request additional material prior to receiving the cost proposals and cost analysis. 
(9)  Overall scores preceding negotiations. Each proposer meeting all mandatory requirements will receive a total combined score by adding the proposer's technical score to the proposer's cost score. 
(10)  Convening a negotiation team. If the EC elects to initiate negotiations, then a negotiation team (NT) will convene. The Purchasing staff member must follow the guidelines found in the RFP. 
(11)  Capturing negotiation results and award recommendation. If the county elects to negotiate with identified proposers, the proposer will each be asked to submit a proposal revision following each round of negotiations, which proposal revision will then augment the original RFP submission. Each proposal revision will be evaluated and rescored by the EC utilizing the same evaluation criteria. 
(12)  Maintaining agency records. All evaluation/negotiation documents/forms completed by each evaluator and by the EC and NT will be collected by the purchasing staff member and become part of the official records and subject to the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. II, § 102-360. 
Sec. 102-381. - Prequalification of offerors (request for qualifications). 
(a)  Conditions for use. Under this article, the purchasing agent, in consultation with the using agency may determine that it is in the best interests of the county to prequalify offerors for particular types of supplies, services, construction and professional and consultant services. Prequalification standards may be imposed by the purchasing agent that must be met by any offeror in order to qualify to respond to an invitation for bids or a request for proposals. Offerors shall be required to submit information to the purchasing agent to allow a determination of whether an offeror has met such prequalification standards. When prequalification is required, only those offerors who submit the required prequalification information and who are actually prequalified to submit a bid or proposal for a particular solicitation shall be allowed to submit bids or proposals. 
(b)  Public notice. Public notice of prequalification shall be given in the same manner as provided in Sections 102-373 and 102-374. 
(c)  Receipt of proposals. Proposals shall be opened in the same manner as competitive sealed bids, provided that there is no disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. A register of proposals received shall be prepared and made available for public inspection in the purchasing department. 
(d)  Procedures for prequalifying offerors. The purchasing agent and using agency for which the solicitation is being performed shall review all information submitted by offerors, and, if necessary, additional information may be required. If the purchasing agent, in consultation with the using agency and any other affected county agency, determines that the offeror meets all of the prequalification standards established under this article, the purchasing agent shall prequalify the offeror as qualified to submit a bid or proposal for the particular solicitation for which the prequalification was performed. The offeror shall be notified in writing of prequalification. 
(e)  Failure to prequalify. If an offeror is found not to meet the prequalification standards established under this article, a written determination setting forth the basis for such finding shall be prepared by the purchasing agent and delivered to the offeror. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-382. - Request for quotation. 
(a)  General procedures. If the several parts of the work or labor to be done or the supplies, material, and equipment to be furnished shall together or in part involve an expenditure of more than $2,499.99 but less than $50,000.00, the same may be procured on order awarded to the lowest responsible bidder upon written bids submitted without public advertisement, under such regulation as shall be made by the county authority. 
(b)  Public notice. 
(1)  General notice. An advertisement inviting quotations shall be posted on an internet website of Fulton County, or a website designated by Fulton County for such purpose and clearly indicated for that purpose. The public notice shall contain a general description of the supplies and/or services and the date and time the quotation must be submitted. 
(c)  Receipt of quotations. All quotations must be received electronically by the purchasing agent or designated department of purchasing staff no later than 2:00 p.m. Eastern Time. 
(d)  Quotation acceptance. Quotations shall be received by the purchasing agent or designated department of purchasing staff without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this article, provided that the quotations are submitted in accordance with the conditions contained in the request for quotation. 
(e)  Quotation evaluation. Quotations shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the request for quotation and the county's Code of Ordinances. Those criteria, including but not limited to discounts, transportation costs that will affect the bid and price and shall be considered in the evaluation of the award. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. I, § 2-315. 
Sec. 102-383. - Small purchases. 
(a)  General procedures. Purchases of $2,499.99 or less may be made without competition. All work or labor solicitations, or solicitations for supplies, materials, or equipment to be let shall be made available for public review in the county purchasing office. 
(b)  Authority of using agency . Heads of all county departments may, in their discretion, make small purchases without the assistance of the purchasing director under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where the purchase does not exceed $2,499.99 and is purchased pursuant to purchasing card policies and allocated to the department under a duly enacted appropriation; and 
(2)  Where the purchase does not exceed $2,499.99 and is paid for by a requisition either by purchase order or payment voucher from funds previously allocated to such department. 
(c)  Limitations on small purchases made by county departments. When small purchases are made by heads of county departments pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the following requirements shall be met: 
(1)  Purchases shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Issuance and use of county purchasing cards and credit cards. The county's purchasing card and credit card can be used for purchases where the purchase does not exceed $2,499.99 and is designed to enable authorized, county employees, appointed officials and elected officials to make purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and services for county business use. 
[(1)]  Intent and scope. This section is intended to comply with the policy requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24 regarding the use of county-issued government purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(2)  Definitions. 
a.  "Authorized elected official" means an elected official designated by the board of commissioners to receive a county issued government purchasing card or credit card. 
b.  "Card administrator" means the purchasing card and credit card administrator designated by the board of commissioners or as provided in the county's Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual. 
c.  "County" means county and/or the board of commissioners. 
d.  "County purchasing card," "county p-card" or "county credit card" means a financial transaction card issued by any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, used by a county official to purchase gods, services and other things of value on behalf of the county. 
e.  "Financial transaction card" means an instrument or device as the term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30(5). 
f.  "User agreement" means the required agreement between the board of commissioners and the authorized elected officials which restricts the use of a county purchasing card or credit card. The purchasing cardholder agreement provided in the Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual shall be used by constitutional officers, non-elected county employees and appointed officials. 
(3)  Designated elected officials. The Fulton County Board of Commissioners ("county"), in its discretion, may, from time-to-time authorize specific county elected officials to use a county purchasing card or credit card by adoption of a resolution in a public meeting. No authorized elected official may use a county purchasing card or credit card until and unless he or she has executed the county's purchasing card and credit card user agreement. The county will not make payments to any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, for amounts charged by an elected official to any purchasing cards or credit cards that are not issued pursuant to this section or the county's Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual or for any purchases that are not authorized by this section. 
(4)  Card administrator. Duties of the card administrator may be delegated to persons identified in the county's Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual. The responsibilities of the card administrator may include: 
a.  Manage county issued purchasing cards and credit cards. 
b.  Serve as the main point of contact for all county purchasing card and credit card issues. 
c.  Serve as liaison to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff, as well as to the issuer of the purchasing card or credit card. 
d.  Provide training on card policies and procedures to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff, along with county employees authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card. 
e.  Develop internal procedures to ensure timely payment of cards. 
f.  Assist authorized elected officials and authorized county employees to dispute transactions when necessary. 
g.  Establish internal procedures to ensure compliance with this section. County procurement laws, rules, regulations and policies, county purchasing card and credit card user agreements, applicable agreements with the business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, issuing card, and state law, specifically, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-9-37 and 36-80-24. 
h.  Document internal controls, audits and other measures to prevent and detect misuse or abuse of the cards. 
i.  Audit and reconcile transactions monthly. 
j.  Maintain records for at least seven years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. 
k.  Comply with all other requirements set forth in the county's Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual not in conflict with these provisions. 
(5)  County Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual. Procedures for the use of county purchasing cards and credit cards by elected officials and county employees shall be set forth in the county's Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual, which shall be created, administered and maintained by the Fulton County Purchasing Department and are incorporated herein by references as if set forth in this section. The county's Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual shall at all times include procedures for the use of purchasing cards and/ or credit cards by county elected officials, Constitutional officers, appointed officials and county employees. The Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual may be revised from time-to-time by the county purchasing agent, without board of commissioners' approval, to ensure compliance with state laws (i.e., O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24) and Fulton County laws, rules and regulations. 
(6)  Use of cards. 
a.  Authorized purchases. County purchasing cards and credit cards may be used to purchase goods and services directly related to the public duties of the authorized elected official, constitutional officer, appointed official and county employee as set forth in the county's Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual. All purchases are subject to the terms of this section, the user agreement, county procurement rules, laws, regulations, policies and ordinances, and the adopted budget. Only authorized elected officials, constitutional officer, appointed official or authorized county employees (as provided for in the Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual) may use a county purchasing card or credit card for purchases or payments. The cards, and use of the cards, are not transferrable to others, except as may be authorized by the Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual. The authorized elected official, constitutional officer, appointed official and authorized county employee shall use care to ensure that others do not have access to the card account number, expiration date and security code. Unless otherwise approved by the governing authority the transaction limits shall be $2,499.99 for each transaction. 
b.  Unauthorized purchases. County purchasing cards and credit cards shall not be used for goods and services not directly related to the official responsibilities of the authorized elected official, constitutional officer, appointed official or county employee. Additionally, cards shall not be used to avoid compliance with the county's purchasing regulations and procedures, to purchase goods and services that are not approved in the county's budget or budget for a user department, to purchase goods and services exceeding the per transaction or per month limit, if any, or to make purchases not in compliance with the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement and the county's Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual. Said procedures shall be further detailed in the County Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual. 
c.  Receipts and documentation. Receipts, invoices and other supporting documentation of all purchases made with a county purchasing card or credit card shall be obtained and maintained by the authorized county elected official, constitutional officer, appointed official or user department for five years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. If an original or duplicate cannot be produced, a sworn affidavit of the authorized elected official may be substituted. The documentation must include the supplier or merchant information (i.e., name and location), quantity, description, unit price, total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to show that the expense was in the performance of official county duties. Said procedures shall be further detailed in the County Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual. 
d.  Public records. All receipts and other documentation of purchases are public records and subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(7)  Review of purchases and audit. Proper documentation of purchases, internal controls and other measures prevent and allow detection of misuse or abuse of county issued purchase cards and credit cards. Authorized elected officials and staff, along with authorized constitutional officers, appointed officials and county employees that process payments under this program shall cooperate and comply with the procedures established by the county's Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual. 
a.  Review of purchases. All purchases shall be reviewed according to the procedures set forth in the county's Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual. 
b.  Audits. The card administrator, under procedures set forth in the county's Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual shall perform an annual review of the card program to ensure adequacy of internal policies and procedures, cardholder spending limits, monthly reconciliation procedures and documentation for transactions. Elected officials and staff. Constitutional officers, appointed officials and employees shall cooperate with such review. 
(8)  Violations. 
a.  An elected official, appointed official or constitutional officer shall reimburse the county for any purchases made with a county issued purchasing card or credit card in violation of this section or the user agreement. In the discretion of the county governing authority, failure to comply with the procedures outlined in this section may result in: (i) a warning; (ii) suspension of the elected official's authority to use a county purchasing card or credit card; or (iii) revocation of the elected official's, appointer officer's or constitutional officer's authority to use a county purchasing card or credit card. 
b.  County employees are subject to disciplinary action under the county's personnel regulations as provided in the county's Purchasing Card and Credit Card Manual. 
c.  Nothing in this section shall preclude the county governing authority from referring misuse of a purchasing card or credit card for prosecution to the appropriate authorities. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13; 15-1171, Exh. 1, 12-16-15) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. I, § 2-315. 
Sec. 102-384. - Award without competition. 
(a)  Statement of policy. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a contract may be awarded by the board of commissioners without competition when the county manager and the purchasing agent determine, in writing, upon recommendation of the user department and after the purchasing agent conducts a good faith review of available sources, that there is only one source for the required work, labor, or service to be done or the supplies, materials, or equipment to be furnished. 
(b)  Conditions for use. The following categories are permitted as basis for conditions allowing award of contracts without competition: 
(1)  When required in order to comply with, or avoid voiding of or penalties under, licenses and warranties held by the county; 
(2)  Expert services, acquiring the services of an expert or neutral person for any anticipated litigation or dispute; 
(3)  The existence of limited rights in data, patent rights, copyrights, or secret processes; or similar circumstances, make the supplies and services available from only one source; 
(4)  When necessary to maintain compatibility with existing equipment or systems, only specified makes and models of technical equipment, software, and parts will satisfy the county's needs for additional units or replacement items, and only one source is available; 
(5)  Authorized or required by statute, a statute expressly authorizes or requires that the acquisition be made through another agency or from a specified source; 
(6)  Supplies may be deemed to be available only from the original source in the case of a follow-on contract for the continued development or production of a major system or high-specialized equipment, including major components; 
(7)  A governmental agency is the only provider of the service and/or services; 
(8)  When a review of the market demonstrates that the work, services, or materials sought by the county are so unique that only one vendor can satisfy the county's requirements; 
(9)  When acquiring utility services; or 
(10)  When acquiring legal services. 
(c)  All intended sole source acquisitions shall be advertised on the county's bid board/internet for a minimum of five business days. The advertisement must include the following: 
(1)  A brief description of the supplies and/or services; 
(2)  The identity of the sole source supplier; 
(3)  A copy of the completed sole source justification form; and 
(4)  Instructions to the vendors how to submit any offers to perform the sole source determination. 
(d)  Negotiations. The purchasing agent, in conjunction with the user department, shall conduct negotiations based upon written documentation and estimates provided in writing by the user department as to quality, price, delivery and terms of performance. A contract shall be written based upon the negotiated terms and conditions. 
(e)  Recordkeeping. A record of all sole source procurement shall be maintained as a public record for a minimum of three years and shall list each contractor's name; the amount and type of each contract; a listing of the work, labor, or service to be done or the supplies, materials or equipment to be furnished under each contract; and the identification number of each contract file. A separate record of sole source procurement shall be maintained as a public record for each fiscal year. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. I, § 2-319. 
Sec. 102-385. - Emergency procurement. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the purchasing agent, upon written recommendation by the user department and approval by the county manager, may make emergency procurement of work, labor or service to be done or the supplies, materials or equipment to be furnished when there exists a threat to public health, welfare or safety; provided, however, that such emergency procurement shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis of the emergency and rationale for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. As soon as possible in such circumstances, a record of each such emergency procurement shall be made and shall set forth the contractor's name, the amount of payment and type of contract, a list of work, labor, or service to be done or the supplies, materials or equipment to be furnished under the contract, and the identification number of the contract file; and such information shall be forwarded to the board of commissioners for ratification and be made a part of the minutes of the next scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. I, § 2-321. 
Sec. 102-386. - Renewal of annual licensing, maintenance and support agreements for intellectual property. 
(a)  Conditions of use. When the county has competitively procured the original acquisition of intellectual property and said property requires annual licensing, maintenance and support. 
(1)  Statement of policy. It is the policy of Fulton County Government to respect all copyrights, patents, trademarks and trade secrets and to adhere to the terms and conditions of any license to which Fulton County is a party. Moreover, it is the policy of the county government to ensure that all resources are managed in a transparent and cost-effective manner and in accordance with applicable laws. 
(2)  Costs. Therefore, the costs associated with annual licensing, maintenance and support for intellectual property shall be approved by the board of commissioners (BOC) as part of the annual budget process. Further, annual licensing, maintenance and support agreements that have been previously awarded by the BOC through a competitive procurement process will not require additional BOC approval so long as the terms and conditions of the agreements have not materially changed and the cost of the associated support and maintenance services have been approved as part of the annual budget process. 
(3)  Applicability. This policy applies to all county agencies, departments and offices acquiring intellectual property. 
(4)  Definitions. For the purpose of this policy, the terms used herein shall be defined as follows: 
a.  Annual maintenance and support agreement provides for the technical assistance and materials related to the use, repair and/or maintenance of equipment and facilities associated with intellectual property, typically includes access to the manufacturer's technical support, the correction of defects or errors/bugs (e.g. software patches, etc.), and future releases of and updates to purchased intellectual property. 
b.  Intellectual property means intangible creations of human intelligence expressed or translated into tangible forms such as patented inventions, copyrightable works, trademarks or trade secrets, which are assigned certain property rights protected under federal and state law. 
c.  License agreement means language that is commonly part of the contract and states that the terms of usage as permitted by the copyright owner for the specific product for which it pertains. The price of the intellectual property covers the legal acquisition of the software license and binds the purchaser to use the intellectual property only according to the terms and conditions stated in the license agreement. 
d.  Licensee means the user of the intellectual property rights, or the entity to which a license is granted. 
e.  Licensor means the owner of the intellectual property rights, of the one with legal rights to grant a license for use. 
f.  Useful life means the details of a product's useful life, which includes anticipated duration/term of use and total cost of ownership over the term. 
g.  Service level agreement (SLA) means language that is commonly part of the contract and states the level of service/support to be provided by the licensor. The SLA documents a common understanding between the licensor and licensee about services, priorities, responsibilities, guarantees, and warranties. 
(b)  Requirements for original acquisition and ongoing use of intellectual property. 
(1)  Definition of business need. The department seeking to acquire intellectual property should clearly define the business need for the product and the expected return on investment. Pursuant to county policy 600-61, any software and/or hardware installations must be approved by the department of information technology in order to minimize costs and potential risk to the existing technology environment. The department should also work with the county's Budget Division to identify funding and with the department of purchasing and contract compliance to procure the intellectual property using the appropriate competitive process according to this Code. 
(2)  Approval of original contract award. board of commissioners approval shall be required at the time of the original contract award when acquiring intellectual property, in accordance with this Code. The department acquiring the intellectual property (licensee) must disclose in the body of the agenda report the terms of the license agreement for the intellectual property in question; the anticipated useful life of the intellectual property; and the anticipated annual cost for maintaining the intellectual property over its useful life cycle. Additionally, the contract and all related agreements must be attached to the agenda report at the time of approval. 
(3)  Annual Budget Approval Process. Once the board of commissioners has approved a contract award for the acquisition of intellectual property, satisfaction of the related maintenance and support and/or license agreements shall be approved through the annual budget process. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Board Policy 800-14. 
Sec. 102-387. - Disposition of county-owned real property. 
(a)  Conditions for use. Guidelines for the identification and disposition of county-owned real property that is deemed no longer needed for county purposes. 
(b)  Statement of policy. It is the policy of the board of commissioners that county-owned real property shall be identified for sale, transfer, or other disposition in accordance with Georgia law. Also, unless otherwise provided by law, the sale or disposition of all interests in county-owned real property shall be to the highest responsible bidder by competitive sealed bidding, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-9-3, as amended. The abandonment, substitution, disposal or leasing of county-owned real property no longer needed for public road purposes shall be in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 32-7-1 et seq. 
(c)  Applicability. This policy will apply, upon adoption, to all Fulton County departments and agencies, contractors, and to the staffs of elected officials. 
(d)  Process for sale of county-owned real property by competitive sealed bids. 
(1)  General procedures. The land administrator shall, with the assistance of the purchasing agent, prepare all documentation for a sale by competitive sealed bid. A sale by sealed bid package shall be prepared in a manner as prescribed by the purchasing agent. 
(2)  Invitation to bid. An invitation for sealed bids shall be issued and shall include a legal description of the real property and all terms and conditions applicable to the sale. The invitation to bid shall include the following mandatory terms: 
a.  The property is being sold "as is" "where is" and "with all faults" to be transferred by a quit claim deed only; 
b.  All closing costs shall be borne by the bidder at closing; and 
c.  The county reserves the right to reject any and all bids. 
(3)  The county shall schedule no less than one date for the public to inspect the property. Such inspection shall be conducted by the land division after legal advertisements have been run, but shall occur at least five days before the bide opening date and time. 
(4)  Engagement of real estate brokerage. At the discretion of the land administrator, provision may be made for the engagement of one or more licensed real estate broker(s) to market and assist in the sale of the property. The land administrator may, in order to stimulate interest and encourage the protection of the interests of both buyer and seller, require any and all potential buyers to be represented by a licensed real estate broker or agent. 
(5)  The procedures specified herein, shall not bar contact with the land administrator, and employees, contractors or agents of the land division with respect to disposition of county owned surplus real estate. 
(6)  Public notice. An advertisement inviting bids shall be published at least once a week for two consecutive weeks in the official legal organ of the county or in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the county, not less than 15 nor more than 60 days prior to the last day for receipt of bids. Such advertisement shall give a legal description of the property, its dimensions, its location and any conditions of the sale or restrictions for use. The advertisement shall also contain an invitation for bids and shall state the conditions of the proposed sale, the address at which bid blanks and other written materials connected with the proposed sale may be obtained, and the date, time, and place for the opening of bids. Notice shall also include the posting of a sign on the property in a size appropriate to give a ready, willing and able buyer adequate notice and which shall contain general information of the sale. The purchasing department shall cause the notice of invitation to bid, including the official appraisal, to be published on their website for downloading by interested bidders. If the property to be disposed of is property previously used for public roads purposes pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 32-7-1 et seq., then the additional notice requirements of O.C.G.A. § 32-7-4 shall be complied with. 
(7)  Bid opening, acceptance and evaluation. Bids shall be opened publicly by the purchasing agent. The name of each bidder, the amount of each bid and other such relevant information as the purchasing agent and/or land administrator deems appropriate shall be recorded. The record and each bid shall be open to public inspection for a period not less than 60 days from the date such bids are opened. Copies and/or a list of all responsible bids shall be provided to the land administrator by the purchasing agent for review and recommendation of an award. The land administrator shall determine the responsiveness of each bid, which shall be evaluated in relation to the fair market value set by the appraisal. The land administrator is empowered to deem responsive any bid that is at least 85 percent of the appraised value. 
(8)  Withdrawal of bids. Except as provided in this subdivision, bids shall become irrevocable once received and opened by the county. 
(9)  Award. The award shall be made by the land administrator to the highest responsible bidder in accordance with the provisions of the sale by sealed bid as approved by the board of commissioners under this policy. The highest responsible bidder will be informed of his/her acceptable bid by written notification of award provided that the price offered by such bidder is acceptable to the land administrator based upon the fair market value of the property. The notification of the award shall include a purchase contract to be executed by the selected bidder and returned in accordance with the provisions set forth in the invitation to bid. All bids may be rejected if they are deemed in the judgment of the land administrator with the concurrence of the county manager, to be nonresponsive to the invitation to bid. 
(10)  Closing. The land administrator, using an approved contract attorney, shall be responsible for the preparation of the quit claim deed and closing statement, which shall be subject to review by the county attorney. The land administrator is responsible for all coordination and scheduling relating to the closing. Good funds shall be collected from the successful bidder in the form of cash, cashiers check or bank issued check. Upon closing of the transaction, the land administrator shall distribute all closing documents and cause the deed to be recorded and notify the finance department in writing and tender any net proceeds for deposit. Upon the close of the sale the land administrator shall make the adjustments to the real property inventory and assets listing of the county and circulate a notice of disposition to all appropriate departments. Upon recording of the deed by the county, the original deed shall be forwarded to the purchaser. 
(11)  Net proceeds. Net proceeds from the closing shall be immediately delivered to the finance department for deposit into the appropriate fund account. 
(12)  County's rights upon failure of successful bidder to close transaction. In accordance with the terms set forth in the invitation for sale bids under this subdivision, the county shall, as may be necessary, pursue its rights upon the failure of the successful bidder to close a transaction concerning the sale, conveyance or exchange of real property owned by the county. When the deed conveying the real property offered for sale by the county has been executed by the chairman of the board of commissioners and is ready for delivery, the successful bidder shall be notified by registered or certified mail of where delivery of the deed shall be accepted. If for any reason the successful bidder fails to render full payment of the consideration upon which the bid was based within 15 days after the mailing of the notice, such failure shall be construed as a refusal to pay the consideration due the county under the terms of the bid and as a refusal to accept the county's deed. If the successful bidder fails or refuses, for any reason, to close the transaction within the 15-day period, the county shall, at its option, have the right, at its option, to pursue any and all remedies available to it at law or in equity, including but not limited to the right to specific performance. If the county is successful in enforcing its right to specific performance, the county may demand that the successful bidder pay the county's reasonable attorney's fees incident thereto. 
(13)  Successful bidder's rights upon failure of the county to close the transaction. Subject to the county's rights to reject any and all bids, the county shall tender a duly executed quitclaim deed conveying the land or interest in real property offered by it for sale within 120 days after the awarding the bid to the successful bidder. Failure by the county to render such deed within the 120-day period shall entitle the successful bidder to refuse to close the transaction by giving written notice of such action to the land administrator. Upon receipt of such written notice of refusal, the county shall cancel the transaction. Neither the county nor the successful bidder shall be liable to any party in any respect as a result of such refusal to close the transaction under this circumstance. 
(e)  Process for sale of county-owned real property by auction. 
(1)  Selection of auctioneer. A duly qualified auctioneer shall be selected by the land administrator pursuant to a duly issued request for proposal. The scope of services and terms and conditions of the auctioneer's contract, including the amount and formula by which fees for services are determined, shall be as set forth in the RFP solicitation. The auctioneer shall be paid a commission from the gross sales proceeds and/or may be paid a "reserve' to cover up-front marketing expense. The source of funds for marketing expenses shall be identified and approved by the BOC as part of the resolution to surplus and sell the property. The auctioneer shall be responsible for preparing an auction registration package containing all prerequisites to submitting a bid at auction. 
(2)  Inspection of the property. The county shall schedule no less than one date for the public to inspect the property. Such inspection shall be conducted by the land division after legal advertisements have been run, but shall occur at least five days before the bid opening date and time. 
(3)  Minimum bid. The fair market value, which shall be deemed to be no less than 85 percent of the value determined by appraisal conducted on behalf of Fulton County, shall constitute the minimum bid. 
(4)  Public notice. An advertisement announcing an auction shall be published at least once a week for two consecutive weeks in the official legal organ of the county or in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the county, not less than 15 days nor more than 60 days prior to the date of the auction. Such advertisement shall direct the public to the auctioneer for an announcement of the auction which shall include a legal description of the property, its dimensions, its location and any conditions of the sale or restrictions for use, the address at which written materials connected with the proposed sale may be obtained, and the date, time and place of the auction. Notice shall also include the posting of a sign on the property in a size appropriate to give a ready, willing and able buyer adequate notice and which shall contain general information of the sale. The purchasing department shall cause the notice of invitation to bid, including the official appraisal, to be published on their website for downloading by interested bidders. If the property to be disposed of is property previously used for public roads purposes pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 32-7-1 et seq., then the additional notice requirements of O.C.G.A. § 32-7-4 shall be complied with. Additional notice of the auction, may be provided by posting such notice on the website of the department of purchasing and contract compliance, but such notices shall in no event be required. 
(5)  Award. Provided that the winning bidder submitted a qualifying minimum bid, the land administrator shall notify the winner by written notification of award which shall include a purchase contract to be executed by the winning bidder and returned to the land administrator. The county shall tender a duly executed quitclaim deed conveying the land or interest in real property offered by it for sale within 120 days after tendering the notification of award. 
(6)  Closing. The closing of the sale of the property by auction shall be in compliance with the closing provisions set forth in this section. 
(7)  Net proceeds. Net proceeds from the closing shall be immediately delivered to the finance department for deposit into the appropriate fund account. 
(8)  County's rights upon failure of successful bidder to close transaction. When the deed conveying the real property offered for sale by the county has been executed by the chairman of the BOC and is ready for delivery, the successful bidder shall be notified by registered or certified mail of where delivery of the deed shall be made. If for any reason, the successful bidder fails to render full payment of the consideration upon which the bid was based within 30 days after the mailing of the notice, such failure shall be construed as a refusal to pay the consideration due the county under the terms of the bid and as a refusal to accept the county's deed. If the successful bidder fails or refuses, for any reason, to close the transaction within the 30-day period, the county shall, at its option, have the right, at its option, to pursue any and all remedies available to it at law or in equity, including but not limited to the right to specific performance. If the county is successful in enforcing its right to specific performance, the county may demand that the successful bidder pay the county's reasonable attorney's fees incident thereto. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-388. - Cancellation of invitation for bids or requests for proposals. 
An invitation for bids, a request for proposals or any other solicitation under this Code may be canceled or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part, as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is in the best interest of the county. 
The reasons therefore shall be made part of the contract file. Each solicitation issued by the county shall state that the solicitation may be canceled and that any bid or proposal may be rejected in whole or in part for good cause when in the best interest of the county. Notice of cancellation shall be sent to all businesses solicited. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-389. - Responsibility of offerors. 
(a)  Determination of responsibility. Responsibility of the offeror under this article shall be ascertained for each county solicitation based upon full disclosure to the purchasing agent at the time of the submission of a bid or proposal in accordance with the terms of the solicitation and this Code, unless the terms of such solicitation allow subsequent submittals by an offeror. 
(b)  Determination of nonresponsibility. If an offeror who otherwise would have been awarded a contract is found nonresponsible, a written determination of non-responsibility setting forth the basis of the finding shall be prepared by the purchasing agent. The unreasonable failure of an offeror to supply information in connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility may be grounds for a determination of nonresponsibility. A copy of the determination shall be sent to the nonresponsible offeror and shall inform the offeror of the right to protest under section 102-445. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-390. - Insurance. 
(a)  Generally. Under this article, the chief financial officer, shall, at least annually, determine the minimum insurance requirements of the county and evaluate current insurance policies to determine whether minimum insurance requirements continue to be met. 
(b)  Public liability insurance for contracts. The chief financial officer is authorized to establish standard ranges for limits of liability in public liability insurance coverage, as appropriate, for all contracts let by the county where work thereunder will expose the general public to the risks of bodily injury and property damage. If the chief financial officer in consultation with the risk manager determines that it is appropriate to the type of work under the contract and maximizes competition in the bidding or proposal process, lower limits of liability may be required. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-391. - Equal opportunity clause. 
(a)  Required. Unless otherwise authorized by law, all contracts and purchase orders entered into by the county shall incorporate an equal employment opportunity (EEO) clause, as set forth in this section. Compliance with this section shall be considered met when the EEO clause is set forth in an exhibit attached to the contract and appropriate language incorporating the exhibit into the contract is set forth therein. 
(b)  Notice. The EEO clause shall be included as a specification and shall appear on all invitations for bids, requests for proposals and all other solicitations, contracts and purchase orders prepared and issued by the department of purchasing and contract compliance. 
(c)  Failure to comply with the EEO clause. The county shall reject any bid or proposal and shall not enter into any contract or purchase order with any person who fails to comply with the equal employment opportunity requirements of this section. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-392. - Cost or pricing data. 
(a)  Submissions relating to award of contracts. 
(1)  Required. A prospective contractor shall submit cost or pricing data when the contract is expected to exceed $2,499.99; for all procurements and contract modifications. 
(2)  Exceptions. The submission of cost or pricing data relating to the award of a contract is not required when: 
a.  The contract price is based on adequate price competition as determined by the purchasing agent; 
b.  The contract price is set by law or regulation; or 
c.  It is determined in writing by the purchasing agent that the requirements of subsection (a)(1) of this section may be waived. 
(b)  Submissions relating to change orders or contract modifications. 
(1)  Required. A contractor shall submit cost or pricing data prior to the pricing of any change order or contract modification, including adjustments to contracts awarded by competitive sealed bidding, whether or not cost or pricing data was required in connection with the initial solicitation. 
(2)  Exceptions. The submission of cost or pricing data relating to the pricing of a change order or contract modification is not required when: 
a.  Unrelated and separately priced adjustments for which cost or pricing data would not be required are consolidated for administrative convenience; or 
b.  It is determined in writing by the purchasing agent that the requirements of subsection (b)(1) of this section may be waived and the determination states the reasons for such waiver. 
(c)  Verification required. A contractor required to submit cost or pricing data in accordance with this section shall verify that, to the best of the contractor's knowledge and belief, the cost or pricing data submitted was accurate, complete and current as of the date it was submitted. 
(d)  Price adjustment provision required. Any contract award, change order or contract modification under which the submission and verification of cost or pricing data are required shall contain a provision stating that the price to the county, including a profit or fee, shall be adjusted to exclude any costs found by the county to have been increased because the contractor furnished cost or pricing data was inaccurate, incomplete or not current as of the date it was submitted. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-393. - Cost or price analysis. 
Under this article, if a contract is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from a federal agency, a cost analysis or a price analysis, as appropriate, shall be conducted prior to award of the contract. A written record of such cost analysis or price analysis shall be made a part of the contract file. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-394. - Multiyear-term contracts. 
The department of purchasing and contract compliance is authorized to procure on behalf of all county agencies multiyear lease, purchase, or lease purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, services, and supplies. 
(1)  Conditions for use. Under this article, unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for supplies or services may be renewed if deemed to be in the best interests of the county, provided the renewal terms are included in the solicitation. The purchasing agent may recommend renewal of a contract, subject to Board of Commission approval, beyond the first term of the contract. Such contract shall be renewed if the renewal is approved by the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Determination prior to use. Prior to the utilization of a multiyear-term contract, the purchasing agent shall determine in writing that: 
a.  Estimated supply and service requirements are covered by the period of the contract and are reasonably firm and continuing; and 
b.  Such contract will serve the best interests of the county by encouraging effective competition or otherwise promoting economy in county procurement. 
(3)  Obligation of funds. The contract shall state the total obligation of the county for the calendar year of execution and shall further state the total obligation which will be incurred in each calendar year renewal term, if renewed. 
(4)  Cancellation due to unavailability of funds in succeeding fiscal periods. All multiyear-term contracts shall contain a clause stating that when funds are not appropriated to support continuation of performance in a subsequent contract period, the contract shall be canceled. 
(5)  Renewal of contract. The user department shall: 
a.  At minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of any term of a multi-term contract, the using agency shall notify the department of purchasing and contract compliance as to whether or not a renewal option will be exercised; and 
b.  Whether the renewal request requires a change in terms and conditions, vendors, or dollar amount from the original award. The user department shall provide the necessary supporting documentation and justification for such change in terms and conditions, vendors, or dollar amount from the original contract. 
c.  Submit to the purchasing agent, in writing, a contractor performance report of the performance of the contract and the agency's recommendations as to the renewal of the contract. 
(6)  Presentation of requests. The department of purchasing and contract compliance shall present all renewal requests to the board of commissioners at least 90 days prior to the contract renewal date, 60 days if the contract term is six months or less. 
(7)  Pricing analysis. The user department and the department of purchasing and contract compliance shall conduct an analysis of the proposed pricing for the renewal to ensure that prices are still fair and reasonable based on market analysis. 
(8)  Authorization. The purchasing agent, after consultation with the head of the using agency and after review of the report, shall recommend renewal of the contract if renewal is in the best interests of the county and all other requirements of this section have been met. Any renewal of a contract shall be expressly authorized by the county board of commissioners. 
(9)  Expiration of multiyear-term contracts. The contract shall terminate absolutely and without further obligation on the part of the county at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding year for which it may be renewed 
(10)  Exceptions. The following categories or types of contracts are exceptions: 
a.  Intergovernmental agreements (IGAs); 
b.  Revenue-generating contracts; 
c.  Construction contracts fully funded from capital improvement funds; 
d.  Capital funded projects; 
e.  Sole source contracts; 
f.  Professional services contracts fully funded from capital improvement funds; and 
g.  Requests for quotations. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
State Law reference— Multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13. 
Sec. 102-395. - County's right to inspect plant, place of business or worksite. 
Under this article, the county may, at reasonable times, inspect the part of the plant, place of business or worksite of a contractor or subcontractor that is pertinent to the performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by the county. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-396. - County's right to audit records. 
(a)  Audit of cost or pricing data. The county may, at reasonable times and places, audit the books and records of any person who has submitted cost or pricing data to the extent that such books, documents, papers and records are pertinent to such cost or pricing data. Any person who receives a contract, change order or contract modification for which cost or pricing data is required shall maintain such books, documents, papers and records that are pertinent to such cost or pricing data for three years from the date of final payment under the contract, unless a shorter period is authorized in writing. 
(b)  Contract audit. The county shall be entitled to audit the books and records of a contractor or subcontractor under any negotiated contract or subcontract, other than a firm fixed-price contract to the extent that such books, documents, papers and records relate to the performance of such contract or subcontract. Such books and records shall be maintained by the contractor for a period of three years from the date of final payment under the prime contract and by the subcontractor for a period of three years from the date of final payment under the subcontract, unless a shorter period is authorized in writing. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-397. - Noncollusion. 
On all competitive sealed proposals and competitive sealed bids solicited by the county through its purchasing agent, the following certificate of independent price determination shall be signed and attached to the bid or proposal. Under this article, collusion and other anticompetitive practices among offerors are prohibited by county, state and federal laws, and the county, therefore, establishes the following: 
On all competitive sealed proposals and competitive sealed bids pursuant to this article received or solicited by the county through its purchasing agent, the following certificate of independent price determination shall be signed and attached to the bid or proposal: 
(1)  Certification of independent price determination. All offerors shall identify a person having authority to sign for the offeror who shall certify, in writing, as follows: 
"I certify that this bid or proposal is made without prior understanding, agreement or connection with any corporation, firm or person submitting a bid for the same work, labor or service to be done or the supplies, materials or equipment to be furnished and is in all respects fair and without collusion or fraud. I understand collusive bidding is a violation of county, state and federal law and can result in fines, prison sentences and civil damages awards. I agree to abide by all conditions of this bid or proposal and certify that I am authorized to sign this bid or proposal for the bidder. 
Affiant further states that pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 36-91-21 (d) and (e), s(he) or it has not, by himself/herself/itself or with others, directly or indirectly, prevented or attempted to prevent competition in such bidding or proposals by any means whatsoever. Affiant further states that (s)he has not prevented or endeavored to prevent anyone from making a bid or offer on the project by any means whatever, nor has Affiant caused or induced another to withdraw a bid or offer for the work. 
Affiant further states that the said offer is bona fide, and that no one has gone to any supplier and attempted to get such person or company to furnish the materials to the bidder only, or if furnished to any other bidder, that the material shall be at a higher price." 
(2)  Reporting of anticompetitive practices. When for any reason collusion or other anticompetitive practices are suspected among any offerors, a notice from the using agency or other county department with knowledge of the relevant facts shall be transmitted to the county attorney for investigation. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
State Law reference— Competitive award requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-91-21(d), (e). 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. I, § 2-320. 
Sec. 102-398. - Prompt pay act; clause for ensuring payment. 
(a)  Required. Under this article, before final payment to a contractor is made by the county, the contractor shall certify to the county in writing, in a form satisfactory to the county, that all subcontractors, materialmen, suppliers and similar firms or persons involved in the county contract have been paid in full at the time of final payment to the contractor by the county or will be paid in full utilizing the monies constituting final payment to the contractor. 
(b)  Contract clause. Every county contract, purchase order or solicitation shall set forth the requirement in subsection (a) of this section and the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 13-11-1. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-399. - Verification of funds availability. 
(a)  Application. This section shall apply to all departments, bureaus, agencies and offices of the county. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no county official, employee or appointee shall incur any liability on behalf of the county under contracts of any kind, including but not limited to purchase orders, unless sufficient funds have been encumbered or otherwise made available for such liability. 
(b)  Verification of funds availability and encumbrances for contracts. The purchasing agent and the chief financial officer shall encumber funds for department, bureau, agency or office contracts, at the appropriate fund, account and center level, with an established dollar amount which is within the approved line item budget for such department, bureau, agency or offices, unless funds are otherwise made available. Each department, bureau, agency and office head shall be responsible for maintaining appropriate internal expenditure and order controls to ensure that the authorized contract amounts and appropriations are not exceeded. No encumbrances shall be made if funds are not available for such purposes, unless the chief financial officer deems the expenditure critical and identifies supplemental appropriations. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
DIVISION 4. - SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 102-400. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Brand name or equal specification means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers to describe the standard of quality, performance and other salient characteristics needed to meet county requirements and which provides for the submission of equivalent products. 
Brand name specification means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers. 
Specification means any description of the physical or functional characteristics or of the nature of a supply, service or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing or preparing a supply, service or construction item for delivery. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-401. - Duties of purchasing agent. 
For purposes of this division, the purchasing agent shall cause to be prepared by using agencies specifications for supplies, services and construction. The purchasing agent shall issue, revise, maintain and monitor specifications for supplies, services and construction required by the county. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-402. - Relationship with using agencies. 
Under this article, the purchasing agent shall obtain expert advice and assistance from personnel of using departments in the development of specifications and in the development of an approved list of supplies, services or construction items described by model or catalogue numbers, which, prior to competitive solicitation, the county has determined will meet the applicable specification requirements. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-403. - Maximum practicable competition. 
All specifications under this article shall be drafted so as to promote overall economy for the purposes intended and to encourage maximum free and open competition in satisfying the county's needs and shall not be unduly restrictive. The policy enunciated in this division applies to all specifications. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-404. - Brand name specification. 
(a)  Condition of use. Under this article, brand name specification may be used only when the purchasing agent makes a written determination that only the identified brand name item will satisfy the county's needs. 
(b)  Competition. The purchasing agent shall seek to identify sources from which the designated brand name item can be obtained and shall solicit such sources to achieve whatever degree of price competition is practicable. If only one source can supply the requirement, the procurement shall be made under section 102-384. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-405. - Brand name or equal specification. 
(a)  Condition of use. Under this article, brand name or equal specification may be used when the purchasing agent determines in writing that: 
(1)  No other design or performance specification or qualified products list is available; 
(2)  Time does not permit the preparation of another form of purchase description, not including a brand name specification; 
(3)  The nature of the product or the nature of the county's requirements makes use of a brand name or equal specification suitable for the procurement; or 
(4)  Use of a brand name or equal specification is in the county's best interest; provided that the purchasing agent determines that the essential characteristics of the brand name included in the specifications are commonly known in the industry or trade. Brand name or equal specifications shall include a description of the particular design, function or performance characteristics that are required. 
(b)  Designation of several brand names. Brand name or equal specifications shall seek to designate three or as many different brands as are practicable, as or equal references, to list the salient characteristics whenever brand names are used and shall further state that substantially equivalent products to those designated will be considered for award. 
(c)  Nonrestrictive use of brand name or equal specifications. When a brand name or equal specification is used in a solicitation, the solicitation shall contain explanatory language that the use of a brand name is for the purpose of describing the standard of quality, performance and characteristics desired and is not intended to limit or restrict competition. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
DIVISION 5. - PROCUREMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITIES AND SERVICES 

Sec. 102-406. - Applicability. 
Public works construction projects costing more than $100,000.00 must be procured pursuant to the Georgia Local Government Public Works Construction Law, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-91-1 through 36-91-95. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-407. - Definitions. 
(a)  Architect-Engineer and land surveying services means: 
(1)  Professional services of an architectural or engineering nature, as defined by state law, if applicable, which are required to be performed or approved by a person licensed, registered, or certified to provide such services; 
(2)  Those professional services within in the scope of the practice of architecture, professional engineering, land surveying, landscape architecture and interior design pertaining to construction, as defined by the laws of the state; 
(3)  Professional services of an architectural or engineering nature performed by contract that are associated with research, planning, development, design, construction, alteration, or repair of real property; and 
(4)  Such other professional services of an architectural or engineering nature, or incidental services, which members of the architectural and engineering professions (and individuals in their employ) may logically or justifiably perform, including: studies, investigations, surveying, mapping, tests, evaluations, consultations, comprehensive planning, program management, conceptual designs, plans and specifications, value engineering, construction phase services, soils engineering, drawing reviews, preparation of operating and maintenance manuals, and other related services. 
(b)  Public works construction means the building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing of any public structure or building or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property other than those projects covered by Chapter 4 of Title 32. Such term does not include the routine operation, routine repair, or maintenance of existing structures, buildings, or real property (O.C.G.A. § 36-91-2(10)). 
(c)  Design-bid-build means a project delivery method in which the county sequentially awards separate contracts, the first for architectural and engineering services to develop the project scope and design. The second contract when the design phase has been completed, the county solicits bids from prospective general contractors for the construction of the project according to the design. 
(d)  Design-build means a project delivery method in which the county enters into a single contract with one entity responsible for both design and construction services. 
(e)  Design-build-operate mean a project delivery method in which the county enters into a single contract with one entity responsible for the design, construction and operation of a facility. 
(f)  Program/project management means a project delivery method in which the county enters into a contract(s) for professional management services above and beyond normal architectural services and serves as an extension of the county's staff and acts on the county's behalf during all phases of the program/project. 
(g)  Construction management means a project delivery method in which the county enters into a contract(s) for construction management services regarding constructability, cost, planning and coordination of a construction project. 
(h)  Construction management at-risk means a project delivery method in which the county, and enters into a contract(s) for construction management services in which the construction manager assumes financial risks and liabilities placing the manger "at-risk." The construction manager can serve as the general contractor and provide input regarding the design, constructability, coordination and planning during the design phase. 
(i)  Fast track construction means a project delivery method in which the county utilizes a process that normally refers to the overlapping of the design and construction phases of a project. It allows construction to begin as soon as the plans for the first phase of the project are completed. While the selected contractor is constructing the project's initial phase, subsequent phases are being designed, and the remaining contract documents are being prepared. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-408. - Contracting for infrastructure facilities and services; project delivery methods authorized. 
(a)  Governmental entities are authorized to utilize any construction delivery method, provided that all public works construction contracts subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-91 that: 
(1)  Place the bidder or offeror at risk for construction; and 
(2)  Require labor or building materials in the execution of the contract shall be awarded on the basis of competitive sealed bidding or competitive sealed proposals. 
(b)  The following project delivery methods are authorized for procurements relating to construction, services: 
(1)  Design-bid-build or traditional bid; 
(2)  Construction management at risk; 
(3)  Design-build; 
(4)  Design-build-operate; and 
(5)  Fast track construction. 
(c)  The following project delivery methods are authorized for procurements relating to architect-engineer and land surveying services: 
(1)  Design; 
(2)  Architectural and engineering; 
(3)  Program/project management; 
(4)  Construction management; 
(5)  Construction management at risk; 
(6)  Operations and maintenance; 
(7)  Design-build; and 
(8)  Design-build-operate. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-409. - Responsibility for selection of methods of construction related services. 
Under this article, the using agency, at the time the construction project is being developed, shall provide the purchasing agent and the county's department charged with monitoring capital projects with information for the scheduling of the project and, if necessary, for the method of selection of architect-engineer and land surveying services, construction services and construction management of the project. In determining which method to use for the selection of architect-engineering and land surveying services, construction services and construction management, the purchasing agent shall consider the county's requirements, its resources and the potential contractor's capabilities. The methods chosen shall be those which are most advantageous to the county and which will result in the most timely, economical and successful completion of the construction project. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-410. - Public notice. 
Such notice shall be posted conspicuously in the governing authority's office and shall be advertised in the legal organ of the county or by electronic means on an Internet website of the governmental entity or an Internet website identified by the governmental entity. Contract opportunities shall be advertised a minimum of two times, with the first advertisement occurring at least four weeks prior to the opening of the sealed bids or proposals. The second advertisement shall follow no earlier than two weeks from the first advertisement. Plans and specifications shall be available on the first day of the advertisement and shall be open to inspection by the public. The advertisement shall include such details and specifications as will enable the public to know the extent and character of the work to be done. All required notices of advertisement shall also advise of any mandatory prequalification requirements or pre-bid conferences as well as any federal requirements pursuant to subsection (d) of O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-411. - Issuance of addenda. 
No governmental entity shall issue or cause to be issued any addenda modifying plans and specifications within a period of 72 hours prior to the advertised time for the opening bids or proposals, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. However, if the necessity arises to issue an addendum modifying plans and specifications within the 72-hour period prior to the advertised time for the opening of bids or proposals, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, then the opening of bids or proposals shall be extended at least 72 hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, form the date of the original bid or proposal opening without need to re-advertise. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-412. - Bonds, insurance, guarantees. 
(a)  Bid security for construction contracts. 
(1)  Required. Under this article, bid security shall be required for all competitive sealed bidding for construction contracts when the price is estimated by the purchasing agent to exceed $100,000.00. Bid security shall be a bond provided by a surety company authorized to do business in the state by the Georgia Insurance Commissioner or shall be the equivalent in cash or a certified check or shall be otherwise supplied in a form satisfactory to the county. Nothing in this subsection prevents the requirement of such bonds on construction contracts under $100,000.00 when the circumstances warrant. 
(2)  Amount. Bid security shall be in an amount equal to at least five percent of the amount of the bid. Unsuccessful offerors shall be entitled to the return of the bid security. Upon failure of a successful offeror to enter into a contract within ten days after the county tenders the proposed contract, the offeror shall forfeit the bid security. 
(3)  Rejection of bids for noncompliance. When the invitation for bids requires security, the bid shall be rejected if the purchasing agent determines that it fails to comply in a substantial manner with the security requirements. 
(4)  Withdrawal of bids. After the bids are opened, they shall be irrevocable for the period specified in the invitation for bids. If an offeror is permitted to withdraw a bid before award, no action shall be had against the offeror or bid security. 
(b)  Contract performance and payment bonds for construction contracts. 
(1)  Required amounts. When a construction contract is awarded in excess of $100,000.00, the following bonds or security shall be delivered to the county and shall become binding on the parties upon the execution of the contract. 
a.  A performance bond satisfactory to the county, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state by the Georgia Insurance Commissioner or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the county, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract; and 
b.  A payment bond satisfactory to the county, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state by the Georgia Insurance Commissioner or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the county, for the protection of all persons supplying labor and material to the contractor or subcontractors for the performance of the work provided for in the contract, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract. 
(2)  Reduction or waiver of bond. The purchasing agent in consultation with the chief financial officer is authorized to reduce or waive performance and payment bonds for contracts for $100,000.00 or less, when a written determination is made that it is in the best interests of the county to do so. Nothing in this subsection prevents the requirement of such bonds on construction contracts for $100,000.00 or less when the purchasing agent determines that the circumstances warrant. 
(3)  Authority to require additional bonds. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the purchasing agent to require other security in addition to those bonds or in circumstances other than those specified herein. 
(4)  Right to institute suit on payment bond; jurisdiction and time limits for suits upon payment bonds. The right to institute suit and jurisdiction and time limits for suits upon payment bonds provided under this section will be governed by the provisions of O.C.G.A. Title 13, Chapter 10, Article 1, P. 4. 
(5)  Retention. 
a.  Maximum amount withheld. In any contract for construction which provides for progress payments in installments based upon an estimated percentage of completion with a percentage of the contracts proceeds to be retained by the county pending completion of the contract, the retained amount of each progress payment or installment shall be no more than ten percent. 
b.  Release of retained funds. Funds held by the county as retainage under the contract shall be released to the contractor as specified in the contract. 
(c)  Bond forms and copies. 
(1)  Forms. The form of payment and performance bonds under this division shall be required by the purchasing agent, in consultation with the county attorney. The purchasing agent shall designate the bond forms to be used for a particular contract. 
(2)  Copies. Any person may request and obtain from the county a copy of the bond form upon payment of the cost of reproduction and postage. 
(d)  Errors and omissions insurance. Regulations shall be promulgated that specify when the purchasing agent shall require offerors to provide appropriate errors and omissions insurance to cover architectural and engineering services under the project delivery methods. 
(e)  Other forms of security. 
(1)  Bid bond. In lieu of a bid bond, the county may accept a cashier's check, certified check or cash deposit in an amount equal to at least five percent of the total contract amount. 
(2)  Payment bond. In lieu of a payment bond, the county may accept, in its discretion, a cashier' s check, certified check, or cash in an amount not less than the total amount payable by the terms of the contract. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
State Law reference— Projects requiring bid bonds; revocation of bids; surety, O.C.G.A. § 36-91-50; requirement of performance bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-91-70; requirement for payment bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-91-90. 
Sec. 102-413. - Wage requirements for construction contracts. 
(a)  Generally. Under this article, unless otherwise required proposals, bids, and contracts involving Fulton County shall hereafter contain the following provision or words of similar import: Each contractor shall agree that in the performance of the contract he will comply with lawful agreements, if any, which the contractor had made with any association, union, or other entity, with respect to wages, salaries, and working conditions, so as not to cause inconvenience, picketing, or work stoppage. 
(b)  Federally funded projects. If federally assisted, when a construction project exceeds the sum of $2,000.00, the prevailing wages paid shall correspond as nearly as practicable to the prevailing wages required in the federal Davis Bacon Act. Such scale of wages to be paid shall be posted by the contractor in a prominent and easily accessible place at the site of work. 
(c)  Statement in invitation for bids. As applicable, the purchasing agent shall include a statement of the general requirements of this section in each invitation for bids. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-414. - Approval of public works construction contracts. 
(a)  All public works construction contracts subject to the requirements of the Georgia Local Government Public Works Construction Law entered into by a governmental entity with private persons or entities shall be in writing, on file, and available for public inspection at a place designated by such governmental entity. Municipalities and consolidated governments shall execute and enter into contracts in the manner provided in applicable local legislation or ordinance. 
(b)  All contracts for counties must be in writing and approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
State Law reference— Contracts to be in writing and entered on minutes, O.C.G.A. § 36-10-1; public works construction contracts made in writing, O.C.G.A. § 36-91-20(a); inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. 50-18-70 et seq. 
Sec. 102-415. - Operation and maintenance of water treatment systems by private entities. 
(a)  General. The county is authorized pursuant to state law, in the discretion of its governing authority, to enter into valid and binding leases and contracts with private persons, firms, associations, or corporations for any period of time not to exceed 20 years to provide for the operation and maintenance of all or portion of its wastewater treatment system, storm-water system, water system, or sewer system, or any combination of such systems, which leases and contracts may include provisions for the design, construction, repair, reconditioning, replacement, maintenance, and operation of the system, or any combination of such services and functions. 
(b)  Definition. Applicant means any individual, firm, association, or corporation submitting a proposal on such leases or contracts. 
(c)  Delivery method. Prior to entering into a lease or contract pursuant to this Code section, the governing authority shall solicit competitive sealed proposals. 
(d)  Evaluation. The governing authority shall first establish criteria for evaluation of any applicants submitting proposals on such leases or contracts for the purpose of assisting the governing authority in making a review of such applicants' previous performance on projects of comparable magnitude, the environmental compliance record of such applicants, and any relevant civil or criminal penalties incurred by such applicant during the five years immediately preceding the execution of the lease or contract. All information required by the county pursuant to this Code section shall be provided by the applicant under oath. 
(e)  Award. The award of a lease or contract pursuant to this Code section shall be made to the responsible and responsive applicant, whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the county, taking into consideration the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
State Law reference— Operation and maintenance of water treatment systems by private entities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-15.1. 
Sec. 102-416. - Contract administration. 
(a)  Applicability. This article applies to all nonconstruction (e.g. professional services) and construction contracts. 
(b)  General. Under this article, the purchasing agent shall establish the standards for a contract administration system designed to ensure that a contractor is performing in accordance with the solicitation under which the contract is awarded and the terms and conditions of the contract. Such system shall require the inclusion of receiving reports from all appropriate agencies in the contract file. 
(c)  User agency responsibilities. The goal of contract administration is to ensure that the contract is performed by the contractor and that the responsibilities of both parties are performed in accordance with the contract. It is the responsibility of the user agency to designate agency staff as the contract administrator to oversee, monitor, and provide technical guidance to contractors performing under a contract. The designee shall responsible for managing the contract after award. All direction to the contractor must be within the scope of the contract. 
(d)  Functions of the contract administrator. After the award of any contract, the user agency shall designate agency staff to assume the role of contract administrator and will ensure that both the county and the contractor/vendor are in compliance with all terms and conditions of the contract. Other responsibilities and duties include: 
(1)  To review all work that has been or is being performed by the contractor; to confirm that the work being performed is in accordance with the specifications and the provisions of the contract; to monitor the progress of the contract and perform inspections/site visits; and to address any performance deficiencies. 
(2)  In accordance with the contract the contract administrator is responsible for acceptance of the work product or services being provided; if changes need to be made to the contract in the form of modifications, terminations or claims disposition, the contract administrator manages this process; to document all actions taken regarding the contract and then maintain the original documentation concerning such actions in the official contract file; responsible for reviewing and approving invoices submitted by the contractor and for monitoring their payment for timeliness and accuracy. 
(3)  Recommends renewal(s) of the contract until the contract expires or is terminated; completes quarterly contract performance reports; and, at the end of the process, it is the responsibility of the contract administrator to close out the contract file. 
(4)  Subsequent to the execution of the contract the using agency shall initiate and coordinate the preconstruction/work conference with the department of purchasing and contract compliance, and thereafter issue a notice to proceed to the contractor with copies to the department of purchasing and contract compliance and the department of finance/accounts payable manager. 
(e)  Purchasing responsibility to remedy a breach. In cases where the user agency is unable to rectify a breach of contract with a contractor/vendor, the matter shall be turned over to the purchasing director, along with all documentation for resolution. Resolution may include, but not limited to, cancellation of the contract; suspension or debarment or other legal action if deemed appropriate by the county attorney. 
(f)  Evaluation of contractor/vendor performance. The user agency shall monitor and review the performance of contractors/vendors that provide goods and services to the county. Regular performance appraisals shall be documented once every calendar quarter, or once every 60 days where the total contract period is six months or less. This shall not take the place of, but shall be in addition to the mandatory contract performance report currently required by the department of purchasing and contract compliance at the end of each contract. The contract administrator is responsible for ensuring that the performance of contractors/vendors is recorded on the contractor performance report and submitted into the department of purchasing and contract compliance centralized database. 
(g)  Contract closeout. The purpose of the closeout process is to verify that both parties to the contract have fulfilled their contractual obligations and that there are no responsibilities remaining. A contract is completed when all goods and services have been received and accepted; all reports have been delivered and accepted; all administrative actions have been accomplished; all county furnished equipment and material has been returned; and final payment has been made to the contractor. The contract administrator has the following responsibilities and duties: 
(1)  Determine that the contractor has satisfactorily performed all required contractual obligations; 
(2)  Determine that all deliverables including reports have been delivered and accepted by the user agency; 
(3)  Determine if all county property (if applicable) has been returned; 
(4)  Ensure that all issues, if any, have been resolved; 
(5)  Determine whether all payments to the contractor have been made; 
(6)  Determine whether all administrative actions have been completed; 
(7)  Ensure that the official contract file contains all necessary documentation; 
(8)  Complete the mandatory closeout contractor performance report; and 
(9)  Provide the closeout report with documentation to the department of purchasing and contract compliance before final payment is made and if applicable, retainage is released. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
DIVISION 6. - MODIFICATION AND TERMINATION OF CONTRACTS FOR SUPPLIES AND SERVICES 

Sec. 102-417. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Amendment means a change, addition, alteration, correction or revision to a bid or proposal or contract document. 
Change order means an alteration, addition, or deduction from the original scope of work as defined by the contract documents to address changes or unforeseen conditions necessary for project completion. 
Contract modification means any written alteration in the terms of the contract including, but not limited to, the scope, manner of performance, specifications, delivery point, time and rate of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity, or other provision of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the contract. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-418. - Contract clauses and their administration. 
(a)  Contract clauses. 
(1)  The purchasing agent may promulgate regulations permitting or requiring the inclusion of clauses providing for adjustments in prices, time of performance, or other contract provisions. 
(2)  All contract clauses shall be consistent with the provisions of this article and the regulations issued pursuant to this Code. 
(b)  Price adjustments. 
(1)  Adjustments in price pursuant to clauses promulgated under subsection (a) of this section shall be computed in one or more of the following ways: 
a.  By agreement on a fixed-price adjustment before commencement of the pertinent performance or as soon thereafter as practicable; 
b.  By unit prices specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon; 
c.  By the costs attributable to the events or situations under such clauses with adjustment or profit or fee, all as specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon; or 
d.  In such other manner as the contracting parties may mutually agreed upon. 
(c)  Modification of clauses. The purchasing agent may vary the clauses for inclusion in any particular contract; provided that any variations are supported by a written determination that states the circumstances justifying such variation and provided that notice of any such material variation be stated in the invitation to bid or request for proposals. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-419. - Responsibilities and rights of parties to contract. 
Each county contract for goods or services shall include provisions necessary to define the responsibilities and rights of the parties to the contract. The purchasing agent, shall issue appropriate contract clauses addressing at least the following subjects, to the extent appropriate for the particular contract: 
(1)  The unilateral right of the county to order changes in writing to the requirements for goods or services within the general scope of the contract; 
(2)  The unilateral right of the county to order in writing a temporary suspension or delay to the provision of goods or services that does not alter the scope of the contract; 
(3)  Responsibilities for performance and payment associated with variations occurring between estimated quantities of goods or services in a contract and actual quantities; 
(4)  Defective pricing; 
(5)  Liquidated damages and service level credits; 
(6)  Specified excuses for delay or nonperformance; 
(7)  Termination of the contract for default; 
(8)  Termination of the contract, in whole or in part, for the convenience of the county; 
(9)  Site conditions differing from those indicated in the contract or ordinarily encountered in similar situations; and 
(10)  An acknowledgement by all parties contracting with the county as follows: 
"Contractor acknowledges that this contract and any changes to it by amendment, modification, change order and/or supplemental agreement shall not become binding unless approved by the board of commissioners and entered on the minutes. Under Georgia law, Contractor is deemed to possess knowledge concerning the county's ability to assume contractual obligations and the consequences of Contractor's provision of goods or services to the county under an unauthorized contract, amendment, modification, change order or other similar document, including the possibility that the Contractor may be precluded from recovering payment for such unauthorized goods or services. Accordingly, Contractor agrees that if it provides goods or services to the county under a contract that has not received proper legislative authorization or if the Contractor provides goods or services to the county in excess of the any contractually authorized goods or services, as required by this Code, the county may withhold payment for any unauthorized goods or services provided by Contractor. Contractor assumes all risk of nonpayment for the provision of any unauthorized goods or services to the county, and it waives all claims to payment or to other remedies for the provision of any unauthorized goods or services to the county, however characterized, including, without limitation, all remedies at law or equity." 
This acknowledgement shall be a mandatory provision in all county contracts for goods and services, except revenue producing contracts. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-420. - Contract modifications and change orders. 
(a)  Statement of policy. Fulton County is committed to a policy of open, nondiscriminatory and competitive purchasing. When circumstances arise after award of a contract, requiring modification of that contract, such modification will be accomplished in accordance with the following procedure, to achieve the following goals: 
(1)  Ensure that Fulton County does not pay more than is necessary to complete the contract; 
(2)  Preclude a contractor from tendering the lowest bid and then increasing the cost of the contract through the change order process; 
(3)  Ensure that the terms and conditions upon which the contract was awarded are met throughout the term of the contract, including any and all change orders; 
(4)  Ensure that the change order procedure is not used to bypass the competitive bidding process; and 
(5)  Ensure that change orders are not used for work that is independent of and outside the scope of the original contract. 
(b)  Background. A change order is a written order form Fulton County to a contractor, directing a change within the scope of the contract and necessary for completion of the contract, in the specifications, services, time of performance or terms and conditions of the contract. A change is within the scope of a contract if it concerns the work required by the original contact documents and any subsequent change orders approved to accomplish the intent of the project as described in the solicitation documents. 
A contractor is any person or entity, whether designated as a contractor, vendor, consultant or by any other title, having a contractual relationship with Fulton County. In Fulton County, except as otherwise provided in this article, change orders shall be affected only through a written, bilateral agreement (modification) between the county, acting through its board of commissioners, and the contractor. The modification modifies the contract and will specify all changes to the contract and the costs thereof. 
(c)  Justification for change orders. Change orders are authorized only for the following reasons: 
(1)  Situations creating an immediate need to protect the public health, safety or welfare; 
(2)  Corrections of deficiencies in design or construction documents provided by architects or engineers other than the contractor; 
(3)  Changes in applicable laws or regulations, or changes that result from public participation when such participation is mandated by laws or regulations; 
(4)  Concealed conditions, differing site conditions or abnormal inclement weather; 
(5)  Owner requested changes within the scope of the original contract. Such changes may include: Deductive change orders and accommodations of value engineering and administrative matters such as closeout change orders for unit price contracts, deductions for approved material substitutions and administrative no-cost change orders. 
(d)  Change order authority. Except as otherwise provided in this article, change orders may be approved only by the board of Commissioners of Fulton County. Such approval shall be demonstrated by a formal vote on the contract modification. 
(e)  Change order procedure. The ordinary sequence of a change order is as follows: 
(1)  Need for contract modification is identified; 
(2)  Contractor is requested to propose price for change and if necessary, schedule changes; 
(3)  Contractor and county negotiate price and scope of change; 
(4)  Agreement between county and contractor for change is clearly defined in a written modification; 
(5)  Contractor signs modification and returns it to the county; and 
(6)  Modification is submitted to the board of commissioners for approval. 
Circumstances may alter this general description of change order procedure. The administrative actions necessary to accomplish a change order are described in subsection (f) of this section. 
(f)  Administrative actions. Department heads have primary responsibility for completion of the administrative steps necessary to complete a change order. Such responsibility may be exercised through designees and in consultation with other interested departments. 
(g)  County manager's authority. In the following described situations, the county manager is authorized to approve change orders and authorize the commencement of work pursuant to such change orders, subject to ratification by the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners will not withhold ratification unless there is credible evidence showing that the contractor induced or procured the change order by fraud. 
(1)  Change orders less than ten percent of original contract amount. 
a.  The county manger is authorized to approve change orders having a total cost that is less than ten percent of the original contract cost. A change order may be approved under this article if its cost, when combined with that of all previous change orders to the same contract, is an amount less than ten percent of the original contract cost. The county manager may decline to exercise this authority and return change orders for processing through the regular change order procedure, or may direct that the work be procured through the competitive process. 
b.  Change orders submitted under this authority shall be processed according to the regular administrative procedures. 
c.  Not more than 60 days following approval of a change order under this authority, the county manger shall have it spread on the minutes by placing it on the consent agenda and subsequently obtaining the signature of the chairman of the board of commissioners on the modification. 
(2)  Extraordinary circumstances. 
a.  The county manager is authorized to approve change orders regardless of the amount when due to extraordinary circumstances, work must be implemented before the board of commissioners can act. The county manager may decline to exercise the authority granted hereunder and may require that the change order be submitted under the regular procedure, or he/she may direct that the work be procured through the competitive process. 
b.  The authority granted in this section may be exercised when immediate action must be taken to protect the county's interests, and only under the following circumstances (in addition to meeting the requirements of subsection (c): 
(i)  Threat to public health, welfare or safety; 
(ii)  Threat of litigation when it appears likely that litigation will be commenced and that the county's legal position may be comprised by delay in implementing the change order. Change orders citing this circumstance must be approved by the Office of the county Attorney; or 
(iii)  Loss of substantial resources due to delay, including delay in critical path schedule. 
c.  Department heads proceeding under this authority must comply with as much of the procedure set out in subsection (g)(1) as the situation will permit. 
d.  At minimum, the following procedures must be observed. 
(i)  The contractor shall execute a written contract modification that clearly describes the work to be done and its cost. If costs cannot be fully detailed due to the exigencies of the situation, the modification must set out a maximum cost and state that the cost will be definitized in a final change order. 
(ii)  The department head shall obtain the approval of the purchasing agent, prior to submitting the change order to the county manager. 
(iii)  The work may proceed upon approval by the county manager. The department head shall prepare all other documentation normally required for a change order. 
(iv)  Not later than 60 days following approval of the change order, the county manager shall place the change order on the consent agenda. 
(v)  In cases of change orders without definitized costs under subsection (i) above, the department head shall commence processing a final change order as soon as circumstances permit. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. II, § 102-353. Board Policy 800-6, procedures for handling change orders. 
Sec. 102-421. - Termination of contract; rescission of award. 
Termination of any contract or rescission of award must be approved by the board of commissioners; and in all cases based upon the purchasing agent's recommendation. The purchasing agent must examine the circumstances and reasons behind the breach of contract, or other reasons for rescission or termination, and determine if there is a solution possible in the situation. If a breach of contract occurs, or rescission of award or termination of contract is necessary, dependent upon the circumstances, the purchasing agent may suspend or debar the subject contractor/vendor for failure to perform under the terms of the county's procurement code. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
DIVISION 7. - OFFICE OF CONTRACT COMPLIANCE 

Sec. 102-422. - Application. 
(a)  Except where federal or state law or regulations mandate to the contrary, the provisions of this division shall be applicable to all contracts. 
(b)  All departments and divisions of county government shall encourage SBE and MFBE participation in all Fulton County government contracting. 
(c)  The director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance shall review SBE and MFBE participation on an annual basis by analyzing the results of the application of this program during the year, plus other relevant data, and shall prepare an annual plan that reports the results of such review, and recommendations therefrom, to the county manager and the board of commissioners. 
(d)  The director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance shall prepare an annual report. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13; Res. No. 16-0864, 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-423. - Functions, duties and organization. 
(a)  The office of contract compliance shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Responsibility for ensuring adherence of all county staff units and county contractors to the minority business participation policies established by the board of commissioners and maintain the county's compliance with applicable federal regulations pertaining to contractor or employment practices, minority business participation and Title VI of the Civil Rights Act; 
(2)  Administration and enforcement of compliance with this established requirements; 
(3)  The establishment of written procedures, informal guidelines and forms necessary to implement this program; 
(4)  The development and maintenance of an SBE and MFBE certification directory which will be made available as a public record; 
(5)  Accept SBE certifications from the United States Department of Transportation and Small Business Administration, and Georgia Department of Transportation, MARTA, or other cities and counties within the Atlanta MSA, or other appropriate agencies; 
(6)  Notification by certified mail that an applicant who has been denied certification as an AABE, HBE, ABE, NABE, FBE or SDVBE has the right to appeal such determination, said appeal to be determined by a contract compliance hearing officer within seven calendar days of receipt of notice of such determination; 
(7)  Investigate and determine whether a contractor or vendor has failed to implement its contractual agreements and commitments regarding this division after the award of the bid or execution of the contract or purchase order; in the event it is determined the contractor or vendor has not complied with this division, the contractor or vendor shall be notified of the determination of noncompliance and any penalty to be imposed; 
(8)  Maintenance of: (1) documents, forms, records or data regarding the dollar amounts subcontracted to or expended for services performed by subcontractors and suppliers on all projects, including race and gender ownership of each subcontractor, and (2) documents, forms, records or data regarding certified SBEs, AABEs, HBEs, ABEs, NABEs, FBEs or SDVBEs; 
(9)  Make recommendations to the County Manager and Board of Commissioners of further efforts needed to encourage SBE and MFBE participation; 
(10)  Attendance at prebid, preproposal, preconstruction and prework conferences; and 
(11)  Development and implementation of outreach and assistance programs to promote equal contracting opportunities for all businesses desiring to do business with the county. 
(b)  The office of contract compliance shall be headed by the contract compliance administrator, under the supervision and direction of the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance and shall perform such duties as he/she shall prescribe. 
(c)  Contract compliance officers will be represented on each Purchasing team to provide continuity, required knowledge of opportunities and improved communication on contract timing. 
(d)  The Department of Purchasing and Contract Compliance shall prepare on an annual basis, an outreach plan for SBEs, MFBEs, DBEs and SDVBEs outlining the annual activities of each program. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13; Res. No. 16-0864, 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-424. - User department responsibilities. 
(a)  All departments and divisions of county government, in consultation with the Department of Purchasing and Contract Compliance, are encouraged to obtain SBE and MFBE participation on all county contracts. The director of the Department of Purchasing and Contract Compliance shall make periodic and annual reports of activity and progress under this article to the county manager and board of commissioners. 
(b)  Provide the scope of work for projected projects and request vendor list of certified SBEs and MFBEs. 
(c)  Contract compliance officers will be aligned with the same Purchasing teams in order to provide continuity, knowledge of procurement opportunities and project timelines. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13; Res. No. 16-0864, 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-425. - Certification. 
(a)  Minority/female business enterprise (MFBE). 
(1)  In order to be certified as a minority or female business enterprise (MFBE) a business must be at least 51 percent owned and controlled by one or more minorities. 
(2)  The MFBE has a place of business registered in official documents filed with the Secretary of State, State of Georgia; and holds a valid business or occupational tax license. 
(3)  All firms participating in this program as a MFBE are encouraged to be certified with the office of contract compliance. 
(4)  Applications for certification will be available for completion and submittal online and will include, but will not be limited to, primary business location, evidence of ownership, control, operation, and experience. The application shall be in the form of an affidavit and shall be signed by the applicant, such signature to be notarized by an officer duly authorized to notarize signatures. 
(5)  The office of contract compliance will have the ability to accept third party certifications as approved by the board of commissioners. 
(6)  All certified MFBE firms will be required to update their listing online continually including changes of addresses, telephone numbers, change of ownership, control and operation. 
(7)  The director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance or his/her designee shall grant certification of an approved MFBE for a period of two years. All companies must request recertification of their business. If an MFBE is denied certification on the basis of information submitted, the company cannot reapply for certification for period of one year from the date of the notice of denial, provided that such company shall have the right to appeal such denial and to be certified if such appeal is decided in its favor as provided herein. 
(8)  Certification records will be maintained by the office of contract compliance. 
(9)  Appeals of denials of certification shall be made pursuant to section 102-439 of this Code. 
(b)  Service disabled veteran business enterprise (SDVBE). 
(1)  In order to be certified as a service disabled veteran business enterprise (SDVBE) a business must be at least 51 percent owned and controlled by one or more service disabled veterans. 
(2)  The SDVBE has a place of business registered in official documents filed with the Secretary of State, State of Georgia; and holds a valid business or occupational tax license. 
(3)  All firms participating in this program as a SDVBE are encouraged to be certified with the office of contract compliance. 
(4)  Applications for certification will be available for completion and submittal online and will include, but will not be limited to, primary business location, evidence of ownership, control, operation, and experience. The application shall be in the form of an affidavit and shall be signed by the applicant, such signature to be notarized by an officer duly authorized to notarize signatures. 
(5)  The office of contract compliance will have the ability to accept third party certifications as approved by the board of commissioners. 
(6)  All certified SDVBE firms will be required to update their listing continually, including changes of addresses, telephone numbers, change of ownership, control and operation. 
(7)  The contract compliance administrator shall grant certification of an approved SDVBE for a period of two years. All companies must request recertification of their business. If an SDVBE is denied certification on the basis of information submitted, the company cannot reapply for certification for period of one year from the date of the notice of denial, provided that such company shall have the right to appeal such denial and to be certified if such appeal is decided in its favor as provided herein. 
(8)  Certification records will be maintained by the office of contract compliance. 
(9)  Appeals of denials of certification shall be made pursuant to section 102-439 of this Code. 
(c)  Small business enterprise program (SBE). 
(1)  The Department of Purchasing and Contract Compliance will have the ability to accept SBE Certifications from United States DOT and Small Business Administration, GDOT, MARTA, cities, and counties within the Atlanta MSA, or other appropriate agencies. 
(2)  All certified SBE firms will be required to notify the county of any material changes and update their listing online continually, including changes of contact information, addresses, telephone numbers, and changes of ownership, control and operation. 
(3)  Certification records will be maintained by the Department of Purchasing and Contract Compliance. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13; Res. No. 16-0864, 10-5-16) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. II, § 102-423(4). 
Sec. 102-426. - Good faith efforts of contractor. 
In complying with the SBE and MFBE program of the county, the bidder, offeror, contractor, or other person or entity seeking to do business with the county is encouraged to exercise the following good faith efforts to involve SBEs and MFBEs: 
(1)  Attendance at prebid/proposal conferences/meetings, to inform attendees of the role and responsibilities of the office of contract compliance; 
(2)  Advertisement in the general circulation media, trade association publications, and minority-focus media, to provide notice of contracting opportunities; 
(3)  Providing written notice to known SBEs and MFBEs that their interest in contracting opportunities is solicited. 
The contractor, offeror, or bidder is required to include with its bid, identification of the SBEs and MFBEs by name, scope of work, and dollar value of work including the appropriate documentation of this information. Potential contractors, offerors, or bidders shall be required to provide documentation of their SBE and MFBE participation at the time their bid is submitted. All bidders will be encouraged to demonstrate that it made reasonable and good-faith efforts to utilize SBEs and MFBEs. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13; Res. No. 16-0864, 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-427. - Outreach program. 
The small business enterprise program and the minority and female business enterprise program are established to provide for specific aggressive outreach efforts by the department of purchasing and contract compliance to solicit and encourage SBEs and MFBEs to bid on county contracts. The efforts of the Department of Purchasing and Contract Compliance in conjunction with the appropriate user departments shall include the following: 
(1)  The notification of bid opportunity alerts to SBEs/MFBEs/SDVBEs of upcoming contracts by the county through utilization of the SBE's and MFBE's certification listing; 
(2)  Advertisement of upcoming county contracts in the appropriate media, including minority newspapers or publications; the county's website, public television, if appropriate; and other media; 
(3)  Seminars to familiarize SBEs/MFBEs/SDVBEs with county procurement and bidding procedures and with upcoming business opportunities; 
(4)  Establishment of a website which contractors and vendors can access information on bids or certification; 
(5)  Active and sustained encouragement of SBEs/MFBEs/SDVBEs to apply for certification and to bid on county contracts. 
(6)  Establishment of a website which prime contractors can identify subcontracting opportunities for Fulton County projects. 
(7)  The office of contract compliance may act as a resource for technical assistance. The office may collect, organize and disseminate information regarding additional technical assistance providers other than Fulton County that are in the Atlanta market area. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13; Res. No. 16-0864, 10-5-16) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. II, § 102-403. 
Sec. 102-428. - Bonding assistance. 
The Department of Purchasing and Contract Compliance may make available to SBEs, MFBEs and SDVBEs: 
(1)  Free one-on-one technical assistance regarding insurance and bonding; and 
(2)  Access to all the tools and training necessary to secure a first time bond and to increase current bonding capacity. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13; Res. No. 16-0864, 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-429. - Monitoring and reporting. 
The office of contract compliance staff shall make periodic random and scheduled visits to the contractor jobsite to review project progress, contractor-subcontractor relations, performance and payment schedules as well as to confirm compliance for the following: 
(1)  Georgia Security and Immigration; 
(2)  Title VI; 
(3)  Davis Bacon Wage Rates; 
(4)  Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE); 
(5)  Minority/Female Business Enterprise (MFBE); 
(6)  Service Disabled Veteran Business Enterprise (SDVBE); and 
(7)  Small Business Enterprise Program. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13; Res. No. 16-0864, 10-5-16) 
DIVISION 8. - NONDISCRIMINATION IN PURCHASING AND CONTRACTING[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Human relations, ch. 42. 

Sec. 102-430. - Statement of policy. 
It is the policy of Fulton County that discrimination against businesses by reason of the race, color, gender or national origin of the ownership of any such business is prohibited. Furthermore, it is the policy of the board of commissioners that Fulton County and all vendors and contractors doing business with it shall provide to all businesses the opportunity to participate in contracting and procurement paid, in whole or in part, with monetary appropriations of the board without regard to the race, color, gender or national origin of the ownership of any such business. Similarly, it is the policy of Fulton County that the contracting and procurement practices of Fulton County should not implicate Fulton County as a passive participant in discriminatory practices engaged in by private contractors or vendors who seek to obtain contracts with Fulton County. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-431. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Availability means the percent of firms seeking to do business with Fulton County that are ready, willing and able to do business with Fulton County. 
Bidder means any contractor, vendor or other person, partnership, corporation or other business entity that submits or desires to submit a bid to Fulton County. 
Board means the board of Commissioners of Fulton County. 
Certified MBE/FBE means an MBE (AABE, HBE, ABE, NABE) or FBE which meets the definitions of this section, and has been "certified" (i.e., approved) as an MBE, or FBE by the department of contract compliance. 
Commercially useful function means the performance of real and actual services in the discharge of a contractual endeavor; or with respect to a contract relating to the sale of goods or other items, contractual liability for the failed delivery thereof. The business must perform some distinct element of work which the business has the skill, expertise or other necessary capabilities and/or attributes as well as the responsibility for actually performing, managing and supervising the work or manufacture and/or delivery of goods. 
Compliance means the condition existing when a bidder has met the requirements of this Code section. 
Contract means any binding legal obligation of Fulton County created to acquire some good and/or service from one or more bidders, which is paid or which is to be paid for, in whole or in part, with monetary appropriations of the board. In this context, the terms "contracting," "purchasing" and "procurement" are synonymous and refer to the process or processes under which Fulton County undertakes such acquisitions. 
Disparity means that the availability of various businesses is greater than the utilization of any such businesses. 
Disparity index means the ratio of utilization to availability (U/A) for a particular racial or gender group. 
Disparity ratio means the ratio of availability to utilization (A/U) for a particular racial or gender group. 
EBO plan means equal business opportunity plan which is designed to enhance the utilization of a particular racial, gender or ethnic group by a Fulton County bidder, contractor, or vendor or by Fulton County. 
Female business enterprise (FBE) shall mean a business which is an independent and continuing enterprise for profit, performing a commercially useful function and is owned and controlled by one or more females, and certified as such by the department of contract compliance. 
Good faith efforts means those active and aggressive measures undertaken by a bidder to acquire MFBE utilization. 
Independent means that with respect to the ownership, control and activity of a MFBE, the business shall operate separate and apart from the ownership, control or undue influence of another business not owned and controlled by one or more minorities or females. 
Joint venture means an association of two or more independent persons, partnerships, corporations, limited liability corporations (or any combination of them) formed, consistent with the laws of the State of Georgia, to perform one or more specific contracts limited in scope and duration; and for which purpose, the entities combined their property, capital, effort, skills, knowledge and other assets. 
MFBE means, alternatively, (1) severally, a minority business enterprise or a female business enterprise, or (2) collectively, minority business enterprises and female business enterprises, depending on the context in which it is used. 
Minority Business Enterprise (MBE) means a business which is an independent and continuing operation for profit, performing a commercially useful function, and is 51 percent owned and controlled by one or more minority persons, and is certified as such by the department of purchasing and contract compliance. MFBEs shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  African American Business Enterprise (AABE) means a business which is owned and controlled by one or more African American minority persons. 
(2)  Asian American Business Enterprise (ABE) means a business which is owned and controlled by one or more Asian American minority persons. 
(3)  Hispanic Business Enterprise (HBE) means a business which is owned and controlled by one or more Hispanic minority persons. 
(4)  Native American Business Enterprise (NABE) means a business which is owned and controlled by one or more Native American minority persons. 
Minority person means a United States citizen or permanent resident alien (as defined by the Immigration and Naturalization Service) of the United States, including but not limited to, one who is a member of any of the following groups and meeting the definition(s) for same: 
(1)  African American means persons having ancestry with origins in any of the Black racial groups of Africa. 
(2)  Asian American means persons having ancestry with origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, the Indian subcontinent, or the Pacific Islands. 
(3)  Hispanic American means persons of Spanish or Portuguese culture and ancestry with origins in Mexico, South or Central America, or the Caribbean Islands, regardless of race. 
(4)  Native American means persons having ancestry with origins in any of the original peoples of North America, including American Indians, Eskimos and Aleuts. 
MSA means the Atlanta Metropolitan Statistical Area as defined by the United States Bureau. 
Noncompliance means the condition existing when a bidder has failed to meet the requirements of this program. 
Office of contract compliance (OCC) means the office of contract compliance within the department of purchasing and contract compliance in Fulton County. 
Owned , for purposes of determining whether a business is a minority business enterprise or female business enterprise, means that the minority or female owner(s) possess an ownership interest of at least 51 percent of the business. 
Person means an individual, sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability corporation, or other business association. 
Promise of nondiscrimination means, collectively, one or more voluntary contractual affirmative promises and other promises of forbearance made by a bidder relating to the bidder's conduct occurring prior to submission of a bid as well as after award of a contract. 
Sole source means the awarding of a contract or contracts to a single bidder without benefit of competition because the bidder is the only appropriate and/or qualified contractor or vendor available from whom the commodity, equipment, good or service can be procured. 
Underutilization means that the percentage of Fulton County dollars spent with a particular racial, gender or ethnic group which is less than what would be expected for a given racial, gender or ethnic group's business availability. 
Utilization means the percentage of Fulton County dollars spent with a particular racial, gender or ethnic group which is equal to or greater than what would be expected for a given racial, gender or ethnic group's business availability. 
Waiver means a determination of excused nonresponsiveness or noncompliance with the requirements of this Code section, including that of nondiscrimination, such that a bidder, contractor or vendor who has failed to achieve said requirements but has otherwise satisfactorily demonstrated efforts to do so shall be deemed to be responsive and compliant and the bidder, contractor or vendor shall be excused from the applicable penalties or sanctions. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-432. - Scope and applicability. 
Except as provided herein below, the provisions of this Code section shall apply to Fulton County contracting and procurement, including construction and the acquisition of all commodities, equipment, goods, and services (including professional and nonprofessional services), however titled, and irrespective of the modality or manner procured, and irrespective as to whether purchased or leased. The following categories are initially established by the board to identify the nature and type of Fulton County contracting and procurement encompassed under this Code section. From time to time, and upon recommendation of the county manager, the board may amend (by addition or deletion) these categories: 
(1)  Category A—Construction (including prime contractors and subcontractors): including, for example, and without limitation, any and all contracting relating to buildings, facilities and other erected structures on real estate of Fulton County such as new construction, rehabilitation, remodeling and repairs; 
(2)  Category B—Wholesale: including, for example, and without limitation, the purchase of all goods, equipment, food stuffs, office and other supplies, art, furniture and other tangible personal property not associated with and subsumed under the provision of a service identified in categories A or C; 
(3)  Category C—Service Industry: including, for example, and without limitation, the procurement of advertising, printing, nonconstruction repairs, janitorial services, computer and information systems, security, shipping and mailing, microfiche and microfilm, courier, storage, travel, consulting, and any other nonprofessional services and professional services that may require a bidder to possess a license or other certificate of competency such as auditing, architectural, legal services and engineering services. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-433. - Exclusions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  The acquisition of any interest or interests in real property including leaseholds; 
(2)  Unique contracting where the unique nature of the item or service to be acquired renders the application of other bidder selection criteria inappropriate such that a sole source procurement may be required under Fulton County purchasing policies and regulations; 
(3)  Emergency purchases as provided for in this Code; 
(4)  Any other categories or subcategories of goods or services the board may from time to time establish as excluded contracts upon recommendation of the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance and approval by the county manager. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. II, § 102-466. 
Sec. 102-434. - Monitoring, evaluation and reporting. 
(a)  Monitor. The office of contract compliance shall continuously monitor the procurement, by contract or other means, of goods and services for Fulton County. Such monitoring shall include, but is not necessarily limited to, a statistical analysis of each wholesale, construction trade, and professional and nonprofessional service which is the subject of the Fulton County purchasing process; and to determine whether in any such classification there is any underutilization. While this monitoring function may be performed on an ongoing, as needed, basis, the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance shall report to the board quarterly with regards to its findings as to any such statistical analysis. 
(b)  Identified underutilization. In the event that the monitoring function of the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance identifies underutilization, the director is authorized to instruct the contract compliance administrator to conduct further investigation into the reasons for any such underutilization. 
(c)  Recommendations for remedial action. In the event that any investigation of underutilization performed pursuant to subsection (b) shows that the underutilization involves either active or passive discrimination by Fulton County in its own contracting and procurement practices, or involves the passive participation by Fulton County in the discriminatory conduct by private persons or entities, or occurs for any other reason, the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance shall report such finding to the county manager, who shall report the same to the board of commissioners with a recommendation for remedial action to eliminate any such discrimination. In the event that any investigation of underutilization performed pursuant to subsection (b) shows that the underutilization involves no discrimination or discriminatory conduct, the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance may report same to the board with a recommendation for remedial action to remedy any such underutilization. 
(d)  Reporting. 
(1)  Scheduled reports. The director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance shall conduct quarterly and annual reviews of the monitoring that is required herein and submit reports to the county manager with a copy to the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Additional reports. In addition to the reports required under subsection (d)(1) above, the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance at any time is authorized to make recommendations to the county manager regarding the implementation of this section. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. II, § 102-467. 
Sec. 102-435. - Methods for promoting nondiscrimination in purchasing and contracting. 
(a)  Policy of nondiscrimination by Fulton County. It is the policy of Fulton County to promote and encourage full and open competition in Fulton County contracting and procurement. 
(b)  Website. There shall be maintained a website that contractors and vendors can use to obtain information on bids or certification. 
(c)  MBE/FBE (MFBE) certification. MFBEs shall be encouraged to apply for certification by the department of purchasing and contract compliance. 
(d)  Purchasing administrative process. The director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance shall investigate complaints, or on its own, initiate investigations, with regard to whether the Fulton County purchasing process, or any part thereof, inhibits the ability of any business to contract with Fulton County by reason of the race, color, gender or national origin of the ownership of any such business. 
(e)  MFBE directory. A single unified list of all certified Fulton County MFBE vendors and contractors shall be maintained. The list shall be coded to reflect designations relating to the type of vendor or contractor, MFBE or non-MFBE, or other relevant information as determined by the director of purchasing and contract compliance and the contract compliance administrator. The directory shall be maintained on a current basis. 
(f)  Enhancement of contracting opportunities. The county manager and the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance, and representatives from other departments involved with contracting and procurement practices shall review contracting and procurement practices such as sole source, multiyear, blanket and emergency purchases and shall also review size of contracts in order to determine whether such practices and contract size unnecessarily inhibit the ability of businesses to participate in the contracting and procurement activities of Fulton County by reason of the race, color, gender or national origin of the ownership of any such business. Where such practices and contract size are identified as inhibitive, they shall be eliminated and/or diminished where practicable. 
(g)  Special publications. The director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance in conjunction with other appropriate private and government agencies, shall issue or cause to be issued one or more pamphlets, brochures or other publications designed to instruct, direct, assist and/or acquaint MFBEs with the procurement procedures of Fulton County. 
(h)  Training programs. The director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance shall develop and conduct seminars and workshops on how to do business with Fulton County. 
(i)  Letter of contract award. When an MFBE receives a contract with Fulton County, the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance may, upon request, furnish a letter stating the dollar value of the contract, its duration and other information about the contract which may be used by the MFBE to establish lines of credit with lending institutions. 
(j)  Prompt payment and certification. Every contract with Fulton County for performance of work or purchase of any item shall contain a provision requiring the prime contractor to certify in writing that all subcontractors and suppliers have been promptly paid for work and materials and previous progress payments received (less any retainage by the prime contractor prior to receipt of any further progress payments). In the event a contractor is unable to pay subcontractors or suppliers until it has received a progress payment from Fulton County, the prime contractor shall pay all subcontractors or suppliers funds due from said progress payments within 48 hours of receipt of payment from Fulton County. Throughout the duration of a construction project or other contract, and upon completion thereof, Fulton County may request documentation to certify payments to subcontractors or suppliers. Fulton County reserves the right to issue joint checks payable to both the contractor and the subcontractor/supplier to ensure proper payments. This provision shall in no way create any contractual relationship between the subcontractor and Fulton County or create any liability on Fulton County for a prime contractor's failure to make timely payment to a subcontractor or supplier. 
(k)  Outreach program. The minority and female business enterprise program is hereby established to provide for specific aggressive outreach efforts by the department of purchasing and contract compliance to solicit and encourage MFBEs to bid on county contracts. The efforts of the department of purchasing and contract compliance in conjunction with the appropriate user departments shall include the following: 
(1)  The notification of bid opportunity alerts to MFBEs of upcoming contracts by the county through utilization of the MFBE's certification listing; 
(2)  Advertisement of upcoming county contracts in the appropriate media, including minority newspapers or publications; the county's website, public television, if appropriate; and other media; 
(3)  Seminars to familiarize MFBEs with county procurement and bidding procedures and with upcoming business opportunities; 
(4)  Establishment of a website which contractors and vendors can access information on bids or certification; 
(5)  Active and sustained encouragement of MFBEs to apply for certification and to bid on county contracts. 
(6)  Establishment of a website which prime contractors can identify subcontracting opportunities for Fulton County projects. 
(7)  The office of contract compliance may act as a resource for technical assistance. The office may collect, organize and disseminate information regarding additional technical assistance providers other than Fulton County that are in the Atlanta market area. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-436. - Contractor discrimination. 
(a)  Statement of policy. It is the policy of Fulton County that discrimination against businesses by reason of the race, color, gender or national origin of the ownership of any such business is prohibited. Furthermore, it is the policy of the board that Fulton County and all vendors and contractors doing business with it shall provide to all businesses the opportunity to participate in contracting and procurement paid, in whole or in part, with monetary appropriations of the board without regard to the race, color, gender or national origin of the ownership of any such business. Similarly, it is the policy of Fulton County that the contracting and procurement practices of Fulton County should not implicate Fulton County as a passive participant in discriminatory practices engaged in by private contractors or vendors who seek to obtain contracts with Fulton County. 
(b)  Promise of nondiscrimination. In consideration of, and as condition precedent to, the right and privilege to bid on or obtain construction projects and other procurement contracts of Fulton County, each bidder, contractor, or vendor shall be required to submit to the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance a duly executed and attested promise of nondiscrimination, enforceable at law, which by agreement, affidavit or other written instrument, unless subsequently amended by the board's attorney, shall provide substantially as follows: 
"Know all persons by these presents, that I/We,(Name(s)), (Title(s)), (Name of bidder/contractor/vendor) (hereinafter "Company"), in consideration of the privilege to bid on or obtain contracts funded, in whole or in part, by Fulton County, hereby consent, covenant and agree as follows: 
(1) No person shall be excluded from participation in, denied the benefit of, or otherwise discriminated against on the basis of race, color, national origin or gender in connection with any bid submitted to Fulton County for the performance of any contract resulting therefrom; 
(2) That it is and shall be the policy of this company to provide equal opportunity to all businesses seeking to contract or otherwise interested in contracting with this company without regard to the race, color, gender or national origin of the ownership of this business; 
(3) That the promises of nondiscrimination as made and set forth herein shall be continuing in nature and shall remain in full force and effect without interruption; 
(4) That the promises of nondiscrimination as made and set forth herein shall be made a part of, and incorporated by reference into, any contract or portion thereof which this company may hereafter obtain; and 
(5) That the failure of this company to satisfactorily discharge any of the promises of nondiscrimination as made and set forth herein shall constitute a material breach of contract entitling the board to declare the contract in default and to exercise any and all applicable rights and remedies, including but not limited to cancellation of the contract, termination of the contract, suspension and debarment from future contracting opportunities, and withholding and/or forfeiture of compensation due and owing on a contract. 
(6) That the bidder shall provide such information as may be required by the director of purchasing and contract compliance pursuant to this division." 
(c)  Required information. Where the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance has reason to believe that a bidder, contractor or vendor is engaged in unlawful discriminatory conduct, the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance may request an investigation that is authorized by subsection (b) of this Code section of such person, contractor, its subcontractors and/or suppliers be conducted by the county manager or his/her designee. Such information may include, but is not necessarily limited to the following: 
(1)  Documents that show what, if any, good faith efforts the bidder, contractor, or vendor has taken to insure the participation of all businesses without regard to the race, color, gender or national origin of the ownership of any such business for participation in the contract or proposed contract with Fulton County. 
(2)  Documents which show that the bidder, contractor, or vendor has attempted to segment the totality of work required under the proposed project or contract into two or more smaller economically feasible units or portions so as to permit participation of all businesses without regard to the race, color, gender or national origin of the ownership of any such business; provided, however, under no circumstances shall a bidder, contractor, or vendor be required to segment work solely for the purpose of utilizing any particular racial or gender group participant as subcontractors where such segmentation is not in accordance with common and accepted industry practices relating to the utilization of other firms or persons as subcontractors. 
(3)  Documents that show whether the bidder, contractor, or vendor attended any pre-solicitation meeting and/or pre-bid conference (if such meeting or conference is held) so as to permit interested businesses a meaningful opportunity to market their goods and services to the bidder, contractor, or vendor without regard to the race, color, gender or national origin of the ownership of any such business. 
(4)  Documents that show whether the bidder, contractor, or vendor solicited specific individual racial, gender or ethnic businesses whose availability as potential sources of goods or services can be reasonably ascertained. This measure includes the sending of letters or making other personal contacts with specific certified MFBE's including those with whom the bidder, contractor or vendor has contracted in the past as well as other MFBE's with whom the bidder, contractor, or vendor may be unfamiliar, but whose identities can be ascertained from a directory of certified MFBE's maintained by the Director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance. 
(5)  Letters or documented personal contacts with any minority or female business enterprise programs, or programs for disadvantaged businesses, as well as private minority trade associations in the Atlanta MSA which programs and associations are known to publicize contracting and procurement opportunities for the benefit of their respective participants and/or members. 
(6)  Documents that show whether the bidder, contractor, or vendor advertised in publications of general circulation and/or trade publications and other media owned by, or otherwise focused or marketed to racial minorities, women and any disadvantaged individuals and/or businesses owned and operated by them. The publication or media shall be one that reasonably covers the metropolitan statistical area. The advertisement shall identify and describe the specific subcontracting or other opportunity in reasonable detail. 
(7)  Documents that show whether the bidder, contractor, or vendor provided all interested business concerns with adequate information about the plans, specifications and requirements of the project or contract in question. 
(8)  Documents that show whether the bidder, contractor, or vendor conducted negotiations with any interested business in good faith without regard to the race, color, gender or national origin of the ownership of any such business and not rejecting them as unqualified or for other reasons without having thoroughly investigated any such business' capabilities or other basis of rejection. 
(9)  Documents that show whether the bidder, contractor, or vendor provided reasonable assistance to an otherwise qualified business without regard to the race, color, gender or national origin of the ownership of any such business in need of equipment, supplies, bonding, letters of credit and/or insurance. The bidder, contractor or vendor may waive such bonding, credit and/or insurance as may be ordinarily required by it or provide reasonable assistance to any such business so as to obtain such equipment, supplies, bonding, credit and/or insurance. 
(10)  Documents that show whether the bidder, contractor, or vendor provided reasonable technical assistance to any business without regard to the race, color, gender or national origin of the ownership of any such business to ameliorate any deficiencies of technical knowledge or advance skill, where such assistance is undertaken by the bidder, contractor, or vendor for the purpose of facilitating such business' successful participation on a project or contract. 
(11)  Documents that show whether the bidder, contractor, or vendor provided equal opportunity to all businesses without regard to the race, color, gender or national origin of the ownership of any such business when replacing nonperforming subcontractors or suppliers. The director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance shall approve all replacements prior to engagement of the substituting firm. 
(12)  Documents that show whether the bidder, contractor, or vendor provides a nondiscriminatory worksite. Bidders, contractors and vendors shall ensure and maintain a work environment free of harassment, intimidation and coercion at all construction sites, offices and other facilities at which the bidder's, contractor's or vendor's employees are assigned to work. The contractor shall specifically show that all labor supervisors, superintendents, and other onsite supervisory personnel are aware of and carry out the bidder's, contractor's or vendor's obligation to maintain a nondiscriminatory work environment. 
(13)  Documents that show all subcontractors and suppliers that were contacted by the bidder, contractor, or vendor detailing, among other things, their race, gender or ethnicity, discipline, requirements, the manner in which such contact was made, if the supplier or subcontractor submitted a bid or quote, the nature of same and, if rejected, the reasons therefor. 
(14)  Documents which show whether the bidder, contractor, or vendor cooperated with the director of the department of contract compliance. Bidders, contractors and vendors shall be required to furnish reports and information sufficient to allow the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance to determine whether the requirements of this Code section are being met. 
(15)  Bidders, contractors and vendors shall provide such other information as the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance may from time to time reasonably require, whether orally or in writing. 
(d)  Notice to bidder, contractor or vendor. When the investigation authorized by the county manager leads to a determination of probable cause to believe that a bidder, contractor or vendor is engaging in discriminatory conduct, the director of purchasing and contract compliance shall give notice of such determination to the bidder, contractor or vendor which notice shall include a rejection of any bid or a determination of breach and a copy of such notice shall be provided to the county manager and the county attorney. 
(e)  Hearing. Any bidder, contractor, or vendor who is adversely affected by a determination under this section shall have the right to appeal such adverse determination pursuant to section 102-439 of this Code. Any request for appeal under this section must be made as provided in section 102-439 of this Code and a hearing shall be conducted pursuant to this division. 
(f)  Sanctions. Where, after hearing held pursuant to section 102-439 of this Code, the contract compliance hearing officer determines that a bidder, contractor, or vendor has engaged or is engaging in discriminatory practices, the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance and the county attorney shall determine the appropriate sanctions. In addition to any other sanctions that are authorized by this section, the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance may impose the sanctions that are set forth in this division; provided, however, that at any time after a determination of discrimination is made pursuant to this Code section, the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance and the county attorney may negotiate a settlement with the affected bidder, contractor or vendor regarding sanction. Such negotiated sanction may include, but is not necessarily limited to, the sanctions that are enumerated in section 102-438 of this Code or a voluntary EBO Plan that is approved by the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. II, § 102-469. 
Sec. 102-437. - Contract compliance hearing officers. 
(a)  Appointment and tenure. The county attorney shall biannually recommend a panel of two hearing officers to be approved by the board. Neither Fulton County employees and elected officials, nor any person who in any way does business with Fulton County (including, but not limited to, as contractor, vendor, or subcontractor), nor any person owning any interest in an entity doing business with Fulton County shall be eligible for recommendation. The hearing officers shall serve for a two-year term; and in no event shall they be eligible to serve more than four consecutive years. 
(b)  Qualifications. The hearing officers panel shall consist of five persons. 
(c)  Authority and scope of review. With the exception of controversies that are the subject matter of litigation or pending administrative review members of the hearing officers panel shall have the authority to review and determine any issue or matter in controversy arising from the adoption, implementation and enforcement of this article. 
(d)  Compensation and access to facilities. The hearing officers shall receive fair compensation at an hourly rate to be determined by the county manager for all time expended in the performance of duties created by this section. All hearings shall be open to the public and shall be held in a suitable place within a Fulton County building. Administrative and support services, as may be required by the hearing officers in the performance of such duties, shall be furnished by Fulton County and the cost of same shall be borne by Fulton County. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. II, § 102-470. 
Sec. 102-438. - Sanctions and penalties. 
The Director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance shall have the authority and power to enforce the provisions of this Code section. Failure by a bidder, contractor, or vendor to comply with the requirements of this Code section shall subject the noncomplying party to administrative sanctions. In addition, a violation of this Code section shall constitute a material breach of contract, enforceable at law or in equity as with all other contract provisions. The following sanctions and penalties are established for the enforcement of this Code section: 
(1)  Declaration of non-responsiveness. Declare a bid nonresponsive. 
(2)  Recommendation of cancellation or termination of contract. Declare a contract null and void, cancelled or terminated where, after such contract has been awarded, it is determined that the bidder's, contractor's or vendor's bid or other relevant document contains false or misleading information. 
(3)  Rejection of future bids. Fulton County may reject any or all future bids of a bidder until such time as the bidder shall have demonstrated that it is in compliance or shall come into compliance with the provisions of the Code section. 
(4)  Limited partial withholding of payments. Fulton County may withhold an amount not to exceed more than ten percent of all progress payments otherwise due and payable under contract until the bidder, contractor, or vendor is in compliance with the provisions of this Code section. 
(5)  Total withholding of payments. Fulton County may withhold the entirety of all progress payments otherwise due and payable under contract until the bidder; contractor or vendor is in compliance with the provisions of this Code section. 
(6)  Limited suspension and debarment. For falsifications and misrepresentations, Fulton County may remove a bidder, contractor or vendor from its list of pre-qualified or otherwise eligible entities entitled to do business with Fulton County for a period not to exceed one year. 
(7)  Permanent debarment. For repeated violations, Fulton County may remove a bidder, contractor, or vendor from its list of pre-qualified or otherwise eligible entities entitled to do business with Fulton County. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. II, § 102-471. 
Sec. 102-439. - Appeals. 
(a)  Availability. Any bidder, contractor or vendor or other party aggrieved by the provisions of this Code section may appeal said grievance or grievances to the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance, as provided herein. By these provisions, it is the intent of the board to ensure all parties basic guarantees of due process consisting of the right to be heard by an impartial trier of fact; and the same are hereby so guaranteed. 
(b)  Appealable matters. Upon a denial of certification by the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance shall notify the affected party in writing and by registered mail, (hereinafter, "notice of determination") setting forth with particularity the reasons for the determination. 
(c)  Time for filing notice of appeal. Any party who has a grievance under this Code section regarding a certification denial determination of non-responsiveness, noncompliance or discrimination may appeal an adverse decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance within seven calendar days of receipt of the notice of determination, but no later than 15 days after the determination or within seven days of notice. 
(d)  Notice of hearing. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal from the aggrieved party, the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance shall forward the notice to a contract compliance hearing officer (hereinafter "hearing officer") within ten business days of receipt. Within ten business days of the date of receipt of the notice of appeal from the director of the department of purchasing and contract compliance, the hearing officer shall set the matter for hearing, which hearing shall be held not more than 30 business days from the date the hearing officer received the notice of appeal. The hearing officer shall cause a written notice of hearing to be served upon all parties by registered mail, which shall state the date, time and place of hearing. Said notice shall also inform the parties of due process rights and relevant procedural matters. 
(e)  Hearing. At the hearing, all parties shall be provided a full and fair opportunity to be heard. Each party may be represented by counsel. Each party may present documentary evidence and the testimony of witnesses and shall have the right to object to the introduction of documents and to cross examine opposing witnesses. Although formal rules of evidence shall not apply, the hearing officer shall cause a record to be made of the proceeding through the use of a court reporter or by way of electronic tape recording with subsequent transcription. 
(f)  Decision. Within seven days of the conclusion of the hearing, and based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented, the hearing officer shall render a written decision (i.e., an "order") which shall contain findings of fact, conclusions of law, and a deposition, nonresponsiveness, discrimination or denial of MFBE certification of the department of contract compliance or the purchasing agent. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. II, § 102-472. 
DIVISION 9. - DISADVANTAGED BUSINESS ENTERPRISE 

Sec. 102-440. - Statement of policy. 
It shall be the policy of Fulton County to grant disadvantaged business enterprises (DBEs) the opportunity to receive and participate in the performance of contracts funded in whole or in part with federal funds. To that end, Fulton County shall strive to: 
(1)  Ensure nondiscrimination in the award and administration of United States Department of Transportation (DOT) or other federally assisted contracts within the department's highway, transit, airport or other federally funded programs; 
(2)  Create a level playing field where DBEs can compete fairly for DOT assisted contracts or other federally funded programs; 
(3)  Ensure that any and all programs as DBEs are narrowly tailored and consistent with federal and state law; 
(4)  Remove barriers to the participation of DBEs in DOT assisted contracts or other federally funded programs; and 
(5)  Encourage and assist the development of firms that compete successfully in the marketplace outside the DBE program to the extent permitted by law. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-441. - Definitions. 
(a)  Contract means a mutually binding legal relationship or any modification thereof obligating the seller to furnish supplies or services and the buyer to pay for them. 
(b)  DBE means disadvantaged business enterprise, a small business concern that is at least 51 percent owned by one or more individuals who are both socially and economically disadvantaged or, in the case of a corporation, in which 51 percent of the stock is owned by one or more such individuals. 
(c)  DOT means the United States Department of Transportation. 
(d)  FAA means Federal Aviation Administration. 
(e)  FHWA means Federal Highway Administration. 
(f)  GDOT means Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(g)  Unified Certification Program means a directory identifying all firms eligible to participate as DBEs as certified by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(h)  User department means any Fulton County department or agency participating in or administering a federally funded project. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-442. - Duties and responsibilities of the office of contract compliance. 
It shall be the responsibility of the department of purchasing and contract compliance and the user department to: 
(1)  Prepare on an annual basis, an outreach plan outlining the annual activities of the DBE program. 
(2)  Facilitate the implementation of this policy and to adhere to any relevant federal regulations regarding federally assisted projects; 
(3)  Disseminate this policy as well as any relevant DBE program materials to all Fulton County Departments, agencies, and employees that are responsible for administering any portion of the DBE program; 
(4)  Administer any DBE program consistent with this policy, Fulton County's purchasing code, and Fulton County's policy of nondiscrimination in contracting and purchasing; 
(5)  Distribute this policy to all agencies/organizations consulted during the development of any DBE goal methodology for any federally funded project; and 
(6)  Monitor and enforce any DBE programs as required by law. 
(7)  Ensure that firms that fully meet 49 CFR Part 26 eligibility standards are permitted to participate as DBEs. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-442.5. - DBE certification. 
Certification is granted to DBEs meeting all certification eligibility standards by the Georgia Department of Transportation. Fulton County has entered into the State of Georgia's Unified Certification Program (known as the GUCP agreement) which authorizes GDOT as the lead agency responsible for processing applications, certification, decertification and recertification, appeals and maintaining the DBE directory. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-422.7. - Goals. 
GDOT, FHWA and FAA are responsible for setting goals if applicable, on federally funded projects on a per project basis. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
DIVISION 10. - SMALL BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PROGRAM[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(A—T), adopted Oct. 5, 2016, repealed the former Div. 10 §§ 102-443—102-447, and enacted a new Div. 10, § 102-443—102-447.15, as set out herein. The former Div. 10 pertained to first source jobs and derived from Res. No. 13-0052, adopted Jan. 23, 2013. 

Sec. 102-443. - Short title. 
This program shall be known as the "Fulton County Small Business Enterprise Program." 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(A), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-444. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this program, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Atlanta MSA shall mean the geographical area consisting of the following 20 counties: Barrow, Bartow, Carroll, Cherokee, Clayton, Cobb, Coweta, DeKalb, Douglas, Fayette, Forsyth, Fulton, Gwinnett, Henry, Newton, Paulding, Pickens, Rockdale, Spalding and Walton. 
Bid shall mean a quotation, proposal, sealed bid or offer to perform or provide labor, materials, supplies or services to the county for a price on an eligible project, or for an eligible project that generates revenue for the county. 
Bidder shall mean any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, or corporation that submits a bid or proposal to the county. 
Certification shall mean official recognition and approval by the Department of Purchasing and Contract Compliance (DPCC) that a business meets the qualification criteria of a small business enterprise as determined by accepting SBE certifications from the United States Department of Transportation and Small Business Administration, Georgia Department of Transportation, MARTA, City of Atlanta and other cities and counties within the Atlanta MSA, and other agencies Fulton County deems appropriate. 
Commercially useful function (CUF) : for the purpose of determining whether a business enterprise is performing a commercially useful function, DPCC shall consider all of the facts in the record, viewed as a whole, including without limitation the following: 
(1)  An SBE performs a commercially useful function when it is responsible for execution of the work of the contract and is carrying out its responsibilities by actually performing, managing and supervising the work involved. 
(2)  To perform a commercially useful function, the SBE must be responsible, with respect to material and supplies used on the contract, for negotiating price, determining quality and quantity, ordering the material, and installing (where applicable) and paying for the material itself. 
(3)  To determine whether an SBE is performing a commercially useful function, DPCC will evaluate the amount of work subcontracted by the SBE, industry practices regarding subcontracting, whether the amount the SBE is to be paid under the contract is commensurate with the work it its actually performing, the SBE credit claimed for its performance of the work and other relevant factors. 
(4)  An SBE does not perform a commercially useful function if its role is limited to that of an extra participant in a transaction, contract, or project through which funds are passed in order to obtain the appearance of SBE participation. In determining whether an SBE is such an extra participant, DPCC will examine similar transactions, particularly those in which SBEs do not participate. 
Contract shall mean and include any agreement between the county and a person or business enterprise to provide or procure labor, materials, equipment, supplies and services to, for or on behalf of the county. A "contract" shall include an agreement between the county and a person or business enterprise to perform professional architectural and engineering services, construction related services or fund the performance of such services, non-professional services and/or goods. Except as otherwise specifically defined in this section, a "contract" does not include: 
(1)  Awards made by the county to a non-profit entity which the county offers assistance, guidance, or supervision on a project or program and the recipient of the grant award uses the grant monies to provide services to the community; 
(2)  Sales transactions where the county sells its personal or real property; 
(3)  A loan transaction where the county is acting as a debtor or a creditor; 
(4)  Lease and franchise agreements; 
(5)  Agreements to use county real property; or, 
(6)  Gifts of materials, equipment, supplies or services to the county. 
Contractor shall mean a prime contractor or vendor on a county contract. 
County shall mean Fulton County. 
Day or days shall refer to calendar days. 
Department of Purchasing and Contract Compliance (DPCC) shall mean the Department of Purchasing and Contract Compliance for Fulton County. 
Eligible project shall mean: 
(1)  Any county contract with an SBE participation goal attached as identified by the DPCC Administrator excluding sole source procurement, emergency procurement and contracts governed by 49 CFR Parts 23 and 26. 
(2)  For purposes of this program, contract or project "value" shall mean either the expenditure of funds by the county, or the generation of revenue for the county by a contractor as a direct result of a county contract. 
Joint venture shall mean an association of two or more persons, partnerships, corporations, or any combination of them, established to carry on a single business activity that is limited in scope and duration. The agreement establishing the joint venture, partnership or other multi-entity relationship shall be in writing. Further, participation in a joint venture shall be based on the sharing of real economic interest in the venture and shall include proportionate control over management, interest in capital acquired by the joint venture and interest in earnings. 
Small business enterprise (SBE) shall mean a firm with a location in the Atlanta MSA which is an independent and continuing enterprise for profit, performing a commercially useful function, for which the gross revenues or number of employees, inclusive of any affiliates as defined by 13 CFR § 121.103, does not exceed the size standard for its industry as defined by 13 CFR § 121.201 (as further explained in 13 CFR §§ 121.104 through 121.107), and which has: either (1) filed a letter or other documentation from the United States Small Business Administration that establishes that the firm is certified as an 8(a) firm, small business enterprise, or HUBZone firm; (2) a letter or other documentation from the City of Atlanta, MARTA, or Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) that establishes that the firm is certified as a DBE; or (3) submit proof of small business certification from a certifying agency within Georgia that applies the small business size standards consistent with or less than the applicable revenue and employment size standards for small businesses established by the United States Small Business Administration, and meets other county criteria related to SBE certification. 
SBE status shall mean whether a firm meets the qualification criteria of an SBE, as set forth in this program. 
Supplier shall mean a warehouser or manufacturer of materials, supplies or equipment which contracts directly with a bidder to provide such materials, supplies or equipment on an eligible project which involves a trade or service. For purposes of measuring the total contract dollars awarded or paid to suppliers on eligible projects, only amounts paid to suppliers of goods customarily and ordinarily used based upon standard industry or trade practices shall be counted towards SBE goals. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(B), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-445. - Statement of policy. 
It is the purpose of this small business enterprise program to promote the economic welfare of the people of Fulton County, to promote full and equal business opportunity for all persons doing business with Fulton County and to promote commerce by assisting SBEs to actively participate in the county's procurement process. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(C), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-446. - Duties of the department of purchasing and contract compliance. 
Under this program, DPCC may have the following authority and duties for the implementation of the small business enterprise program: 
(1)  Administration and enforcement of this program. 
(2)  Administration and enforcement of the disadvantaged business enterprise program. 
(3)  Establishment of written procedures, informal guidelines and forms as may be necessary to effectuate this program. 
(4)  Monitoring compliance with the requirements of this program. 
(5)  Acceptance of certification of businesses as SBEs in accordance with the standards set forth in this program. 
(6)  Investigation of alleged violations of this program, and the issuance of written statements following any determination of such investigation, stating the reasons therefore and any penalty to be imposed. 
(7)  Collaborating with the various county departments to ensure maximum outreach to SBEs. 
(8)  Determination of whether any of the penalties set forth in section 102-447.8 should be applied to a business. 
(9)  Attendance at pre-bid, pre-proposal, pre-construction and pre-work conferences. 
(10)  Provision to business entities of all forms, applications, documents and papers necessary to comply with this program. 
(11)  Provision of information to potential bidders, upon request by the potential bidder, which may include names and contact information of certified SBEs, to reinforce and support outreach efforts by potential bidders. 
(12)  Notification by certified mail that a bidder who has bid on and who otherwise would have been awarded a contract has the right to appeal a determination of noncompliance with this program, said appeal to be determined by the DPCC within seven calendar days of receipt of the notice of noncompliance. 
(13)  Notification to the Purchasing Director of any determination of noncompliance with this program and of any appeal from any such determination. 
(14)  Monitoring, for data gathering and informational purposes, utilization of SBEs on eligible projects. 
(15)  Maintenance of documents, forms, records or data regarding this program as provided in this program including documents, forms, records or data regarding the dollar amounts subcontracted to or expended for services performed by subcontractors and suppliers on eligible projects, including the SBE status of each subcontractor and supplier. 
(16)  Development and implementation of outreach and assistance programs to promote equal contracting opportunities for all businesses that wish to do business with the county, regardless of SBE status. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(D), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-447. - Small business assistance and procedures to ensure that SBEs have an equitable opportunity to compete for contracts and subcontracts. 
(1)  Procedures to ensure opportunities. To the extent feasible and that there are available resources, Fulton County may utilize the following measures to ensure maximum practicable opportunities for SBE participation on county contracts: 
(a)  Assist SBEs in obtaining insurance and surety bonds where necessary in the performance of contracts, including but not limited to: 
i.  Packaging contracts so that dollar amounts do not require bonding; 
ii.  Encouraging prime contractors to waive bonding or assist SBE subcontractors in obtaining bonding; 
iii.  Encouraging staged bonding where feasible, when bonding is carried over from one project stage to the next; and 
iv.  Relaxing bonding requirements for projects, to the extent permitted by Fulton County Code or state law. 
(b)  Encourage the formation of joint ventures between SBEs. DPCC may also assist prime contractors in identifying interested SBEs for subcontracts; 
(c)  Provide information on Fulton County's organization and contractual needs and offer instructions on bid specifications, procurement policy, procedures and general bidding requirements; 
(d)  Provide specifications and requests for proposals to the SBE community in a timely manner to allow SBEs adequate time to develop responsive bids. In instances where the cost of obtaining specifications or requests for proposal is prohibitive, copies of the material would be made available at no charge to SBE development agencies; 
(e)  Establish prorated payment and delivery schedules where feasible, to minimize cash flow problems faced by small firms. The county may provide guidance to SBE contractors regarding maintenance of positive flow in order that current obligations can be met; 
(f)  Hold pre-bid conferences to explain SBE requirements as well as forms that must be submitted with a bid; 
(g)  Permit bidders to review and evaluate successful bid documents of similar procurements via the Georgia Open Records Act; 
(h)  Provide projected procurement information and contracting schedules through the office of contract compliance and other outreach efforts; 
(i)  Conduct internal information workshops to inform and acquaint the county staff with the goals and objectives of Fulton County's Small Business Enterprise program and to sensitize them to the challenges faced by SBEs; 
(j)  Maintain records showing specific efforts to identify and award contracts to SBEs and establish a monitoring system to ensure that all contractors, subcontractors, consultants and vendors comply with contract specifications related to SBE utilization; and 
(k)  Inform SBEs of bid notices and specifications related to their capability by placing bid notices in major local newspapers and other periodicals or on the Fulton County Website. Bid notices may also be sent to local trade associations, technical assistance agencies, economic development groups and SBEs with capabilities that may be relevant to the bid notice as identified by Fulton County's SBE data bank. Bid specifications may be made available to SBE contractor associations and technical assistance agencies. Lists of potential firms bidding as primes may also be made available to SBEs. 
(l)  Provide in contracts a provision requiring the contractor to certify it has complied with the prompt payment requirements pursuant to County Code at section 102-435(j). 
(2)  Direct assistance to SBEs. In addition to the procedures set forth above, the DPCC may also undertake special measures to assist SBEs in overcoming barriers to participation on county contracts. This assistance may be offered directly by the county, as well as by county referral to other assistance agencies with established, comprehensive and continuous SBE development programs. Businesses requiring management and technical assistance may be identified through a questionnaire, through personal experience with these businesses and through requests for assistance. The DPCC may, to the extent feasible, offer the following direct assistance to SBEs: 
(a)  Act as a resource for technical assistance. DPCC may collect, organize and disseminate information regarding available technical assistance providers in the Atlanta MSA. 
(b)  Act as a resource for financial assistance. DPCC may collect, organize and disseminate information regarding available capital or financing sources in the Atlanta MSA. 
(c)  The DPCC may provide SBEs with information regarding bonding including, providing a list of qualified service providers that supply bonding services; and may coordinate the development of programs with existing service providers in the Atlanta MSA. 
(d)  Provide counseling and training sessions for SBEs. County staff may be available to interested business representatives to explain (in detail) instructions for preparation of bid specifications, the county's procurement policies, procedures and general bid requirements. DPCC would then coordinate and follow-up all requests for assistance to ensure that all necessary information was provided. 
(e)  Provide coordination and referral to existing business development organizations. 
(f)  Sponsor workshops and training sessions on identified SBE problem areas, including pricing and estimating, joint venture formation, accounting principles, marketing and related areas. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(E), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-447.1. - County-maintained records and reports. 
The  effectiveness of this program will be measured by a review of data indicating SBE participation as prime contractors, subcontractors and suppliers. In order to ensure the effective tracking of these efforts, the following shall be done: 
(1)  On eligible projects, each contractor shall continuously maintain, compile, and provide to DPCC, monthly information relating to its use of SBEs on the county project. This information may include without limitation the following information for each of the SBE subcontractors and suppliers utilized by the contractor on the county project: a description of the categories of contracts awarded to SBEs; the dollar value of contracts awarded to SBEs; and contact information for the SBEs. Additionally, the contractor shall provide information regarding its progress toward attaining the SBE goal on the eligible county project. 
(2)  Within 30 days after the end of a contract in which there was an SBE goal, each contractor shall provide DPCC with a report that summarizes the outcome of the project information, including without limitation: the identity of and contact information for each SBE to whom the contractor has awarded a subcontract or supplier agreement; the type of work performed or supplies provided by each subcontractor/supplier; the dollar value of each of the subcontracts/supplier agreements; and the total percentage of the value of the county contract subcontracted to SBE subcontractors and/or suppliers. 
(3)  DPCC shall track information regarding every county contract on which the prime contractor is an SBE or on which an SBE is part of a joint venture team serving as the prime contractor. The information shall include the name and contact information of the SBE, the type of contract and the dollar value of the contract. 
(4)  DPCC shall prepare a consolidated report based on a compilation and analysis of the reports submitted by each contractor regarding the county's use of SBEs as prime contractors. The consolidated report will identify and assess the awards to SBEs of county contracts, prime contractors' use of SBE subcontractors and suppliers, prime contractors' progress in achieving SBE subcontract goals and other SBE development and contracting efforts. Specifically, DPCC will maintain records and prepare reports showing: 
(a)  Awards to SBE subcontractors and suppliers, including names of contractors and subcontractors, nature of the work/services performed, and the percentage of SBE participation per contract. Fulton County will obtain regular reports from prime contractors on their progress in meeting contractual SBE commitments; 
(b)  Specific efforts by contractors to identify and award contracts to SBEs; 
(c)  Electronic lists of direct mailings by contractors to SBEs; 
(d)  County contracts awarded to SBEs or prime contractors in which an SBE was a joint venture partner. This information shall include without limitation the name and contact information of the SBEs, the type of contract and the dollar value of the contract. 
(e)  Pre-bid conference information as it relates to the small business enterprise program; 
(f)  Requests for assistance from SBEs interested in bidding/proposing on Fulton County contracts and subcontracts; 
(g)  Attendance of SBEs at county-sponsored workshops, seminars and training programs; and 
(h)  Efforts to assist SBEs in acquiring bonding and insurance. 
(5)  DPCC will submit annual SBE participation reports to the Board of Commissioners. These reports shall include a summary of the information described above, plus an analysis of the total dollar value of county contracts/subcontracts awarded to SBEs during the preceding year, categorized by prime contracting dollars, subcontracting dollars and supplier dollars. The percentage of the total dollar value of these contracts that was awarded to SBEs during the preceding year shall also be provided. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(F), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-447.2. - Small business enterprise program goals and counting procedures. 
(1)  The Purchasing Director will set a specific percentage SBE goal on a contract-by contract basis for prime contracts, for contracts with subcontracting opportunities, and for supplier contracts, and shall have the authority to establish such SBE goal on a contract-by-contract basis based upon the type of contract, the type of subcontracting work that will be required, and the availability of SBEs to perform the work for that specific contract. Every bidder on an eligible project that has an SBE goal shall be required to submit, with its bid submission, the names, address, certification numbers, if applicable, of certified SBEs and any other information required by DPCC as set forth in the project's solicitation documents. 
(2)  SBE participation is counted as follows: 
(a)  Once a firm is certified as an SBE, the total dollar value of the prime contract, subcontract or supplier contract awarded to the SBE by the county or the contractor is counted toward the applicable SBE goal. However, if an SBE fails to be recertified during the term of the contract, or if an SBE is decertified during the term of the contract, the dollar value of the contract awarded to that SBE cannot be counted toward the applicable SBE goal. 
(b)  The county will count toward its SBE goal a portion of the total dollar value of a contract with a joint venture equal to the percentage of the ownership and contractual commitment to the SBE partner in the joint venture. 
(c)  The county will count toward its SBE goal only expenditures to SBEs that perform a commercially useful function in the work of the contract. 
(d)  The county will count toward its SBE goals the following expenditures to SBE firms that are not suppliers: 
i.  The fees or commissions charged for providing a bona fide service, such as professional, technical, consultant or managerial services and assistance in the procurement of essential personnel, facilities, equipment, materials or supplies required for performance of the contract, provided that the fee or commission is determined by the county to be reasonable and not excessive as compared with fees customarily allowed for similar services. 
ii.  The fees charged for delivery of materials and supplies required on a job site (but not the cost of the materials and supplies themselves) when the hauler, trucker, or delivery service is not also the manufacturer of, or a regular dealer in, the materials and supplies, provided that the fee is determined by the county to be reasonable and not excessive as compared with fees customarily allowed for similar services. The fees or commissions charged for providing any bonds or insurance specifically required for the performance of the contract, provided that the fee or commission is determined by Fulton County to be reasonable and not excessive as compared with fees customarily allowed for similar services. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(G), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-447.3. - Certification as a small business enterprise. 
(1)  Prime contractors are required to provide DPCC documentation of its certification as an SBE, if applicable, and any subcontractor SBE certification at the time of bid, per the eligible project's solicitation documents, in order to count participation of a business towards an SBE goal. Certified SBEs must submit to DPCC or, if applicable, to the prime contractor, either (1) a letter or other documentation that establishes that the firm qualifies as an 8(a) or small business enterprise firm or HUBZone firm with the United States Small Business Administration; or (2) a letter or other documentation from the City of Atlanta, MARTA, GDOT or the United States Department of Transportation that establishes that the firm qualifies as a DBE; or (3) submit proof of small business certification from a certifying agency within Georgia that applies small business size standards consistent with or less than the applicable revenue and employment size standards for small businesses established by the United States Small Business Administration, and meets other county criteria related to SBE status. 
(2)  Certified SBEs must provide the prime with any information requested to verify location of the business within the Atlanta MSA. 
(3)  When a firm which has previously been designated as an SBE exceeds the size standard for its industry as defined pursuant to 13 CFR § 121.201 (as further explained in 13 CFR §§ 121.104 through 121.107), it must notify the DPCC and, if applicable, the prime contractor of the change in status. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(H), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-447.4. - Decertification of small business enterprise. 
If an SBE is decertified, the SBE has an affirmative obligation to notify the DPCC and the prime contractor of such decertification. If the prime contractor no longer meets the county's SBE goals after the decertification of the former SBE, the prime contractor shall be required, within 30 days after notification by the SBE, to demonstrate good faith efforts to substitute the decertified SBE with another certified SBE. Failure to demonstrate good faith efforts to substitute a decertified SBE with a certified SBE will result in the contractor being declared non-responsive, if done prior to the award of the contract, or the contractor being held in default of the contract, if done after the award of the contract. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(I), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-447.5. - Appeals. 
A responsible bidder that is determined to be non-responsive to the requirements of the SBE program, and that otherwise would have been awarded a contract, as determined in consultation with DPCC, shall receive a written determination by the DPCC, via certified mail, setting forth the reasons for the determination of non-responsiveness. 
Any appeal regarding the SBE program shall be subject to the appeal process provided in the County Code at section 102-453. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(J), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-447.6. - Small business enterprise directory. 
The county will create an SBE Directory that lists SBEs categorized by types of firms to facilitate identifying businesses with capabilities relevant to a particular specification. Each business listing will contain the business name, contact person, address, phone number, legal structure of the business, and details concerning the company's business specialties. North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) Codes will be identified for each company. The DPCC will continuously update and maintain the directory on the computer and on hard copy. In compiling this directory, the DPCC will identify as many SBEs as possible that perform the types of work or provide the types of supplies needed by the county. The county will maintain and have available an updated SBE Directory and source list(s) for each bid/proposal solicitation to facilitate identifying SBEs working in areas relevant to county contracting requirements and the particular solicitations. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(K), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-447.7. - Methods by which the county may require contractors and subcontractors to comply with applicable SBE requirements. 
The county's staff is available to assist contractors and subcontractors in implementing this program. As a standard procedure, such assistance may include: 
(1)  Clearly setting forth any Fulton County SBE goals in specific applicable Fulton County solicitations; 
(2)  Attending pre-proposal/bid conferences to explain the county's SBE program; 
(3)  Identifying certified SBEs in Fulton County's database and providing a list of available, certified SBEs upon request; 
(4)  Providing plan holder lists and pre-bid sign-in sheets made available to interested SBEs upon request; 
(5)  Remaining available to assist bidders in developing their SBE programs; 
(6)  Monitoring SBE participation levels on eligible projects throughout the duration of a contract. Contractors violating contract provisions regarding SBE participation are subject to the sanctions set forth in section 102-447.8 below; and 
(7)  Monitoring prompt payment by prime contractors to SBE subcontractors, pursuant to County Code at section 102-435(j), "Methods for promoting nondiscrimination in purchasing and contracting." 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(L), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-447.8. - Means to ensure bidders and contractors make good faith efforts to meet SBE contract goals. 
The county shall request documentation of good faith efforts from bidders at the time of bid. 
(1)  For all contracts for which SBE contract goals have been established, the bidder shall be required to submit SBE participation information to Fulton County. The award of the contract will be conditioned upon satisfaction of the requirements established by the county. The bidder shall submit, with its bid submission, the following information: 
(a)  The name, address, certification number and certifying agency of the SBE firm(s) that will participate in the contract; 
(b)  The description of the work each named SBE will perform and associated NIGP code(s); and 
(c)  The dollar amount of participation by each named SBE firm. 
(2)  If the SBE participation submitted by the bidder does not meet the SBE contract goals, the bidder must submit with its bid submission evidence demonstrating that "good faith efforts" were made to meet the goals. The county will review documents submitted at the time of bid and make its determination of good faith efforts based on those submitted documents. Additional submissions will not be permitted. To determine sufficient "good faith efforts" to meet the SBE contract goal, a bidder/proposer shall document the steps it has taken to obtain SBE participation, which may include, but are not limited to, the following types of actions that are not meant to be mandatory or exhaustive: 
(a)  Attendance at a pre-bid meeting, if any, scheduled by the county to inform SBEs of subcontracting opportunities under a given solicitation; 
(b)  Advertisement in general circulation media, trade association publications, the county website and other media for at least 15 days before bids or proposals are due; 
(c)  Written notification to SBEs that their interest in the contract is solicited; 
(d)  Efforts made to select portions of the work proposed to be performed by SBEs in order to increase the likelihood of achieving the stated goal; 
(e)  Good faith efforts to negotiate with SBEs for specific subcontracts, including at a minimum: 
i.  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of SBEs that were contacted; 
ii.  A description of the information provided to SBEs regarding the plans and specifications for portions of the work to be performed; 
iii.  A statement of why additional agreements with SBE were not reached; 
iv.  Concerning each SBE, the SBE contacted but rejected as unqualified and the reasons for the bidder's conclusion; and 
v.  Efforts made to assist the SBEs contacted that needed assistance in obtaining bonding or insurance required by the competitor or the county. 
(f)  To determine whether a bidder that has failed to meet SBE goals may be awarded the contract, the county will determine whether the efforts the bidder made to obtain SBE participation were "good faith efforts." Efforts that are merely pro forma are not "good faith efforts" to meet the goals. In order to award a contract to a bidder that has failed to meet SBE contract goals, DPCC will determine whether the bidder made good faith efforts to meet the county's SBE goals. 
(g)  A bidder making a good faith effort would consider a number of factors in negotiating with subcontractors, including SBE subcontractors, and would take a firm's price and capabilities as well as contract goals into consideration. However, the fact that there may be some additional costs involved in finding and using SBEs is not in itself sufficient reason for a bidder's failure to meet the contract SBE goal, as long as such costs are reasonable. Also, the ability or desire of a prime contractor to perform the work of a contract with its own organization does not relieve the bidder of the responsibility to make good faith efforts. 
(h)  Prime contractors are not, however, required to accept higher quotes from SBEs if the price difference is excessive or unreasonable. In determining whether a bidder has made good faith efforts, DPCC will take into account the performance of other bidders in meeting the contract. For example, when the apparent successful bidder fails to meet the contract goal, but others meet it, DPCC may reasonably raise the question of whether, with additional reasonable efforts, the apparent successful bidder could have met the goal. If the apparent successful bidder fails to meet the goal but meets or exceeds the average SBE participation obtained by other bidders, the county may view this, in conjunction with other factors, as evidence of the apparent successful bidder having made good faith efforts. 
(i)  Bidders that fail to meet SBE goals and fail to demonstrate "good faith efforts" shall be deemed non-responsive to the county's SBE requirements and shall not be eligible to be awarded the contract. 
(j)  To ensure that all obligations under contracts awarded to SBEs are met, the county shall review the contractor's SBE involvement efforts during the performance of the contract. The contractor shall bring to the attention of the county any situation in which regularly scheduled progress payments are not made to SBE subcontractors. 
The county may also request documentation of good faith efforts from contractors after award of a contract with SBE goals. Specifically, in the event that a subcontractor becomes decertified as an SBE after contract award, the subcontractor will be required to notify the prime contractor of decertification and the prime contractor shall either replace the decertified SBE subcontractor by an equivalent SBE certified firm or provide documentation of good faith efforts. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(M), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-447.9. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
A contractor who fails to comply with any portion of this program, and whose failure to comply continues for a period of 30 calendar days after the contractor receives written notice of such noncompliance from the Purchasing Director, shall be subject to any or all of the following penalties: 
(1)  Withholding of ten percent of all future payments for the eligible project until DPCC determines that the contractor is in compliance with this program. 
(2)  Withholding of all future payments under the eligible project until it is determined that the contractor is in compliance with this program. 
(3)  Cancellation of the eligible project. 
(4)  Refusal of all future contracts or subcontracts with the county for a minimum of one year and a maximum of five years from the date upon which this penalty is imposed. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(N), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-447.10. - Outreach to SBEs. 
Fulton County considers information dissemination and communication with SBEs as an integral part of the county's SBE program. As a part of its outreach program, DPCC may solicit input from representatives of SBEs, trade associations and community organizations. This input will serve several important functions, including: 
(1)  Providing information to identify additional SBE firms; 
(2)  Assisting in refining SBE program goals and procedures; 
(3)  Disseminating procurement opportunities to SBEs; and 
(4)  Providing an independent assessment of the effectiveness of the county's SBE program. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(O), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-447.11. - Procedures to require that participating SBEs are identified by name, by bidders for contracts. 
The county may indicate, in specific solicitations for contracts that are determined to provide opportunities for SBE participation, goals for the use of SBE firms. Solicitations may require all bidders to submit a written assurance of meeting the goals in their bids or proposals. Bids may also include a proposed schedule of SBE participation that lists the names of SBE subcontractors, a description of the work each is to perform and the dollar value of each proposed SBE subcontract. If the SBE participation does not meet the SBE contract goals, the bidders must submit sufficient information and evidence demonstrating that the bidder made good faith efforts to meet the goals on designated contracts. 
Bidders may be required to submit this information at a time to be determined by DPCC. Agreements between a bidder and an SBE in which the SBE promises not to provide subcontracting quotations to other bidders shall be prohibited. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(P), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-447.12. - Prime contracting guidelines. 
(1)  As early in the acquisition planning process as practicable, but no later than 30 days before the issuance of a solicitation, a user or procuring agency must coordinate with DPCC when a procurement is valued over $100,000.00 in order to determine potential measures to be taken to maximize prime participation of SBEs in the procurement. 
(2)  If DPCC believes that a proposed procurement will render SBE prime contract participation unlikely, then DPCC may recommend to the procuring agency alternative procurement methods which would increase SBE prime contract participation. Such alternatives may include: 
(a)  Breaking up the procurement into smaller discrete procurements; and 
(b)  Breaking out one or more discrete components. 
(3)  Where methods under subsection (2)(b) are not feasible, DPCC will work with the procuring agency to recommend a strategy that preserves SBE prime contract participation to the maximum extent practicable. DPCC will also work to recommend that SBE participation is maximized through teaming arrangements and subcontracting opportunities. 
(4)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to mandate increased participation of SBEs where such increased participation would significantly affect the ability of a user agency to complete a given project. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(Q), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-447.13. - Severability. 
If any provision of this program or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this division which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or applications, and are to this end declared to be severable. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(R), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-447.14. - Periodic review. 
There shall be a periodic review and analysis of the program to determine if adjustments need to be made prior to its sunset within five years. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(S), 10-5-16) 
Sec. 102-447.15. - Sunset. 
This program shall sunset on December 31, 2022. 
(Res. No. 16-0864, App. A(T), 10-5-16) 
DIVISION 11. - LEGAL AND CONTRACTUAL REMEDIES 

Sec. 102-448. - Right to protest; due process. 
(a)  Applicability. The provision of this Code section applies to the following Code sections: 
(1)  Section 102-373, Competitive sealed bidding; 
(2)  Section 102-374, Competitive sealed proposals; 
(3)  Section 102-375, Competitive selection procedures for professional and consultant services; 
(4)  Section 102-376, Qualification based selection procedures for architectural and engineering services for federally funded projects; 
(5)  Section 102-381, Prequalification of offerors (request for qualifications); 
(6)  Section 102-382, Request for quotation; 
(7)  Section 102-389, Responsibility of offerors; 
(8)  Section 102-449, Debarment; and 
(9)  Section 102-450, Suspension of contractors. 
(b)  Right to protest. Any actual offeror that has submitted a bid/proposal for a particular procurement and is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of the contract shall protest in writing to the purchasing agent after the date that the specific bid or proposal is submitted. No protest will be accepted or considered prior to the date the specific bid or proposal is submitted; it will be considered untimely. All protests shall set forth in full detail the factual and legal basis for the protest and specific relief sought by the protestor. Protests arising from factual or legal basis that the protestor knew or should have known prior to the submission of the bid/proposal must be submitted within three business days of the submission of the bid/proposal. Protests arising from factual or legal basis that the protestor knew or should have known subsequent to the date the bid/proposal was submitted must be submitted within ten business days after the protestor knew or should have known of such basis, but in no event shall any protest be submitted more than ten business days after the award of the contract. Untimely protests will not be considered by the purchasing agent and will be simply denied as untimely. Decisions on timeliness by the purchasing agent are not appealable. This Code section shall be described in all procurement solicitations. 
(c)  Authority to resolve protest. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to settle and resolve any and all protest of an aggrieved bidder or offeror concerning the solicitation or award of a contract prior to the filing of an appeal to the procurement hearing officer, where the right to appeal to a hearing officer is allowable under this Code section. 
(d)  Stand procurements during protest. When a protest has been properly and timely filed and such filing is before a contract award has been approved and spread on the minutes of the commissioners at an open meeting, or before a purchase order has been signed and issued by the purchasing agent, the purchasing agent shall not award the contract until the protest has been settled; except, the purchasing agent, with the approval of the county manager after consulting with the user department, may make a written determination of the award of a contract without delay if necessary to protect substantial interests of the county. 
(e)  Making information on protest available. The purchasing agent shall upon written request, make available to any interested party information submitted that bears on the substance of a protest except where the information is proprietary, confidential, or otherwise submitted or required to be withheld by law or regulation. Entities who desire, for business purposes, to keep its bid or protest documentation confidential shall so request by specifically identifying such information within documents submitted and indicating on the front page of each document that it contains such nonpublic information. 
(f)  Decision on protest. If a protest is timely filed, the purchasing agent shall inform the protestor of the decision in writing within fifteen business days or, if the purchasing agent requires more than fifteen business days to render a decision, the purchasing agent will advise the protestor within the initial ten days of the additional amount of time required to render a decision on the protest. 
(g)  Finality of decision. A decision under subsection (f) of this section is final and conclusive, unless fraudulent or the protestor, having the right to file under this division, files an administrative appeal with the procurement appeals hearing officer in accordance with this division. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. I, § 2-324. 
Sec. 102-449. - Debarment. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Contractor means any individual, partnership, corporation or other business entity that seeks to obtain any construction, procurement, concession, services, lease, subcontract or other contract with the county. 
Debarment means action taken by the county to bar a company from doing business with the county for a period at the county's sole discretion. 
Suspension means action taken by the county to bar a contractor from doing business with the county during a period when investigation into possible debarment is underway. The suspension period will not exceed 120 days. 
(b)  Authority to suspend or debar. After reasonable notice to the entity involved and reasonable opportunity for that entity to be heard, the purchasing agent, after consultation with the user department, the county manager and the county attorney, shall have the authority to suspend an entity for cause from consideration for award of county contracts. As used in this section, the term entity means any business entity, individual, firm, contractor, subcontractor, or business corporation, partnership, limited liability corporation, or joint venture, however designated or structured; provided, further, that any such entity shall also be subject to suspension or debarment under this section if any of its constituents, members, subcontractors at any tier, or subcontractors at any tier of such entity's constituents or members, is found to have committed any act constituting a cause for suspension or debarment and the entity, or any constituent or member, knew or should have known of the commission of the act. The suspension or debarment shall be for a period not to exceed three years, unless cause is based on a felony conviction for an offense related or associated with fraudulent contracting or misappropriation of funds wherein the suspension shall not exceed seven years. 
(c)  Causes for suspension or debarment. The causes for suspension or debarment include: 
(1)  Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtain or attempting to obtain a public or private contractor subcontract, or in performance of such contract or subcontract; 
(2)  Conviction of state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously and directly affects responsibility as a county contractor; 
(3)  Conviction of state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the solicitation and submission of bids or proposals; 
(4)  Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character which is regarded by the purchasing agent to be so serious as to justify suspension action: 
a.  Failure to perform in accordance with the specifications within a time limit provided in a county contract; 
b.  A recent record of failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts; provided, that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for suspension; 
c.  Material misrepresentation of the composition of the ownership or workforce or business entity certified to the county as a minority business enterprise; or 
d.  Falsification of any documents. 
(5)  Commission or solicitation of any act that would constitute a violation of the ethical standards set forth in this Code. 
(6)  Knowing misrepresentation to the county, of the use which a majority owned contractor intends to make a minority business enterprise (a business entity at least 51 percent of which is owned and controlled by minority persons, as defined in this Code and certified as such by the county), as a subcontractor or a joint venture partner, in performing work under contract with the county; 
(7)  A determination that the involved individual, firm, or other business entity has previously received an abatement of taxes, but failed to comply with the prerequisite terms, conditions and obligations of an enterprise zone created pursuant to any applicable law. 
(d)  Initiation of suspension or debarment action. Written notice of a proposed suspension or debarment action shall be sent by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested to the bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor. This notice shall state the suspension or debarment as being considered and set forth the reasons for the action. The purchasing agent shall invite such notified persons and their counsel, if known, to submit records and any and all documents in defense of such suspension or debarment action to be received by the purchasing agent within 14 days of notice of the proposed suspension or debarment action. Notice of proposed suspension or debarment shall also be sent to the county attorney and the user department. Failure to submit a timely written response to the purchasing agent shall result in a waiver of review. 
(e)  Finding cause of suspension or debarment. The purchasing agent shall prepare a written determination of suspension or debarment based on a finding of any of the foregoing causes for suspension, as enumerated in this section. The bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor shall have ten days to file comments upon a determination with the county manager. After consultation with the county attorney, the county manager shall issue a final decision. Both the purchasing agents decision and the county manager's decision shall recite the evidence relied upon. When suspension or debarment is ordered, the length of the suspension or debarment, the reasons for such action and to what extent affiliates are affected shall be set forth. 
(f)  Maintenance of list of suspended or debarred entity. The purchasing agent shall maintain and update a list of suspended and debarred entities. All departments within the county shall be routinely supplied with this list and such list is a public document available to the public upon request. 
(g)  Authority of purchasing director. Under this division, the purchasing director has the power to: 
(1)  Hold informal conferences to settle issues, simplify and set forth the issues in a proceeding, or to consider other matters that may aid in the expedition disposition of the proceeding either by consent of the parties. 
(2)  Impose time limits and require parties to produce for examination any documentation that will assist in the purchasing agent's decision. 
(h)  Effect of suspension or debarment decision. A suspension or debarment decision shall take effect upon issuance and mailing of written notice of such action to the contractor or prospective contractor. After the suspension or debarment decision takes effect, the contractor shall remain suspended or debarred until the period specified in the decision expires, but in no event longer than three years. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. I, § 2-322. 
Sec. 102-450. - Suspension of contractors. 
All contractors who have a recent record of unsatisfactory performance, or who fail to perform in accordance with the specifications or within the time limit provided in a contract shall be subject to suspension from doing business with Fulton County, provided that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for suspension, in accordance with purchasing policies and procedures for a period to be determined by the purchasing agent. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. II, § 102-355. 
Sec. 102-451. - Solicitations or awards in violation of law. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies where it is determined by the purchasing agent, that a solicitation or award of a contract is in violation of law. 
(b)  Remedies prior to award. If the protest is timely and properly filed prior to an award, and the purchasing agent, after consultation with the county attorney determines that a solicitation or proposed award of a contract is in violation of law, then the solicitation of proposed award shall be canceled or revised to comply with the law. 
(c)  Remedies after award. If the protest is timely and properly filed after an award, and the purchasing agent, after consultation with the county attorney, determines that the solicitation or award of a contract is in violation of applicable law, then: 
(1)  If the entity awarded the contract has not acted fraudulently or in bad faith: 
a.  The contract may be ratified and affirmed, provided it is determined that so doing is in the best interest of the county; or 
b.  The contract may be terminated and the entity awarded the contract shall be compensated for the actual expenses of the contract, prior to the termination. 
(2)  If the entity awarded the contract has acted fraudulently or in bad faith: 
a.  The contract may be declared null and void or voidable; or 
b.  The contract may be ratified and affirmed if such action is in the best interest of the county, without prejudice to the county's right to such damages as may be appropriate. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Note— Formerly Code, Pt. I, § 2-323. 
Sec. 102-452. - Procurement appeals hearing officers. 
(a)  Appointment and tenure. The county attorney shall appoint five procurement appeals hearing officers who shall be confirmed by the board of commissioners. The officers shall possess the educational background and public or private employment experience to examine facts and apply legal principles, including, but not limited to experience with evidentiary and civil procedure issues, to controversies regarding the following subjects: procurement of goods and services, construction, professional and consultant services and information technology. No county employee or official shall be appointed who is a contractor or subcontractor or who owns any interest in any contracting or subcontracting firm or who does business with the county as a contractor. The officer shall serve a two-year term and shall not be eligible to serve more than two consecutive terms. 
(b)  Qualifications. The officers shall process the educational background and public or private employment experience to examine facts and apply legal principles, including but not limited to experience with evidentiary and civil procedure issues, to controversies regarding the following subjects: procurement and disposal of goods and services, construction, professional and consultant services and information technology. No county employee or official shall be appointed who is a contractor or subcontractor or who owns any interest in any contracting or subcontracting firm or who does business with the county as a contractor. 
(c)  Authority and scope of review. With the exception of controversies that are the subject matter of litigation or pending administrative review members of the hearing officers panel shall have the authority to review and determine any issue or matter in controversy arising from the adoption, implementation and enforcement of this article. 
(d)  Compensation and access to facilities. The hearing officers shall receive fair compensation at an hourly rate to be determined by the county attorney for all time expended in the performance of duties created by this section. All hearing shall be open to the public and shall be held in a suitable place within a Fulton County building. Administrative and support services, as may be required by the hearing officer in the performance of such duties, shall be furnished by the county and the cost of same shall be borne by the county. 
(e)  Authority of procurement appeals hearing officers. The procurement appeals hearing officers shall have the authority to review and determine any appeal by an aggrieved party from a determination by the purchasing agent that is authorized in section 102-448(b). 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-453. - Appeals. 
(a)  Time for filing notice of appeal. For an appeal before a procurement appeals hearing officer under the previous section, the aggrieved person shall file a notice of appeal with the purchasing agent with a copy to the head of the applicable using agency and county attorney within seven days of receipt of the notice of an adverse action by the purchasing agent concerning the person's protest. 
(b)  Notice of hearing date; hearing. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal from the aggrieved party by the purchasing agent, the purchasing agent shall forward the notice to a procurement appeals hearing officer within three days of receipt of the notice. The duties of the procurement appeals hearing officer shall be as follows: 
(1)  The procurement appeals hearing officer shall set a hearing date not more than thirty days from the date of receipt of the notice from the purchasing agent. The officer shall cause notice of the hearing date, time and location to be served upon all parties, by registered mail. 
(2)  At the hearing, all parties shall be provided a fair and impartial hearing and shall be allowed to offer argument as to whether the purchasing agent's decision should be affirmed or overturned. Said hearing will not be de novo, but shall be of an appellate nature. 
(c)  Decision. The procurement appeals hearing officer shall, within seven days of the hearing, make a written decision on the appeal, which decision shall affirm or deny the decision by the purchasing agent. The officer shall decide whether: 
(1)  The solicitation or award being appealed was in accordance with applicable law and the terms and conditions of the solicitation; or 
(2)  The debarment or suspension being appealed was in accordance with applicable law and in the best interest of the city and was fair. 
(d)  Notice of decision. The procurement appeals hearing officer shall issue written notice of the decision on the appeal to all parties within seven days of the hearing. The notice of the decision shall be sent to all parties by registered mail and shall set forth the reasons for the decision. 
(e)  Standard of review for factual issues. The determination of the procurement appeals hearing officer shall be final and conclusive, unless arbitrary, capricious, fraudulent or clearly erroneous. 
(f)  Discontinuance of appeal. After a notice of appeal to the purchasing agent has been filed, a protestor may not discontinue such appeal without prejudice, except as authorized by a procurement appeals hearing officer. 
(g)  Authority to resolve protest. One of three independent hearing officers appointed by the board of commissioners shall have the authority to settle and resolve any and all protest on aggrieved bidder or offeror concerning solicitation or award of a contract prior to commencement of an action in court concerning the controversy. 
(h)  Remedies. If the protest is sustained, the county shall remedy the protest by awarding the protesting bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor the reasonable cost incurred in connection with the bid including bid preparation cost and cost other than attorney's fees. 
(i)  Finality of decision. A decision under subsection (e) of this section is final and conclusive as to the county appeal process. Any further action shall be through the court. 
(j)  Fees. The party losing the appeal to the purchasing hearing officer will be responsible for the procurement appeals hearing officer's fees and costs. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
DIVISION 12. - INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS 

Sec. 102-454. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Cooperative purchasing means procurement conducted by or on behalf of more than one public procurement unit. 
Public procurement unit means the United States government or any department, agency or division thereof; any county, city, town and any subdivision of the state or public agency of any such subdivision; public authority, educational, health or other institution; any entity which expends public funds for procurement of supplies, services or construction. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-455. - Cooperative purchasing authorized. 
The purchasing agent may participate in, sponsor, conduct or administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the procurement of supplies, services or construction with one or more public procurement units in accordance with an agreement entered into between the participants. Such cooperative purchasing agreements may include but are not limited to joint or multiparty contracts between public purchasing units. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-456. - Sale, acquisition or use of supplies. 
The purchasing agent may sell to, acquire from or use any supplies belonging to another public procurement unit independent of the requirements of division 3 of this article. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-457. - Cooperative use of supplies or services. 
The purchasing agent may enter into an agreement, independent of the requirements of division 3 of this article, with any public procurement unit for the cooperative use of supplies or services under the terms agreed upon between the parties. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-458. - Joint use of facilities. 
The purchasing agent may enter into agreements for the common use or lease of warehousing facilities, capital equipment and other facilities with another public procurement unit under the terms agreed upon between the parties. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-459. - Use of state contracts. 
The purchasing agent may procure supplies, services or construction items through contracts established by purchasing division of the state where such contracts and contractors substantially meet the requirements of this article. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-460. - Purchase of surplus and excess federal property authorized. 
The purchasing agent may purchase surplus and excess personal and real property from the United States government of any department, agency or division thereof, independent of the requirements of division 3 of this article. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-461. - Board authorization required. 
The purchasing agent shall not procure, acquire, sell, dispose of, lease, or use any supplies, services, construction items or professional and consultant services, facilities, equipment, or real property on behalf of the county pursuant to any state contract or cooperative purchasing transaction or contract established by a public procurement unit for an amount over $49,999.99 without BOC approval. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
DIVISION 13. - ETHICS IN PUBLIC CONTRACTING 

Sec. 102-462. - Definitions. 
Business means any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, organization, self-employed individual and any other entity operated for economic gain, whether professional, industrial, or commercial, and other entities, which for purposes of federal income taxation are operated as nonprofit organizations. 
Confidential information means information which has been obtained in the course of performing official duties as an officer or employee. 
Contract means any written or otherwise established agreement, lease, claim, account, or demand against any person, to which the county is an actual or otherwise interested party. 
Gifts and favors means anything of value given by or received from a prohibited source. 
Immediate family means an officer or employee and the spouse of or an individual in a certified committed relationship or legally recognized domestic partnership with an officer or employee, as well as the parents, children, brothers, and sisters of an officer or employee. 
Intent means the state of mind in which a person seeks to accomplish a given result through a deliberate course of action. Intent is the design, resolve, or determination with which a person acts, and which can seldom be proved by direct evidence, but must usually be proved by circumstances from which intent may be inferred. 
Intent to influence means to deliberately and willfully act in a manner chosen and designed to exert power over others, or to modify or affect the actions of others, even if in a gentle, subtle, or gradual fashion. 
Interest means any financial interest or personal interest or any other direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit held by or accruing to an officer or employee as a result of a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the county. Unless otherwise provided, the term "interest" does not include any remote interest. For purposes of this code of ethics, the term "financial interest" means any interest which shall, directly or indirectly, yield a monetary or other material benefit to the officer or employee, or to any person employing or retaining the services of the officer or employee, or to the immediate family of the officer or employee; and, the term "personal interest" means any interest arising from relationships between the officer or employee and members of his or her immediate family or from associations with any business, whether or not a financial interest is involved. For the purposes of this code of ethics, and without being limited thereto, an officer or employee shall be deemed to have an interest in matters and transactions involving: 
(1)  Any person in his or her immediate family; 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship (either written or implied) exists, whereby he or she may receive any payment or other benefit, including any agreement for employment; and 
(3)  Any business in which he or she is a director, officer, employee, prospective employee, or substantial shareholder. 
Matter or transaction means the subject of any official act or action by an officer or employee or any governing body of the county or any county agency. 
Officer or employee means any elected officer of the county, any person appointed to a county Board, commission, or agency by the board of commissioners, any person employed by the county, including contractual employees, and any person retained by the county or any agency of the county in a consulting capacity, who is exclusively obligated to the county for a period of 90 or more days. This definition does not include members of advisory boards having no decision-making authority; provided, however, that county employees serving on the Advisory Committee of the Atlanta/Fulton County Water Resources Commission continue to be included within this definition while serving on that advisory committee. This definition includes retired former employees and other former employees of the county during any period in which they are later employed or retained by the county or any county agency. 
Official act or action means any executive, legislative, administrative, appointive, ministerial, or discretionary act taken by the board of commissioners or the county manager, as well as any such act taken by any other officer or employee in the performance of his or her official duties. 
Paid means the receipt of, or right to receive, a salary or a commission, percentage, brokerage, or contingent fee for services. 
Participate means to take part in any official act, actions, or proceedings personally, and to take part in such acts, actions, or proceedings as an officer or employee for the purpose of performing a duty, granting or denying approvals, rendering decisions, or failing to so act or perform such a duty. 
Participation in contracting means , with respect to current officers and employees as well as former officers and employees during the time periods set forth herein), to take part in any official act, actions, or proceedings personally, which acts, actions, or proceedings involve county contracts, and to take part in such acts, actions, or proceedings as an officer or employee for the purpose of performing a duty, or otherwise to grant or deny approvals, make recommendations, prepare any part of purchasing specifications or solicitations for bids or proposals, to influence the content of such documents, to render advice regarding such documents or contracts or the interpretation or meaning of county regulations and policies relevant to such documents or contracts, to investigate, audit, review, or make any ruling or determination regarding any proceedings or applications relating to such documents or contracts or related subcontracts, or to attempt to or actually influence the official acts, actions, proceedings, or decisions of others. 
Person means any individual, business, representative, fiduciary, trust, or association. 
Prohibited source means any person, business, or entity that the involved officer or employee knows or should know: 
(1)  Is seeking official action from the county; 
(2)  Is seeking to do or is doing business with the county; 
(3)  Represents a person who is seeking official action from the county or who is seeking to do or is doing business with the county; 
(4)  Has interests that may be affected by the performance or nonperformance of official duties by the officer or employee; or 
(5)  Is a registered lobbyist in accordance with state law. 
Reprimand means an action taken by the board of ethics, which constitutes and transmits a public disapproval of the conduct of an officer or employee. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-463. - Employee conflict of interest. 
(a)  Conflict of interest. It shall be a breach of ethical standards for any employee to participate directly or indirectly in procurement when the employee knows: 
(1)  The employee or any member of the employee's immediate family has a financial interest pertaining to the procurement; 
(2)  A business or organization in which the employee, or any member of the employee's immediate family, has a financial interest pertaining to the procurement; or 
(3)  Any other person, business, or organization with whom the employee or any member of the employee's immediate family is negotiating or has an arrangement concerning prospective employment is involved in the procurement. 
(b)  Discovery of actual or potential conflict of interest, disqualification, and waiver. Upon discovery of an actual or potential conflict of interest, an employee shall promptly submit a written statement of disqualification and shall withdraw from further participation in the transaction involved. The employee may, at the same time, apply to the ethics commission in accordance with sections 2-66 et seq., for an advisory opinion as to what further participation, if any, the employee may have in the transaction. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-464. - Employee disclosure requirements. 
(a)  Disclosure. Any employee that serves on a vendor selection committee or a designated advisor to the vendor selection committee for a competitive sealed proposal shall complete a confidentiality agreement and disclosure report and disclose whether the employee or any member of the employee's immediate family has a business or financial interest pertaining to the procurement. 
(b)  Violation. Violation of the confidentiality agreement and disclosure report shall result in removal of the employee from the vendor selection committee or as designated advisor to the vendor selection committee and may result in the cancellation of the solicitation. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-465. - Gratuities and kickbacks. 
(a)  Gratuities. It shall be unethical for any person to offer, give or agree to give any employee or former employee or for any employee or former employee to solicit, demand, accept or agree to accept from another person a gratuity or an offer of employment in connection with any decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, preparation or any part of a program requirement or a purchase request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing or in any other advisory capacity in any proceeding or application, request for ruling, determination, claim or controversy or other particular matter pertaining to any program requirement or a contract or subcontract or to any solicitation or proposal therefor. 
(b)  Kickbacks. It shall be unethical for any payment, gratuity or offer of employment to be made by or on behalf of a subcontractor under a contract to the prime contractor or higher tier subcontractor or any person associated therewith as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order. 
(c)  Contract clause. The prohibition against gratuities and kickbacks prescribed in this section shall be conspicuously set forth in every contract and solicitation therefor. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-466. - Contingent fees. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unethical for a person to be retained or to retain a person to solicit or secure a county contract upon an agreement or understanding for a commission, percentage, brokerage or contingent fee, except for retention of bona fide employees of bona fide established commercial selling agencies for the purpose of securing business. 
(b)  Contract clause required. Every county contract or purchase order shall contain the clause prohibiting contingent fees, as follows: 
"The vendor or contractor or firm warrants that it has not employed or retained any company or person, other than a bona fide employee working for the vendor or contractor or firm, to solicit or secure this contract or purchase order; and that the vendor or contractor or firm has not paid or agreed to pay any person, company, association, corporation, individual or firm, other than a bona fide employee working for the vendor or contractor or firms, any fee, commission, percentage, gift or any other consideration contingent upon or resulting from the award or making of this agreement. For the breach or violation of the above warranty, and upon a finding after notice and hearing, the county shall have the right to terminate the contract or purchase order without liability, and, at its discretion, to deduct from the contract or purchase order price, or otherwise recover the full amount of such fee, commission, percentage, gift or consideration." The requirement of incorporating the clause prohibiting contingent fees into purchase orders and contracts shall be considered met when such quoted language is set forth in an exhibit attached to the contract and appropriate language incorporating the exhibit into the contract is set forth in the contract." 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-467. - Contemporaneous employment. 
Unless otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unethical under this division for any employee who is participating directly or indirectly in the procurement process to become or to be, while such an employee, the employee of any person contracting with the governmental body by whom the employee is employed. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Sec. 102-468. - Violations. 
(a)  Any intentional violation of this code of ethics in public contracting, the furnishing of false or misleading information to the purchasing agent with respect to the disclosures and duties outlined herein shall subject the violator to: 
(1)  The purchasing agent making a recommendation for imposition of an administrative sanction not to exceed $1,000.00, which sanction shall be deposited into the general fund of Fulton County; and/or 
(2)  A public reprimand. 
(b)  In addition to those sanctions provided for at subsection (a), with regard to a violation of this code of ethics committed by an employee of Fulton County, the purchasing agent may recommend to the board of commissioners or the appropriate appointing authority disciplinary action in accordance with the personnel rules and regulations of Fulton County. 
(c)  In addition to those sanctions provided for at subsection (a), with regard to a violation of this code of ethics committed by any person, business, or other entity, the purchasing agent may commence debarment proceedings in accordance with applicable ordinances of Fulton County. 
(Res. No. 13-0052, 1-23-13) 
Secs. 102-469—102-490. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - COUNTY PROPERTY[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— County property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-491. - Sale of personal property. 
(a)  In all cases where any article or articles of any kind or description whatsoever belonging to the county are not needed for county purposes, and it is desired by the commissioners to dispose of the same, sale of such article or articles shall be under the direction of the county purchasing agent, to the end that not only purchases of all supplies used by the county but sale of such as may not be needed shall be concentrated in the office of purchasing agent. 
(b)  In all auction sales of surplus property owned by the county, bidders shall be required to post ten percent of their respective bids at the time of the sale; provided, further, that the ten percent shall be forfeited if the bidder does not consummate the sale within a 30-day period. 
(Code 1983, §§ 23-3-71, 23-3-72) 
Sec. 102-492. - Construction standards. 
The board of commissioners hereby approves the standards attached to the commissioners' agenda item no. 95-1193 and incorporated hereto and directs all project managers responsible for Fulton County construction and renovation projects to follow and meet the standards. All project managers responsible for Fulton County construction and renovation projects shall require all architects, engineers, contractors, and all others to follow and meet the standards during the construction of Fulton County projects. 
(95-1193, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 102-493. - Vehicles powered by natural gas or alternate fuels to be purchased. 
Vehicles powered by natural gas, or other alternate fuels, shall be purchased as a portion of the county fleet of light and heavy vehicles, consistent with the requirements of the Federal Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 and the Federal Energy Policy Act of 1992. 
(96-0839, 7-3-96) 
Secs. 102-494—102-525. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 102-526. - Compliance with division provisions. 
In the management of properties acquired by and under the supervision of the Fulton County Land Agent, the procedures set out hereinafter shall be followed. 
(Code 1983, § 23-3-51) 
Sec. 102-527. - Habitable properties; land agent to obtain tenants. 
The land agent, as quickly as possible, shall obtain suitable tenants for all habitable properties belonging to Fulton County for which there is no immediate public need. 
(Code 1983, § 23-3-52) 
Sec. 102-528. - Rentals. 
The rentals assessed and to be collected shall be commensurate with those prevailing in the area for similar accommodations. 
(Code 1983, § 23-3-53) 
Sec. 102-529. - Disposition of funds. 
All funds collected as rent shall be turned over immediately to the Comptroller of Fulton County and deposited in the appropriate account. 
(Code 1983, § 23-3-54) 
Sec. 102-530. - Warrants in cases of default. 
The land agent is authorized in the name of Fulton County to sue out distress warrants and/or dispossessory warrants in cases of default. 
(Code 1983, § 23-3-55) 
Sec. 102-531. - Maintenance of premises. 
The land agent is charged with the duty of maintaining all premises in reasonably safe condition and, for such purposes, is authorized to make emergency, minor, and major repairs subject, nevertheless, to the following conditions and procedures: 
(1)  Whenever an immediate repair is necessary to protect the property or to provide utilities or shelter to a tenant, the land agent is authorized in his discretion to do whatever is necessary to remedy the condition caused by the emergency. 
(2)  Minor repairs not exceeding $500.00 may be made by the land agent on his own authority and in his discretion. 
(3)  Any repair involving the expenditure of more than $500.00 and which is not of an emergency nature, shall be approved by the director of public buildings before the same shall be authorized. 
(Code 1983, § 23-3-56) 
Sec. 102-532. - Report to clerk; fire insurance. 
The land agent shall report promptly to the clerk of the county commission on the ownership and acquisition of all properties and ascertain that adequate fire insurance coverage has been taken upon all premises. 
(Code 1983, § 23-3-57) 
Sec. 102-533. - Taxes against property. 
Where taxes are due or assumed at the time any property is acquired, the land agent shall cause such taxes to be paid on or before the due date thereof. 
(Code 1983, § 23-3-58) 
Sec. 102-534. - Counsel of county attorney. 
In any controversy involving questions of law, the land agent shall report the same to the county attorney and be guided by the advice and counsel of the county attorney. 
(Code 1983, § 23-3-59) 
Secs. 102-535—102-565. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMERCIAL FILMING ON COUNTY PROPERTY[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-0875, Exh. A, adopted Oct. 18, 2017, changed the title of Div. 3 from "Motion Picture Productions" to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 

Sec. 102-566. - Purpose. 
The Fulton County Board of Commissioners invites and encourages film production utilizing county property by applicants, provided that the procedures created by the county manager or his/or her designee are adhered to, and that the county is indemnified from any responsibility arising from injury, accident, destruction of property, or other occurrence associated with the project. Fulton County, acting through the county manager or his/her designee reserves the right to refuse access to county property on the grounds provided in the procedures or at the discretion of the county manager. 
(92-RC-194, 5-20-92; 17-0875, Exh. A, 10-18-17) 
Sec. 102-567. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person, business, or other entity submitting a request to the county for commercial filming or commercial still photography on a county owned or leased property or facility. 
Commercial filming means digital or film recording of a visual image or sound recording by an applicant for a market audience, such as for a documentary, television or feature film, advertisement, the creation of a product for sale, or the use of actors, models, sets, props or similar project, but not including activities associated with broadcasting breaking news. 
Commercial still photography means the use of photographic equipment by an applicant to capture still images on film, digital format, and other similar technologies now in existence or will be created and is intended for a market audience or for sale. 
County property means Fulton County owned or leased real property, building, facility, personalty, easement, right-of-way, parking lot or other similar asset. 
Film location agreement means the standard form agreement developed by the office of the county attorney for use by the county and the applicant to create a binding relationship between the parties regarding commercial filming or commercial still photography on county owned or leased property or facility. This agreement may be modified from time to time by the office of the county attorney to meet the needs of the county. 
(17-0875, Exh. A, 10-18-17) 
Sec. 102-568. - Delegation. 
The county manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized with the necessary discretion to approve or disallow commercial filming or commercial still photography, and related matters on Fulton County property, and the county manager is hereby granted the authority: (1) to establish procedures governing commercial filming or photography on county property, (2) to post such procedures on the county's webpage, and other suitable locations, (3) approve or deny request to conduct commercial filming or commercial still photography on county property, and (4) to execute Fulton County's form agreement for filming purposes as this form agreement may be modified as necessary by the county attorney to protect the interests of Fulton County. Except as delegated herein to the county manager, no other approval for commercial filming or commercial still photography on county property by any county official, officer, employee or agent shall be valid or enforceable. 
(17-0875, Exh. A, 10-18-17) 
Sec. 102-569. - Filming procedures. 
These procedures shall be established by the county manager and may be modified from time-to-time as deemed necessary for the interest of the county. These procedures shall be posted on the county's webpage or other suitable location to place the public on notice of the requirements to seek approval to conduct commercial filming or commercial still photography on county property. 
(92-RC-194, 5-20-92; 17-0875, Exh. A, 10-18-17) 
Sec. 102-570. - Fees. 
The board of commissioners reserve the right to establish applicable fees and rates for the use of county property for commercial filming or commercial still photography from time-to-time at its sole discretion. Any change to the fee schedule must be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(17-0875, Exh. A, 10-18-17) 
Sec. 102-571. - Violations. 
County employees who violate this Code section or the procedures established by the county manager may be disciplined under applicable county personnel regulations. Any approval by a county official (including elected, appointed or constitutional), officer, employee or agent for filming on county property, except as provided in this Code section or the procedures established by the county manager shall be null and void, not enforceable and shall not be honored by Fulton County. 
(17-0875, Exh. A, 10-18-17) 
Secs. 102-572—102-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Planning commission, § 58-36 et seq.; records retention committee, § 102-45; employee services fund management committee, § 102-252; electrical advisory board, § 106-36 et seq.; heating, ventilating and air conditioning advisory board, § 106-76 et seq.; development authorities, § 118-31 et seq.; arts council, § 126-46 et seq.; emergency medical services board, § 130-91 et seq.; hazardous material advisory council, § 134-1; citizens commission on the environment, § 134-2; hospital authorities, § 138-56 et seq.; committee to manage county jail welfare fund, § 146-82; parks and recreation advisory board, § 150-31 et seq.; board of trustees of pension plan of 1991, § 154-182; pension board for county employees pension plan of 1982, § 154-296; development advisory committee, § 158-36 et seq.; commission on road improvements, § 162-1; residential care facilities for the elderly authority, § 166-31 et seq.; aging services council, § 166-71 et seq.; board of tax assessors, § 170-61 et seq.; advisory committee on cable TV service, § 172-31 et seq. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts references— Building authority of Fulton County, § 2-386 et seq.; South Fulton Coliseum Authority, § 2-446 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 102-601—102-630. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM COORDINATING COMMITTEE[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 122; law enforcement, ch. 146. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Courts, ch. 10. 

Sec. 102-631. - Establishment; purpose. 
The Fulton County Justice System Coordinating Committee is hereby established to develop and recommend a practical and purposeful justice plan for Fulton County. The justice system coordinating committee will recommend to the Fulton County board of commissioners actions that should be taken to implement the justice plan. The plan will include shortterm and longterm goals and will evolve to respond to new demands on the justice system. 
(95-1184, § 1, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 102-632. - Development of justice plan. 
The justice system coordinating committee shall engage in all activities sufficient to develop a justice plan including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Evaluation of what information is available and needed to make informed decisions about the justice system and to make recommendations about how to improve the gathering, transmission, and presentation of such information. 
(2)  Identification of actual and potential problems within the various components of the justice system, determining the effects on the quality of justice dispensed, and working collectively to address and solve the problems. 
(3)  Preparation of justice impact statements, which will analyze the funding and workload impact of existing and proposed legislation, executive branch orders or actions, and local judicial rules and policies, to show the relationship between action by one justice system component and the subsequent effect on the other components. 
(4)  Evaluation of whether and to what extent the functions of certain components in the Fulton County Justice System should be coordinated or consolidated with the same function in other jurisdictions to become more cost-effective and efficient. 
(5)  Evaluation of the budgets of each component of the justice system. 
(6)  Evaluation of case loads in the various components of the justice system to determine whether any changes or adjustments should be made. 
(7)  Coordination with other local, state, and federal agencies concerning justice system planning. 
(8)  Evaluation of whether funding levels for the justice system are adequate and balanced and whether the funds are being put to their best use. 
(9)  Evaluation of all procedures and procedures to determine their impact on the justice system and whether any changes or adjustments should be made. 
(95-1184, § 2, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 102-633. - Agencies invited to be represented on committee. 
The following agencies shall be invited to have representatives on the justice system coordinating committee: 
(1)  Fulton County Public Defender; 
(2)  Fulton County Sheriff; 
(3)  Fulton County Police Department; 
(4)  Fulton County District Attorney; 
(5)  Fulton County Superior Court; 
(6)  Fulton County Juvenile Court; 
(7)  Clerk of Fulton County Superior Court; 
(8)  Fulton County State Court; 
(9)  Fulton County Probate Court; 
(10)  Solicitor General of Fulton County State Court; 
(11)  Fulton County Marshal; 
(12)  Fulton County Medical Examiner; 
(13)  Georgia Indigent Defense Council; 
(14)  Atlanta Bar Association; 
(15)  Gate City Bar Association; 
(16)  Fulton County Adult Probation; 
(17)  City of Atlanta; 
(18)  North Fulton County municipalities (rotate representative every two years); and 
(19)  South Fulton County municipalities (rotate representative every two years). 
(95-1184, § 3, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 102-634. - Intent of committee actions. 
The actions of the justice system coordinating committee will not and are not intended to hinder or prevent elected officials or department heads from taking whatever actions they deem appropriate, within the province of their respective offices, to address any justice issues. 
(95-1184, § 4, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 102-635. - Meetings. 
The justice system coordinating committee shall meet on a regularly scheduled basis. Committee meetings will be directed by a facilitator selected by the committee. 
(95-1184, § 5, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 102-636. - Invitation of other governmental representatives to committee meetings. 
The committee may invite federal, state, or local representatives to the meetings to discuss matters concerning coordination or cooperation with other governmental entities. 
(95-1184, § 6, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 102-637. - Expansion of membership. 
The committee may expand its membership. 
(95-1184, § 7, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 102-638. - Subcommittees. 
The committee may operate with subcommittees. 
(95-1184, § 8, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 102-639. - Creation of staff. 
The committee contemplates in the future the creation of staff to assist the committee, subject to approval by the board of commissioners. 
(95-1184, § 9, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 102-640. - Annual report to commissioners. 
The justice system coordinating committee will prepare an annual report which summarizes activities and present it to the board of commissioners in January of each year. 
(95-1184, § 10, 10-4-95) 
Secs. 102-641—102-670. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ATLANTA-FULTON COUNTY WATER RESOURCES COMMISSION[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— This division codifies an agreement adopted by the board of commissioners on May 28, 1986. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 26; utilities, ch. 82. 

Sec. 102-671. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Coverage means the required minimum percentage by which net operating revenues, as defined in this section, must exceed the highest annual principal and interest payment on the debt instruments used to finance the project. Such coverage requirement shall be contained in a contract between the borrower and the lender. 
Facilities or the project means the raw water intake, raw water supply lines, raw water reservoir, water treatment plant and other related appurtenances in Fulton County, to be jointly constructed, owned and operated by the parties to this division. 
Indirect costs means those reasonable and necessary costs incurred for a common or joint purpose benefiting more than one cost object, and such costs are not readily assignable to the cost objectives specifically benefited without effort disproportionate to the results achieved. 
Net interest rate means the aggregate interest rate for debt instruments with several principal maturity dates and several coupon interest rates. The net interest rate is determined by multiplying each principal maturity amount by its corresponding number of years to maturity; and dividing the sum of these products into the total interest (plus or minus discounts or premiums, respectively) to be paid over the entire life of such debt instruments. 
Net operating revenues means those remaining revenues generated by the sale of potable water produced by the facilities after all reasonable and necessary direct costs (including depreciation) and indirect costs of operating and maintaining such facilities have been paid. 
Operating costs means those reasonable and necessary direct costs (including depreciation) and indirect costs of operating and maintaining the facilities. Indirect costs shall be determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. Depreciation shall be calculated on a straight line basis over estimated useful life. 
Project costs means those costs which are reasonable and necessary for the completion of the project including, but not necessarily limited to: 
(1)  The cost of acquiring land, rights-of-way and easements; 
(2)  Amounts paid for materials, equipment, labor, bond issuance, professional and other services, insurance and bonds under contracts awarded in connection with the project; 
(3)  Any additional staff within either government necessary for project administration and contract management; and 
(4)  Payment for temporary utilities and utility relocations related to and incurred during the project-in-progress period as may be agreed to by Atlanta and Fulton County. 
Project costs incurred by Atlanta and Fulton County shall be free of any and all handling charges or special fees beyond those normally included in the conduct of business within the respective governments. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 101-2. 
Sec. 102-672. - Name of joint venture. 
The name of the joint venture is the Atlanta-Fulton County Water Resources Commission. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 2.1) 
Sec. 102-673. - Purpose of joint venture. 
The purpose of the joint venture is to develop plans for, acquire the necessary sites and governmental permits for and to construct and operate a water treatment plant and appurtenances in North Fulton County, Georgia, to serve the joint needs of Atlanta and Fulton County in assuring an adequate supply of potable water for the citizens of Atlanta and Fulton County. The water produced by the plant shall be delivered to the parties to this contract for their use. Additionally, the joint venture shall make investigations and coordinate additional joint planning and development for the efficient utilization of the water resources. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 2.2) 
Sec. 102-674. - Powers and duties of the joint venture. 
The joint venture shall fulfill the purposes set forth in section 102-673, and in so doing the joint venture shall have, subject to the terms, conditions and limitations set forth in this division, the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To plan, develop, construct and operate, maintain and keep or cause to be maintained and kept, the facilities in good repair, working order and condition, and from time to time to make or cause to be made, all needed and proper repairs, renewals, replacements and improvements, so that the facilities may be properly and advantageously operated at all times for the benefit of the citizens of Atlanta and Fulton County. 
(2)  To make long-range plans for the joint development, management and utilization of water resources. 
(3)  To provide, in accordance with the terms of the joint venture agreement, all funds and financial arrangements necessary to carry on the functions of the joint venture. 
(4)  To faithfully observe, perform and discharge all of the conditions, actions, liabilities and obligations that are or will be imposed upon it. 
(5)  To perform all other lawful acts and functions necessary to accomplish the purposes of the joint venture. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 3.1) 
Sec. 102-675. - Management of the joint venture. 
(a)  Generally. The decision-making body of the joint venture shall be a management commission. 
(b)  Management commission. There shall be a management commission of the joint venture (the "commission"), which shall consist of seven members, three from Atlanta and three from Fulton County, with each member having one vote. Membership shall include: the Mayor of Atlanta, the President of the City Council of Atlanta, and one councilmember appointed by the president of the city council and approved by the mayor; the Chairperson of the Fulton County board of commissioners and two commissioners selected by the Fulton County board of commissioners; and one person employed by neither Atlanta nor Fulton County who shall be known as the "independent member" of the commission. Said independent member shall be elected by vote of the other members to a term of two years, with the ability to serve successive terms, and shall at all times be a resident of Fulton County or forfeit membership. Officials of Atlanta and Fulton County who are members of the commission shall serve without compensation. Should any of the members representing the respective parties die, become disabled, resign or for any reason cease to be connected with the governmental entity which appointed him or her, the appointing party shall promptly, by written notice served upon the other party, name his or her successor. Upon the resignation or inability of the independent member to complete a term, the other members shall elect a new independent member to a full term. 
(c)  Commission meetings. The first meeting of the commission shall be prior to July 1, 1986, on a date agreed upon by the Mayor of Atlanta and the Chairperson of the Fulton County Commission. At the first meeting, a temporary chairperson shall be elected, and nominations submitted for an independent member. An organizational meeting of the commission at which the independent member shall be elected shall be convened by the temporary chairperson as soon as is practicable following the first meeting. Thereafter, the commission shall meet at a minimum within February, May, August and November of each year and at such times as the commission shall determine for consultation and transaction of the commission's business. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or by any three members of the commission upon ten days' written notice. 
(d)  Conduct of meetings. No action shall be taken unless approved by a majority of members present and voting, except as hereinafter provided. A quorum of five members of the commission shall be required to conduct the business of the joint venture. In the event that the vote of the commission upon any proposition should result in a tie, then such proposition shall be submitted in writing to the members following the meeting at which the vote was taken. Said members shall record their votes in writing and mail same to the chairperson within five days of receipt of the proposition. If such balloting still results in a tie, then such proposition shall be submitted to the Senior Judge of the Fulton County Superior Court, who shall refer the proposition to any disinterested person whom said judge may deem qualified to decide such proposition and the decision of said person to whom said judge refers said proposition shall be final and conclusive on the commission. 
(e)  Officers. The commission shall elect from among its members a chairperson, one or more vice chairpersons, a secretary and a treasurer. The office of secretary and treasurer may be combined. The commission may also elect an assistant treasurer who need not be a member of the commission. The treasurer and any assistant treasurer shall be bonded, at the expense of the joint venture, in such amount as the commission shall determine. 
(f)  Committees. The commission shall appoint an advisory committee composed of no more than four staff members from Atlanta and no more than four staff members from Fulton County. The advisory committee shall attend all meetings of the commission and provide advice and consultation to the commission. The commission may appoint such committees as it may determine from its membership or from the professional staff of each joint venturer and from the personnel of its consulting engineers to assist it in the performance of its duties, and prescribe the purpose, responsibilities, duties and procedures of such committees and the times of meeting. 
(g)  Powers of the commission generally. As agent for the joint venturers, the commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To formulate the plans for the acquisition of sites and all necessary easements for the facilities; to formulate developmental plans, including engineering, construction and financing plans, for the construction and use of the facilities. 
(2)  To contract with either joint venturer or a private entity for the operation of the facilities. 
(3)  To select a general manager as provided hereafter. 
(4)  To establish, review, update and implement plans and procedures for such orderly additions and improvements to the facilities as are necessary to carry out the purposes of the joint venturers. 
(5)  To make long-range plans for additional joint efforts in utilization and management of water resources. 
(6)  To establish the policies and procedures for the operation and maintenance of the facilities. 
(7)  To establish the cost allocation to be charged for the water delivered to the respective distribution systems of Atlanta and Fulton County, based upon metered water flows and finished water pumping costs. 
(8)  To apply for and hold the necessary state permits, to be issued independently to and in the name of Atlanta and Fulton County. 
(9)  To apportion any annual deficits from operations to Atlanta and Fulton County in proportion to the amount of water delivered from the facilities to each. 
(10)  To develop financial plans and procedures to ensure efficient operation of the facilities. 
(11)  To submit an annual budget which includes personnel positions, classifications and salary ranges, and an emergency reserve by September 15 of each year to Atlanta and Fulton County for approval. An amended budget may be submitted from time to time to Atlanta and Fulton County for approval. 
(12)  To coordinate operation of the facilities with the operation of the Atlanta and the Fulton County water systems. 
(13)  To contract for goods and services, subject to the following limitations: 
a.  The funds for such goods and services are available to the commission in line item appropriations of the budget approved by Atlanta and Fulton County. 
b.  Such contracts or purchases do not exceed $50,000.00, except that contracts exceeding that amount are hereby authorized (1) for goods or services for which the entity providing same is listed by name in the budget approved by Atlanta and Fulton County or (2) when the chairperson of the commission certifies that emergency circumstances exist and that failure to contract for goods or services to correct such circumstances would result in the loss of operations of the facilities and that insufficient time is available to secure specific approval of the contract by Atlanta and Fulton County. 
c.  Such contracts are made pursuant to purchasing and minority participation procedures as determined by the commission. 
(14)  Regardless of the amount and when authorized by Atlanta and Fulton County to execute all contracts that are reasonable and necessary for the construction of the facilities, including professional and consultant contracts, provided that the funds for same are available to the commission in specific line items appropriations of the budget approved by Atlanta and Fulton County. 
(15)  Without limiting the generality of the above and when authorized by Atlanta and Fulton County, to contract for, acquire and hold, lease and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes in the joint name of Atlanta and Fulton County pursuant to this agreement as contained in subsection (g)(14) of this section. 
(16)  To undertake such other responsibilities as shall be agreed upon from time to time by Atlanta and Fulton County. 
(h)  Records; certain actions require approval. Subject to the provisions of this agreement, the commission shall determine the procedures and methods by which it will act, and shall cause its actions to be recorded in books kept for that purpose. No action of the commission related to the following responsibilities shall be taken unless approved at a regularly scheduled quarterly meeting, or unless approved by a majority of those voting at a meeting at which all members of the commission are present, or unless approved at a meeting which has been duly called on ten days' notice and a quorum is present: 
(1)  The establishment of compensation, within the range established in the approved budget, and employment of a general manager. 
(2)  The establishment of compensation, within the limits established in the approved budget, and the authorization of contracts for the services of consulting and design engineers. 
(3)  The establishment of compensation, within the limits established in the approved budget, and the authorization of contracts for the services of any consultant. 
(4)  The establishment of policies for the operation and maintenance of the facilities. 
(5)  The establishment of the cost allocation for water delivered to the respective water distribution systems of Atlanta and Fulton County, on the basis of metered water flows. 
(6)  The selection of an outside certified public accountant to conduct the annual audits of the joint venture. 
(i)  Prohibited actions. The commission is hereby expressly prohibited from performing the following acts, which are understood and agreed to be authorized only through legislation adopted by Atlanta and Fulton County: 
(1)  Execution of contracts and contract amendments having a cost exceeding $50,000.00 unless otherwise provided for in subsection (g)(13), (14) or (15) of this section. 
(2)  Application for and acceptance of loans or grants-in-aid unless otherwise authorized by legislation adopted by Atlanta and Fulton County. 
(3)  Increasing the overall annual operating and capital budgets. 
(4)  Incurring any liability in excess of the amount appropriated in the operating and capital budgets unless otherwise provided for by legislation adopted by Atlanta and Fulton County. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 3.2) 
Sec. 102-676. - General manager. 
The commission shall provide for a general manager for the facilities, who shall be responsible for implementing the programs, policies, plans and decisions formulated or made by the commission, and for supervising the day-to-day operations of the facilities. 
(1)  The commission shall employ by contract a general manager. The commission shall select compensation for, and employ by contract, such person, who shall be the chief administrative officer of the facilities. He or she shall serve at the pleasure of the commission and shall report to, and be responsible to, the commission, a committee or subcommittee, as designated by the commission. 
(2)  The general manager shall be an employee of the joint venture by contract. If the joint venture decides to operate the facilities rather than to contract out its operations, all members of the staff of the general manager and the operating personnel of the facilities shall be selected by the general manager, pursuant to employment policies established by the commission, and shall be employees of the joint venture, but shall be covered by a civil service system and pension program as determined by the commission. 
(3)  If a private entity is selected to undertake the day-to-day operation of the facilities, it shall be employed by contract and be subject to the direction of the general manager. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 3.3) 
Sec. 102-677. - Consulting engineers. 
The commission shall utilize the services provided by the current contract between Atlanta and Williams-Russell and Johnson, Inc., and Jordan, Jones & Goulding, Inc., consulting engineers (the "engineers") for consultation, analysis, investigation, projections, design and construction services for the facilities. The assignment of all terms, conditions and obligations of said current contract to the commission shall be effective without further action of Atlanta 90 days after the execution of this division, or at such earlier date as the general manager may designate in writing to Atlanta. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 3.4) 
Sec. 102-678. - Legal counsel. 
The commission shall utilize the legal services of the Atlanta and Fulton County legal departments in a form to be determined by the commission. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 3.5) 
Sec. 102-679. - Compensation of joint ventures. 
Except as specifically provided in this division, neither Atlanta nor Fulton County shall charge the joint venture for any services rendered, or for any expenses incurred by the other joint venturer. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 3.6) 
Sec. 102-680. - Construction contract procedures. 
Following its formulation of the plans for acquisition of the necessary site locations and easements and for financing and construction of the facilities, including the estimated costs of said construction, the commission shall submit the plans to the governing bodies of Atlanta and Fulton County for final approval and for the adoption of the financial plans for funding the construction. After such approval, and after advice in writing from Atlanta and Fulton County that plans for the necessary funding have been made, the commission, through the general manager, shall provide for the necessary bidding process and letting of the construction contracts. This may consist of the letting of a joint contract obligating both Atlanta and Fulton County to the contractors, or it may consist of the execution of a contract with either Atlanta or Fulton County as the agent of the joint venture to let the contract. In any event, the bidding process and contracting procedure shall comply with all federal and state laws. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 3.7) 
Sec. 102-681. - Funding of the joint venture prior to the generation of operating revenue. 
(a)  Atlanta and Fulton County each agrees to appropriate and pay to the joint venture one-half of all funds as are necessary to enable the joint venture to perform its responsibilities throughout the period of planning and construction and until appropriate allocation formulas are approved and in place, based on a temporary budget to be submitted to and approved by Atlanta and Fulton County. 
(b)  All funds of the joint venture shall be maintained in an account or accounts as determined by the commission, and such funds as are within the discretion of the commission shall be disbursed under such procedures as the commission shall determine. 
(c)  During the period of planning and construction and prior to the establishment of cost allocation formulas, the commission may, at its discretion, appoint either Atlanta or Fulton County or both as agent or agents to hold and disburse the funds of the joint venture subject to the direction of the commission. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 4.1) 
Sec. 102-682. - Capital cost of facilities. 
(a)  All mutually agreeable capital costs associated with the facilities, including the reasonable and necessary cost of site acquisition, easements, legal services, planning, engineering and construction shall be shared equally by Atlanta and Fulton County. All such costs shall be agreed upon by Atlanta and Fulton County before liability for sharing shall accrue, except that, in the event either Atlanta or Fulton County shall have incurred any of the said direct cash outlay costs before the date of this agreement, then the party which has incurred such costs, as the case may be, will be credited with such costs in accounting for its share of the total cost of the facilities. 
(b)  The cost of any enlargement, improvement or modification of the plant, intake or reservoir which requires capital investment, shall not be undertaken until recommended by the commission and approved by Atlanta and Fulton County. 
(c)  It is mutually agreed that Atlanta will be credited its full share of the costs for the purchase of the plant/reservoir site of the facilities, in consideration of its release and dismissal of all claims against Fulton County for water and sewer services provided to agencies of Fulton County from January 1, 1978, through December 31, 1984, and in consideration of Fulton County's agreement to pay all charges for water and sewer services accrued on and after January 1, 1985; provided that Fulton County will be credited $2,531,485.00 toward the payment of sewer charges from the principal and interest held by Atlanta and derived from the South Fulton Surcharge Program. The sum shall be paid from an account to the city to cover the outstanding sewer charges on Fulton County facilities from January 1, 1985, to present, and the balance of such sum shall be used and applied as a credit against future sewer charges. Fulton County agrees to pay all future charges within 15 days after receipt of a bill for water and sewer services. 
(d)  It is mutually agreed that Fulton County will reimburse Atlanta for one-half of the direct land and appraisal costs paid by Atlanta for the acquisition of the intake site of the facilities, within 30 days of receipt of an invoice detailing such costs, which invoice will be transmitted promptly upon the conclusion of pending litigation for such acquisition. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 4.2) 
Sec. 102-683. - Ownership of the facilities. 
(a)  Atlanta and Fulton County shall jointly own the land, treatment plant, intake, raw water lines and reservoir of the facilities on a 50-50 basis, as tenants in common. 
(b)  Immediately upon execution of the agreement from which this division is derived, Atlanta shall deed Fulton County an undivided one-half interest in the water intake site, and Fulton County shall deed to Atlanta an undivided one-half interest in the primary site of the facilities. 
(c)  Both parties agree to seek permits equal to the design rate of production and further agree to operate the facilities at the maximum permitted rate of production. 
(d)  Atlanta and Fulton County shall each own, and be entitled to receive and distribute through their respective distribution systems, 50 percent of the total supply of water treated by the plant at any time or 50 percent of capacity, whichever is greater. To the extent that the share of Atlanta or Fulton County shall exceed its needs, Atlanta or Fulton County or Atlanta and Fulton County jointly through the commission shall be entitled to enter into short-term agreements with, and sell to, any other governmental entity the excess of such share. If either Atlanta or Fulton County desires to sell any surplus supply, it shall first offer the surplus to the other, which shall have a right of first refusal, for a period of 30 days after receiving the offer, according to allocation formulas; and the terms of such agreement to sell surplus water shall not exceed a period agreed to by Atlanta and Fulton County. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 4.3) 
Sec. 102-684. - Operating costs. 
(a)  The commission shall allocate the monthly operating costs of the facilities to Atlanta and Fulton County on the basis of the pro rata share of water delivered to each party. The pro rata shares shall be determined by monthly meter readings. 
(b)  The joint venture shall bill to Atlanta and Fulton County monthly, at the allocated cost for all water delivered to the distribution system of each, which invoice shall be paid within 15 days after receipt to the joint venture. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 4.4) 
Sec. 102-685. - Support services. 
The commission may contract with Atlanta or Fulton County or a private contractor to provide purchasing, payroll, accounting, legal and other support services required for the operation of the facilities. The cost of the services will be treated as an operating cost of the plant and shall be treated as all other operating costs. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 4.5) 
Sec. 102-686. - Financial management. 
The commission may contract with either Atlanta or Fulton County or a private contractor as financial manager for all functions related to the construction and operation of the facilities. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 4.6) 
Sec. 102-687. - Accounting methodology. 
The designated entity agrees to accumulate all costs associated with construction and operation of the facilities in a set of accounts separate and apart from any other activities and to maintain such accounts in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 4.7) 
Sec. 102-688. - Capital financing. 
The parties hereby agree that each shall be responsible for financing 50 percent of the project costs as such costs are defined in section 102-671. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to preclude one party from initially financing the other party's share of project costs, or a portion thereof, provided that the party providing such financing shall be entitled to recover from the other party the amount financed, plus coverage, if any, for the facilities, at an interest rate equivalent to the net interest rate, as defined in section 102-671, on the debt instruments used to finance the project or at an interest rate to be mutually agreed upon by both parties. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it is acknowledged and agreed that the financing of the plant/reservoir site, and the intake site, of the facilities will be undertaken as provided in section 102-682(c) and (d). 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 4.8) 
Sec. 102-689. - Grants-in-aid. 
(a)  The parties hereby agree to make their best efforts to obtain available federal and/or state grants-in-aid funding for the project. Irrespective of the amount of grant-in-aid funding, each individual party may obtain for the facilities, total grant-in-aid received shall be credited equally to each party's share of project costs. 
(b)  It is further agreed that any portion of project costs funded from grant-in-aid proceeds shall be excluded from the computation required to determine the amount of project costs to be recovered by one party from the other if such party provides financing of the project on behalf of the other party. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 4.9) 
Sec. 102-690. - Depreciation reserve account. 
The parties hereby agree that an amount equal to the monthly depreciation expense shall be deposited monthly into a depreciation reserve account. These funds shall only be used to renew and/or replace capital components of the facilities. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 4.10) 
Sec. 102-691. - Term of joint venture. 
The joint venture shall continue for a term of 50 years, unless terminated by mutual consent of the parties or by an order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 5.1) 
Sec. 102-692. - Default. 
Each of the following shall constitute an event of default by either party to the agreement from which this division is derived: 
(1)  If such party shall fail to pay promptly any of its financial obligations under the term and conditions of this division when such financial obligations shall become due and payable, and such default continues for a period of 90 days after the receipt of notice from the joint venture of such nonpayment. 
(2)  If such party shall fail to be represented by any commission members or alternates at two consecutive regularly scheduled meetings of the commission when at least three of the other joint venturer's commission members are present. 
(3)  If such party shall fail to keep, perform or observe any other material term, covenant or condition of this division and such default continues for a period of 30 days after the receipt of written notice from the other party of such failure. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 5.2) 
Sec. 102-693. - Remedies for events of default. 
(a)  Upon the occurrence of an event of default by a party to this agreement other than the event of default contained in section 102-692, the joint venture, besides any other rights or remedies it may have, shall have the right to deny such party the use of the facilities either in whole or in part until such event of default has been cured. Moreover, commission members of the party which committed an event of default shall not participate in the vote of the commission regarding remedies to be pursued following an event of default by such party. 
(b)  With respect to the occurrence of an event of default by either party to this agreement as contained in section 102-692, the commission members who are in attendance for the regularly scheduled meeting which constituted an event of default are hereby granted authority to conduct the business of the joint venture and make decisions which shall be legally binding on both parties in accordance with the terms and conditions of this division. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 5.3) 
Sec. 102-694. - No prejudice to other agreements. 
Both Atlanta and Fulton County have other agreements with other entities touching the subject of this division. It is the intention of the parties that this division is limited solely to the covenants and agreements expressly set forth herein and that it shall not, by implication or otherwise, prejudice any existing rights of either party or any covenants, contracts, agreements or arrangements which now exist between Atlanta and Fulton County or other parties, nor the right of either Atlanta or Fulton County to enter into such covenants, contracts, agreements or arrangements in the future. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 5.4) 
Sec. 102-695. - Enabling action. 
Atlanta and Fulton County agree that they will each enact such ordinance and resolutions as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this division. Further, the parties pledge to each other their support and assistance, and agree to take such action as may be necessary, in order to obtain from the general assembly, and if necessary, the people of Georgia by constitutional amendment, such further additions to the authority now vested in them by virtue of the constitution and laws of Georgia, as may now or may hereafter become necessary to carry out the intent of the parties hereto, whether expressed or implied. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 5.5) 
Sec. 102-696. - Saving clause. 
Should any subparagraph, paragraph or other portion of this division be held for any reason to be unconstitutional or otherwise void, the remaining portions of this division shall not be affected thereby, but shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Res. of 5-28-86, § 5.6) 
Chapter 106 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; resolutions pertaining to planning, ch. 158; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference— Construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 106-1. - Director of department of inspections and permits—Powers in general. 
The director of department of inspections and permits shall have general supervision over and charge of all buildings in Fulton County outside the corporate limits of any municipality, and he shall require all outside of the corporate limits of any municipality to conform to the pertinent regulations. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-6) 
Sec. 106-2. - Same—Powers of inspection; enforcement of building code. 
The director of department of inspections and permits and any other persons as the county commission may designate from time to time are hereby charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this building code and of inspecting all buildings erected in Fulton County outside the corporate limits of any municipality. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-7) 
Sec. 106-3. - Building permits—Issuance by director of department of inspections and permits. 
(a)  It shall likewise be the duty of the director of department of inspections and permits to issue permits for the erection of buildings, in accordance with the building code, and no building shall be begun or erected without the owner or builder thereof having first applied for and obtained his permit to erect the same. 
(b)  No permit as required by the building code shall be issued until the fee prescribed in this section shall have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be approved until the additional fee, if any due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building or structure, shall have been paid. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-8) 
Sec. 106-4. - Same—Fees. 
Building permit and inspection fees for the construction or alteration of a building or structure shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-9) 
Sec. 106-5. - Same—Violations. 
Whenever construction requiring a building, electrical, plumbing, or heating permit is begun before a permit is obtained, the fees for the permit shall be increased 50 percent. This increase shall be not less than $10.00, nor more than $100.00 on each construction project. The increased permit fee as well as the regular permit fee shall be paid before any permit is issued. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-10) 
Sec. 106-6. - Private inspection of water and sewer lines. 
Pursuant to the provisions of 1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1046), page 1632, the county exempts itself from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d), pertaining to inspection of water and sewer lines by master plumbers or utility contractors. 
(96-0742, 7-10-96) 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; ordinances pertaining to utilities, ch. 82; resolutions pertaining to utilities, ch. 178. 
Sec. 106-7. - Displacement of public housing unit residents. 
(a)  Before any residents of any public housing units are displaced pending renovation and/or restoration of the housing units, an adequate and workable relocation plan must be developed for implementation. 
(b)  With respect to the Boatrock public housing community, before any renovation and/or restoration of those housing units occur, consistent with this section, a relocation plan acceptable to the community must be developed and approved by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Before a relocation plan for Boatrock residents is presented to the board of commissioners for approval, the residents of that community shall be provided adequate notice of public hearings which shall be held in order to ensure that the relocation plan addresses the interest and concerns of the residents of the community. 
(96-1137, 12-4-96) 
Secs. 106-8—106-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRICAL ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 

Sec. 106-36. - Creation. 
There is hereby created a board to be known as the electrical advisory board, consisting of three members to be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County. The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County shall designate one of the members as chairman of the board. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-51) 
Sec. 106-37. - Qualifications of members. 
Each member shall be either a professional electrical engineer or contractor of not less than ten years' experience in the field of electrical construction and the installation or maintenance of electrical equipment. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-53) 
Sec. 106-38. - Terms of members. 
One member of the board shall be appointed for a term of one year, and one member shall be appointed for a term of two years, and one member shall be appointed for a term of three years. At the expiration of the first term of these members, all reappointments, or new appointments, shall be for a term of three years. Each member shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-53) 
Sec. 106-39. - Powers; quorum; duties. 
The powers of the advisory board are expressly limited to advisory powers only. Two members of the board shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized and empowered to transact any and all business which may properly come before the board. The board shall aid, assist, and counsel with the director of the department of inspections and permits of Fulton County in the adoption of rules, regulations, and codes pertaining to the administration of electrical installation and construction in Fulton County, Georgia. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-54) 
Sec. 106-40. - Meetings. 
(a)  The advisory board shall meet upon the call of the chairman, or any two members of the board, for the purpose of considering and advising the director of the department of inspections and permits upon any matter where their advice and counsel is requested by him, and for the transaction of any other business properly coming before the advisory board. 
(b)  The director of the department of inspections and permits shall act as secretary to the advisory board, or shall appoint someone from his department to act as secretary of said board, and minutes shall be taken of all matters, acts, and recommendations of the advisory board. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-55) 
Sec. 106-41. - Appeals to board. 
(a)  Whenever any person shall be dissatisfied with any ruling, decision, or order of the director of the department of inspections and permits, such person may make a written request to the chairman of the electrical advisory board for a hearing thereon. 
(b)  The board shall thereupon call a meeting of its members to hear and investigate any and all complaints. After a full and complete hearing on all questions in controversy, the advisory board shall render its opinion concurring in, or recommending any changes in, the order, ruling, or decision of the director of the department of inspections and permits as it may deem fit or proper under the circumstances. 
(c)  Each action of the board shall be by resolution copies of which shall be certified to the director of the department of inspections and permits and to complaining party or parties. 
(d)  Any person dissatisfied with a ruling of the advisory board, on appeal, may appeal directly to the board of commissioners who shall make the final decision on such questions. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-56) 
Sec. 106-42. - Compensation. 
The members of the board shall serve without compensation. The board of commissioners may allow such sums as may be necessary to cover expenses of the advisory board. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-57) 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 
Sec. 106-43. - Disciplinary authority. 
(a)  The director of inspections and permits shall have the authority to suspend or revoke the right of any electrical worker in Fulton County whose work shall be of such inferior quality as to suggest incompetency or neglect. The director of inspections and permits shall specify in writing to the contractor the charges on which the suspension or revocation of the contractor's right to do work in Fulton County is based. The contractor shall have five days in which to appeal any suspension or revocation to the electrical advisory board. The electrical advisory board shall set a time and place at which a hearing shall be held on such charges. A notice of the hearing giving the time and place shall be given not less than ten days prior to the hearing. 
(b)  The electrical advisory board shall make findings of fact as to the charges which have been preferred against the electrical contractor, and, if the charges are found to be true, the board shall sustain the suspension or revocation of the contractor's right to do work in Fulton County. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-58) 
Sec. 106-44. - Appeals from board's decision. 
The electrical contractor shall have the right to appeal the action of the electrical advisory board in revoking or suspending his right to do electrical work in Fulton County to the board of commissioners by filing in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners his appeal in writing within five days from the date of the revocation. The board of commissioners shall hold a hearing on the appeal which shall be de novo, and the board may either affirm or reverse the action of the electrical advisory board. If the decision is adverse to the appellant, he may certiorari the decision of the board of commissioners to the Superior Court of Fulton County, all as provided by law. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-59) 
Sec. 106-45. - Expenses of hearings held at times other than regular meetings. 
Any appellant or complaining party requesting hearings before the advisory board, at any time other than regular meetings, shall reimburse Fulton County for the expense incident to the holding of such hearings. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-60) 
Sec. 106-46. - Electrical contractor eligible for reinstatement of right to work after six months. 
Should an electrical contractor's right to do electrical work in Fulton County be revoked or suspended by the electrical advisory board, the electrical contractor shall be eligible to apply for reinstatement of his right at any time after six months from the date of the revocation. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-61) 
Secs. 106-47—106-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HEATING, VENTILATING, AND AIR CONDITIONING ADVISORY BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 

Sec. 106-76. - Creation; appointment of members; chairman. 
There is hereby created a board to be known as the heating, ventilating and air conditioning advisory board, consisting of five members, to be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County. The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County shall designate one of the members as chairman of said board. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-31) 
Sec. 106-77. - Qualifications of members. 
Each member shall be either a professional engineer or contractor of not less than ten years' experience in the field of heating, ventilating, and air conditioning and the installation or maintenance of heating, power, and fuel-burning equipment. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-32) 
Sec. 106-78. - Terms of members. 
The term of each member of the board shall be three years. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-33) 
Sec. 106-79. - Powers; quorum; duties. 
The powers of the board are expressly limited to advisory powers only. The majority of members of the board shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized and empowered to transact any and all business which may properly come before said board. The board shall aid, assist, and counsel the director of the department of inspections and permits of Fulton County in the adopting of rules, regulations, and codes pertaining to the administration of heating, ventilating, and air conditioning installation and construction in Fulton County, Georgia. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-34) 
Sec. 106-80. - Meetings. 
(a)  The advisory board shall meet upon the call of the chairman, or a majority of the members of the board, for the purpose of considering and advising the director of the department of inspections and permits of Fulton County upon any matter where their advice and counsel is requested by him, and for the transaction of any other business properly coming before the board. 
(b)  The director of the department of inspections and permits shall act as secretary to the advisory board, or shall appoint someone from his department to act as secretary of said board, and minutes shall be taken of all matters, acts, and recommendations of the board. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-35) 
Sec. 106-81. - Appeals to board. 
(a)  Whenever any person shall be dissatisfied with any ruling, decision, or order of the director of the department of inspections and permits, such person may make a written request to the chairman of the heating, ventilating, and air conditioning advisory board for a hearing thereon. The board shall thereupon call a meeting of its members to hear and investigate any and all complaints. After a full and complete hearing on all questions in controversy, the advisory board shall render its opinion concurring in, or recommending any changes in, the order, ruling, or decision of the director of the department of inspections and permits as it may deem fit or proper under the circumstances. 
(b)  Each action of the board shall be by resolution, copies of which shall be certified to the director of the department of inspections and permits and to the complaining party or parties. 
(c)  Any person dissatisfied with a ruling of the advisory board, on appeal, may appeal directly to the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County who shall make the final decision on such questions. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-36) 
Sec. 106-82. - Compensation. 
The members of the board shall serve without compensation. The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County may allow any sums as may be necessary to cover expenses of the advisory board. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-37) 
Sec. 106-83. - Expenses of hearing held at times other than regular meetings. 
Any appellant or complaining party requesting a hearing before the advisory board, at any time other than regular meetings, shall reimburse the Commissioners of Fulton County for the expense incident to the holding of these hearings. 
(Code 1983, § 31-1-38) 
Chapter 110 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; ordinances pertaining to cable communications; ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Regulation of cable television systems by counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 110-1—110-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON CABLE TV SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Massage parlors, § 18-146 et seq.; boards, commissions, etc, § 102-601 et seq. 

Sec. 110-31. - Established; composition; membership; functions. 
An advisory committee on cable TV service is hereby established. This advisory committee shall be composed of seven residents and the clerk of commissioners of Fulton County. Each member of the board of commissioners shall be entitled to select a member who shall serve on the committee for a one-year term. The committee shall be authorized to make recommendations to the board of commissioners as to matters of ongoing concern affecting the quality and extent of cable TV service in Fulton County, and shall further be authorized to review and make recommendations to the board of commissioners regarding citizens' complaints. 
(90-RM-148, 3-21-90) 
Sec. 110-32. - Additional members added; purpose. 
The board of commissioners hereby adds two additional members to the cable TV advisory committee, bringing the total membership to nine members. The additional two members shall be appointed by the board of commissioners to serve until the tasks of the cable TV advisory committee have been completed. 
(95-0471, 4-19-95) 
Sec. 110-33. - Quarterly meetings; reports; selection of officers; adoption of rules. 
The advisory committee shall meet quarterly, commencing April 1, 1990, and/or more frequently if the members of the advisory committee so determine. The advisory committee shall submit written reports to the board of commissioners after each meeting. The advisory committee shall be authorized to select officers from its members, and otherwise adopt rules for the conduct of its business. 
(90-RM-148, 3-21-90) 
Sec. 110-34. - Liaison between committee and board of commissioners. 
The county manager shall designate one of his staff to serve as a liaison between the advisory committee and the board of commissioners. 
(90-RM-148, 3-21-90) 
Chapter 114 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 114-1—114-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 

Sec. 114-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for and the execution of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to mitigate, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin, caused by enemy attack, sabotage, civil disturbance, major accident, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, oil spill, or other water contaminations requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 114-32. - Policy and purpose of article. 
Because of the existing and increasing possibility of the occurrence of emergencies or disasters, resulting from manmade or natural causes, or enemy attack, and in order to ensure that the preparations of Fulton County will be adequate to deal with such emergencies or disasters, and generally to provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the people of Fulton County and to carry out the functions, duties, and responsibilities contained in the Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950 (Public Law 81-920) and the Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981 (O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.), it is hereby found and declared to be necessary to: 
(1)  Create a department of emergency management services for Fulton County; 
(2)  Authorize this department to take such steps as are necessary and appropriate to carry out the provisions of this law so that all emergency management functions for Fulton County are coordinated to the maximum practical extent with the comparable functions of the State of Georgia and its political subdivisions, of the federal government including its various departments and agencies, of other states and localities, and of private agencies, of every type, to the end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of the available manpower, resources, and facilities in dealing with any emergency or disaster that may occur. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-1) 
Sec. 114-33. - Atlanta-Fulton County Emergency Management Agency designated as county department of emergency management services. 
The Atlanta-Fulton County Emergency Management Agency is hereby designated as the Fulton County Department of Emergency Management Services, to coordinate the planning and execution of all emergency management functions for Fulton County in accordance with the Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981 (O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.), as heretofore and hereafter amended from time to time. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-3) 
Sec. 114-34. - Emergency management director; appointment. 
(a)  The department shall be under the direction and control of an emergency management director who shall be appointed by the Governor of the State of Georgia upon nomination by the Chairman of the Fulton County Board of Commissioners and the Mayor of the City of Atlanta, in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The director of emergency management is also designated the disaster coordinator for Fulton County. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-4) 
Sec. 114-35. - Policy development and implementation. 
(a)  The department and the director shall operate under policies established by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners and the county manager. The emergency management director shall be responsible directly to the Fulton County Board of Commissioners and the county manager and shall serve as the director of emergency and disaster planning for the county, to include planning required for the management of resources and economic stabilization in the event of enemy attack, planning required for mitigation, response and recovery operations for natural disasters, and coordination of emergency planning with Georgia and federal planning agencies. 
(b)  The emergency management director shall serve as the senior liaison officer between Fulton County and the State of Georgia Department of Defense and state and federal military forces. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-5) 
Sec. 114-36. - Director's duties. 
(a)  The emergency management director is hereby authorized and directed to: 
(1)  Represent Fulton County in all matters pertaining to emergency management and disaster preparedness; 
(2)  Utilize all other department heads and all county officials as required in the preparation, development, and execution of emergency management plans; 
(3)  Assist county officials in planning the organization of county departments for emergency operations; 
(4)  Develop and maintain emergency management plans, in conjunction with county departments, for emergency functions in consonance with state and federal emergency plans, and to implement these plans when required; 
(5)  Establish an emergency management plan for the continuity of county government in the event of any enemy attack or other emergency; 
(6)  Maintain and, where feasible, improve public fallout shelters, and the attack warning system; maintain a community shelter plan in readiness for publication on short notice; train fallout shelter managers and radiological monitoring personnel; take such other readiness steps toward preparedness against enemy attack as are prudent and practical; and to institute equivalent readiness measures and planning against manmade and natural disasters; 
(7)  Maintain an adequate emergency communications system encompassing all county departments and other agencies and an emergency operations center; and 
(8)  Establish and maintain an organization of sufficient staff and operating agencies to implement approved emergency plans, approximately as set forth in section 27-4-6 below. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-6) 
Sec. 114-37. - Organization and functions. 
The county manager is hereby authorized and directed to: 
(1)  Provide policy guidance to the director in the administration of the emergency management program; 
(2)  Assist in providing effective mobilization of all private and public resources of the county in time of emergency; 
(3)  Prepare and recommend for approval by the Fulton County Commission all resolutions, regulations, and ordinances necessary or convenient to implement the emergency management program; 
(4)  Review emergency management plans prepared by the department; and 
(5)  Approve the annual operating budget request of the department and approve other special emergency management services fund requests. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-7) 
_____
Sec. 114-38. - Emergency management services. 
The emergency management organization shall consist of governmental and voluntary emergency services. The chief officer of a governmental service unit shall be the head of the department providing the service as an emergency management function. Directors of volunteer services shall be chosen by the director. Services shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 

 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-8) 
_____
Sec. 114-39. - Additional duties of director. 
The emergency management services director shall: 
(1)  Coordinate the operations and actions of all the services in time of emergency; 
(2)  Maintain a permanent staff sufficient to carry out the duties and responsibilities of the department and insure that the staff is professionally trained and fully qualified; 
(3)  Ensure that an adequate emergency operations center (EOC) is available and properly equipped as needed for the conduct of emergency operations; 
(4)  Through coordination with the state emergency management division department of public defense and the Federal Emergency Management Agency, ensure that county plans and activities are consistent with state and federal guidelines; 
(5)  Prepare and periodically update basic emergency operations plan, to include an annex (plan) for each service which shall be prepared and authenticated by the service chief; and 
(6)  Plan and implement preparedness measures in readiness for implementation of emergency plans. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-9) 
Sec. 114-40. - Budgets; financial records. 
(a)  The director shall be the chief executive officer and responsible administrator of the emergency management services department. 
(b)  The director shall prepare all budgets to meet operating and administrative expenses and shall operate the department in accordance with the approved budget appropriations of Fulton County to include anticipated federal matching funds, as projected by the Georgia Emergency Management Division, Department of Public Defense, with staff pay based upon an approved emergency management staffing pattern and pay scales of the Georgia merit system. Proposed budget requests shall be approved by the Fulton County Manager. 
(c)  Financial records, personnel and administration records, and such other records as are desired, shall be subject to audit at any time by designated county officials. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-10) 
Chapter 118 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to planning, ch. 58; resolutions pertaining to planning, ch. 158. 
State Law reference— Redevelopment Powers Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1 et seq.; Urban Redevelopment Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 118-1. - Development policy; incentives; eligibility for assistance. 
The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County shall adopt a policy whereby potential incentives are identified, evaluated, applied, and administered that promote development opportunities for Fulton County. Commercial, industrial and residential projects will be evaluated for the merits of offering development incentives on a case by case basis. In the interest of the economic welfare of the citizens of Fulton County, the benefit of the incentives offered must equal or exceed the predetermined cost to the county. This will be determined by a comprehensive evaluation of the project which includes an evaluation of its eligibility. In order to be eligible for incentives, each project must have a minimum cost-benefit ratio of 1:1. All exceptions are subject to review by the county manager. In addition to the results of the analysis of eligibility, the value of the incentive package offered to any business will also be based upon the company's commitment to hire residents of Fulton County. 
(93-RC-241, 7-21-93) 
Sec. 118-2. - Enterprise zones; standards and procedures for creation. 
(a)  Standards and procedures for the creation of enterprise zones are as follows: 
(1)  Report required prior to designation. Three weeks prior to the designation of any new enterprise zone, the City of Atlanta shall submit two site plans and the following information to the department of planning and economic development, so that the staff can make a full report to the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Housing enterprise zones. The following information shall be required to create a housing enterprise zone: 
a.  The relationship of the enterprise zone to the overall comprehensive development plan for the area and to the downtown housing plan. 
b.  Clear indications of: 
1.  Type of housing (single-family, multifamily, condo, fee simple); 
2.  Construction type; 
3.  Price range or rental rates; 
4.  Any displacement of current low income residents; and 
5.  Likelihood of future displacement of residents in the immediate vicinity. 
c.  A letter from a bank or financing institution as to the necessity of the enterprise zone designation for the development. 
d.  A letter from the City of Atlanta to indicate: 
1.  The total percentage of land area committed to enterprise zones before the enterprise zone designation; 
2.  The total percentage of land area committed to enterprise zones after the new enterprise zone designation; 
3.  The total number of units authorized and the number constructed by sales price or rental rate already in such enterprise zones; 
4.  The total number of units authorized by sales price or rental rate authorized by this enterprise zone designation; 
5.  The amount of taxes being paid currently for the property; 
6.  The amount of taxes projected for the housing enterprise zone over a ten-year period; 
7.  The need for infrastructure improvements for the project and source of revenue for any such improvements contemplated; 
8.  Any federal, state, or local funds committed to the project; and 
9.  Any other extenuating circumstances to be considered by the board of commissioners prior to the decision about enterprise zone designation. 
(3)  Industrial enterprise zones. The following information shall be required to create an industrial enterprise zone: 
a.  The relationship of the enterprise zone to the overall comprehensive development plan for the area, including the area not included in the enterprise zone. 
b.  A letter from a bank or financing institution as to the necessity of the enterprise zone designation for the development. 
c.  A letter from the City of Atlanta to indicate: 
1.  The total percentage of land area committed to enterprise zones before the enterprise zone designation; 
2.  The total percentage of land area committed to enterprise zones after the new enterprise zone designation; 
3.  The amount of taxes being paid currently for the property; 
4.  The amount of taxes projected for the housing enterprise zone over the 25-year period; 
5.  The need for infrastructure improvements for the project and source of revenue for any such improvements contemplated; 
6.  Any federal, state, or local funds committed to the project; 
7.  An estimate of the tax revenue from nonfreeport eligible inventory of businesses which contemplate relocation into the enterprise zone, if created; 
8.  Commitment of these businesses to hire low income residents to fill job vacancies or new jobs created; 
9.  Commitment of these businesses to create new jobs within a short time (one year after opening of the business in the enterprise zone; 
10.  A plan of action by the city to train low skilled workers specifically to fill new vacancies or jobs created; 
11.  Price of land acquisition and sources of funds; 
12.  Sales price of the land or any portion of the land to be sold after the enterprise zone designation; and 
13.  Any other extenuating circumstances to be considered by the board of commissioners prior to the decision about enterprise zone designation. 
(b)  In addition to all the above in subsection (a) of this section, prior to the December 15 of each year that an enterprise zone is in existence, an employment report of all businesses already located within enterprise zones, including which enterprise the business is located, jobs created since moving to the enterprise zone, and number of low income residents of Fulton County occupying the total number of jobs. 
(Res. of 8-3-88) 
Sec. 118-3. - Citizen deputy program. 
(a)  Be it resolved: 
(1)  That the board of commissioners appoint designated members of the community as citizen deputies to aid and assist county employees in identifying illegal signs and other ordinance violations in Fulton County; 
(2)  That citizen deputies be permitted to remove signs illegally erected or maintained on the right-of-way of any public road which is a part of the Fulton County public road system; 
(3)  That the director of environment and community development accept nominations for citizen deputies; 
(4)  That citizen deputies shall be approved by the board of commissioners; 
(5)  That said citizen deputies shall serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners; 
(6)  That said citizen deputies shall act strictly pursuant to the qualification standards and regulations adopted by the board of commissioners to regulate the removal of illegal signs from state, federal, and public roads in the county road system; 
(7)  That the board of commissioners adopt the qualification standards and regulations prepared by the department of environment and community development; 
(8)  That the citizen deputy program be monitored for compliance and consistency with local, state, and departmental policy by the director of environment and community development; and 
(9)  That the department of environment and community development staff continually measure performance and recommend program changes to the board of commissioners as deemed appropriate. 
(b)  Qualifications. 
(1)  All citizen deputies shall serve at the discretion of the Fulton County Board of Commissioners. 
(2)  All citizen deputies shall be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  Appointees shall be law-abiding citizens with full-time residence or work in Fulton County. 
(4)  Appointees shall be at least 21 years old. 
(5)  Each citizen deputy shall in effect be an appointed volunteer who shall perform duty without the right to receive any salary, pension, insurance, or any other compensation or benefit. 
(6)  Each term of appointment shall be for one year, renewable annually at the discretion of the department of environment and community development or the board of commissioners. Citizen deputy terms may be terminated at any time during the year at the discretion of the department of environment and community development or the board of commissioners. 
(7)  Prospective appointees shall provide the department of environment and community development with names, addresses, and other general information as necessary to perform background investigations and assess suitability for appointment as a citizen deputy. 
(8)  Appointees shall take full responsibility for any injury or damages incurred by them or their property in the execution of their duties. 
(9)  Appointees must complete a citizen deputy training program which has been approved by the department of environment and community development. Additionally, citizen deputies must attend specific and periodic instructional classes to update citizen deputy training. 
(c)  Regulations. 
(1)  Citizen deputies shall identify illegal signs within the public right-of-way. Citizen deputies shall report violations to the appropriate county employee in a manner devised by the Fulton County Department of Environment and Community Development ("The Department"). 
(2)  Citizen deputies shall identify, monitor, and report violations of zoning, codes, and other ordinance violations. Citizen deputies shall report the violations to the appropriate county employee in a manner devised by the department. 
(3)  Citizen deputies will not penalize, threaten, or admonish individuals upon identifying illegally posted signs or other ordinance violations. 
(4)  If citizen deputy's participation in the program includes voluntary enforcement of the existing law concerning private signs placed within the right-of-way of all public streets and roads, enforcement shall be carried out logically and objectively. Citizen deputies shall not remove signs placed upon private property. 
(5)  All sign removal shall occur during day light hours, under safe, favorable weather, and traffic conditions. Citizen deputies shall refrain from removing illegal signs if doing so is likely to result in a breach of the peace. 
(6)  All illegal signs which cannot be safely removed by the deputy shall be referred to county employees for removal. 
(7)  Citizen deputies shall dispose of all removed signs in a lawful manner as directed by the department. 
(8)  Any citizen deputy who runs for an elected local, state, or national government position shall abstain from removing illegal signs of any nature during the campaign season. 
Res. No. 98-0298, 2-18-98) 
Cross reference— Zoning resolution, App. B. 
Secs. 118-4—118-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITIES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 118-31—118-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY OF FULTON COUNTY 

Sec. 118-46. - Creation; purpose. 
(a)  There is hereby determined and declared an urgent existing and future need for a development authority (as more fully described and defined in the Development Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.) to function in Fulton County, Georgia, for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in said county thereby promoting the general welfare of its citizens. 
(b)  There is hereby activated in Fulton County, Georgia, a public body corporate and politic known as the "Development Authority of Fulton County." 
(Code 1983, § 13-6-2) 
Sec. 118-47. - Duties and responsibilities of board of directors. 
The board of directors hereinbefore elected shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities, and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Development Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.), as it now exists and as it may hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Code 1983, § 13-6-3) 
State Law reference— Board of directors, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-4. 
Sec. 118-48. - Purpose as advisory committee; authority and function. 
The members of the Fulton County Development Authority, as the same is constituted from time to time, are hereby designated as an advisory committee for the purpose of making studies and recommendations for the future development, use, and sale of county owned property and are hereby further granted the authority, with the advice and approval of the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, to negotiate and consummate private sales of county owned property. 
(Code 1983, § 13-6-4) 
Sec. 118-49. - Use of county attorneys. 
The Development Authority of Fulton County is hereby directed to cease the employment of outside attorneys and to rely upon the legal assistance of the office of County Attorney of Fulton County, and the county attorney is directed to provide all legal assistance required by the authority. 
(Code 1983, § 13-6-5) 
Secs. 118-50—118-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - JOINT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY OF METROPOLITAN ATLANTA[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Joint development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5.1. 

Sec. 118-66. - Need determined; purpose. 
There is hereby determined and declared an urgent, existing, and future need for a joint development authority as more fully described and defined in the Development Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.), to function in the counties specified in exhibit A, section 118-72, for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare, trade, commerce, industry, and employment opportunities in said counties, thereby promoting the general welfare of their citizens. 
(95-1103, § 1, 9-6-95) 
Sec. 118-67. - Membership; terms of office. 
There are hereby designated as members of the authority the chairmen of the development authorities of the counties specified in exhibit A, section 118-72. The term of office of such members shall be for their term of office as chairman of the respective authority. 
(95-1103, § 1, 9-6-95) 
Sec. 118-68. - Activation. 
There is hereby activated in Fulton County, Georgia, a public body corporate and politic known as the Joint Development Authority of Metropolitan Atlanta, hereinafter sometimes referred to as the "authority." 
(95-1103, § 1, 9-6-95) 
Sec. 118-69. - Purpose of activation. 
The authority is being activated solely to increase the dollar amount of job tax credits for business located in the geographical area of the authority, and will not issue revenue bonds, and will be automatically deactivated when the advantage of a joint authority to make available such job credits no longer exists. 
(95-1103, § 1, 9-6-95) 
Sec. 118-70. - Amendment of division. 
This division may be amended by appropriate concurrent resolutions of participating counties, in accordance with law, so as to permit the addition of additional counties as participants in the Joint Development Authority of Metropolitan Atlanta. 
(95-1103, § 1, 9-6-95) 
Sec. 118-71. - Effect of division provisions on development authority of county. 
Nothing herein shall affect the Development Authority of Fulton County, which has heretofore been created by this board or any other public corporation, industrial development, or other authority previously created by legislative act or constitutional amendment including, without limitation, its existence, purpose, organizational powers, or functions. 
(95-1103, § 1, 9-6-95) 
Sec. 118-72. - Exhibit A, participating counties. 
Participating counties in the Joint Development Authority of Metropolitan Atlanta are as follows: 
(1)  Clayton; 
(2)  Douglas; and 
(3)  Fulton. 
(95-1103, ex. A, 9-6-95) 
Secs. 118-73—118-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENTERPRISE ZONES 

Sec. 118-101. - Enterprise zones created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-88-1 et seq. 
ORDINANCE NO. 98-0618  Adopted April 15, 1998 
Section 1. Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the following meanings, except where the context indicates a different meaning is intended: 
(1)  Ad valorem tax shall mean property taxes levied for state or county operating purposes but does not include property taxes imposed by school districts or property taxes imposed for general obligation debt. 
(2)  Business enterprise means any business which is engaged primarily in manufacturing, warehousing and distribution, processing, telecommunications, tourism, and research and development industries. 
(3)  Enterprise zone means the geographic area designated in section 3 of this ordinance. 
(4)  Full-time job equivalent means a job or jobs with no predetermined end date, with a regular work week of 30 hours or more, and with the same benefits provided to similar employees. 
(5)  Low-income and moderate-income individual means a person who, at the time of hire, is: 
a.  Unemployed or unemployed for three of the six months prior to the date of hire; 
b.  Homeless; 
c.  A resident of public housing; 
d.  Receiving temporary assistance to needy families or who has received temporary assistance to needy families at any time during the 18 months previous to the date of hire; 
e.  A participant in the Job Training Partnership Act or who has participated in the Job Training Partnership Act at any time during the 18 months previous to the date of hire; 
f.  A participant in a job opportunity where basic skills are required or who has participated in such a job opportunity at any time during the 18 months previous to the date of hire; 
g.  Receiving supplemental social security income; or 
h.  Receiving food stamps. 
(6)  New job means employment for an individual created within an enterprise zone by a new or expanded qualified business or service enterprise at the time of the initial staffing of such new or expanded enterprise. 
(7)  Qualified or qualifying business means an employer that meets the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-88-1, et seq. (including O.C.G.A. § 36-88-4) and section 4(b) of this ordinance. 
(8)  Qualified or qualifying service enterprise means an entity that meets the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-88-1 et seq. (including O.C.G.A. § 36-88-4) and section 4(b) of this ordinance, and that is engaged primarily in finance, insurance, and real estate activity or activities listed under the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes 60 through 67 according to the Federal Office of Management and Budget Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987 Edition. 
Section 2. Purpose and scope. 
It has been found by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County and the Fulton County Economic Development Division that there is a need for revitalization in certain areas of Fulton County. Revitalization will improve geographic areas within Fulton County which are suffering from disinvestment, underdevelopment, and economic decline and will encourage private businesses to reinvest and rehabilitate such areas. This ordinance should be liberally construed to accomplish these purposes. 
Section 3. Boundaries of enterprise zones. 
(a)  The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County and the Fulton County Economic Development Division have determined that the area contained in the enterprise zone delineated below satisfies at least three of the four criteria set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-88-6. More specifically, it is determined that there is evidence of adverse economic conditions brought about by significant job dislocation within the area delineated below, there is evidence of general distress within the area other than poverty and unemployment, and there is evidence of underdevelopment within the area showing that the level of development in the nominated area is at least 20 percent lower than development activity within Fulton County as a whole. The enterprise zone created herein shall have the following geographic boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the northeasterly right-of-way of Norman Berry Drive and the southeasterly right-of-way of Cleveland Avenue, said point being the True Point of Beginning; thence running northeasterly along the southerly right-of-way of Cleveland Avenue approximately 248 feet to a point; thence running easterly along the southerly right-of-way of Cleveland Avenue approximately 642 feet to a point at the intersection of the southerly right-of-way of Cleveland Avenue and the westerly right-of-way of Sylvan Road; thence running southerly along the westerly right-of-way of Sylvan Road a distance of approximately 1385 feet to a point; thence running southwesterly a distance of approximately 62 feet to a point, said point being on the City Limit line for the City of East Point; thence running westerly approximately 250 feet to a point, said point being the intersection of the City of East Point City Limit line and the northerly right-of-way of Central Avenue; thence running northwesterly along the northern right-of-way of Central Avenue a distance of approximately 448 feet to a point, said point being the intersection of the northerly right-of-way of Central Avenue and the easterly right-of-way of Norman Berry Drive; thence running northerly along the easterly right-of-way of Norman Berry Drive approximately 1337 feet to a point at the intersection of the northeasterly right-of-way of Norman Berry Drive and the southeasterly right-of-way of Cleveland Avenue, said point being the True Point of Beginning. 
(b)  Flat Shoals Crossing Enterprise Zone [Created March 17, 1999]. 
Within the area delineated below, it is determined that (1) there is evidence of adverse economic conditions brought about by significant job dislocation within the nominated area (O.C.G.A. § 36-88-6(c)), (2) there is evidence of general distress such as functionally obsolete structures, and (3) there is evidence of underdevelopment within the area showing that the level of development in the nominated area is at least 20 percent lower than development activity within Fulton County as a whole. Accordingly, there is hereby created an enterprise zone with the following geographic boundaries: 
Parcel 1: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 125 of the 13th District of Fulton County, Georgia, as per survey of site for Granny's by Travis Pruitt & Associates, P.C., dated August 14, 1978, more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING at an iron pin found on the southerly side of the right-of-way of Flat Shoals Road (having a 80 feet right-of-way) which iron pin found is located 175.0 feet from the westerly side of the right-of-way of Old National Highway (having a 100 foot right-of-way) as measured in a westerly direction along the said southerly side of Flat Shoals Road from the intersection of the westerly side of the right-of-way of Old National Highway with the southerly side of the right-of-way of said Flat Shoals Road; running thence south 08 degrees 45 minutes west a distance of 190.0 feet to an iron pin set; running thence north 81 degrees 39 minutes west a distance of 81.7 feet to an iron pin set; running thence north 09 degrees 03 minutes 05 seconds east a distance of 190.04 feet to an iron pin set on the southerly side of the right-of-way of Flat Shoals Road; running thence south 01 degree 37 minutes 30 seconds east a distance of 80.7 feet along the southerly side of the right-of-way of Flat Shoals Road to the iron pin found and the POINT OF BEGINNING, said tract containing 0.354 acres according to said plat. Said tract also being shown on lease plat, Phase I, Pineview Plaza Shopping Center, prepared by Watts & Drowning Engineers dated December 21, 1972, the last revision being on July 29, 1975. 
Parcel A: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 125 of the 13th District of Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING at a point marked by an iron pin on the westerly side of Old National Highway (Old National Highway having a right-of-way of 100 feet in width) 190 feet southerly from the corner formed by the intersection of the westerly side of Old National Highway and the southwesterly side of Flat Shoals Road (Flat Shoals Road having a right-of-way of 80 feet in width); thence southerly as measured along the westerly side of Old National Highway a distance of 443 feet to an iron pin; thence north 87 degrees 38 minutes 30 seconds west a distance of 668 feet to an iron pin; thence north 01 degree minutes east a distance of 482 feet to an iron pin; thence south 88 degrees 48 minutes & 30 seconds east a distance of 200 feet to an iron pin; thence north 00 degree 49 minutes 30 seconds east a distance of 200 feet to an iron pin located on the southwesterly side of Flat Shoals Road; thence southeasterly as measured along the southwesterly side of Flat Shoals Road a distance of 347.5 feet to an iron pin; thence south 08 degrees 45 minutes west a distance of 190 feet to an iron pin; thence south 81 degrees 39 minutes west a distance of 175 feet to the point of beginning. 
Less and excepting the following Parcel 1 
Parcel B: 
Together with the following tract: 
Being all that tract or parcel of land located in LL 125 of the 13th District, Fulton County, Georgia per survey of Watts & Browning Engineers dated October 24, 1972, and being further revised November 25, 1987, commencing on the westerly right-of-way of Old National Highway (100;ft; r/w) 783 feet southerly from the intersection of the westerly right-of-way line of Old National Highway with the southerly right-of-way of Flat Shoals Road (80;ft; r/w); thence S 2 degrees 8;ft; W along the westerly right-of-way of Old National Highway a distance of 132 feet to a point at the northerly side of Phase II-A Pineview Plaza Shopping Center; running thence N 89 degrees 27;ft; W along the northerly side of said Phase 11-A a distance of 200.08 feet to a point; WHICH POINT IS THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING; running thence along the northerly side of Phase II-A N 89 degrees 27;ft; W a distance of 463.52 feet to property now or formerly owned by Glover; running thence along the easterly side of said Glover property N 01 degree 16;ft; E, 303.0 feet to the southerly side of Phase I-A of Pineview Plaza Shopping Center; running thence S 87 degrees 38;ft; 30;inch; E, 468 feet to the northerly line of property now or formerly owned or occupied by Stonegate Package Store; running thence S 02 degrees 08;ft; W, 288.31 feet to the true point of beginning; containing 3.16 acres and being a portion of said Phase I-B Pineview Plaza Shopping Center. 
Parcel C: 
Together with the following tract: 
Being all that tract or parcel of land located in LL 125 of the 13th District, Fulton County, Georgia by survey of Watts & Browning Engineers dated October 24, 1972 as revised October 20, 1987, commencing on the westerly right-of-way of Old National Highway (100;ft; r/w) 915 feet southerly from the intersection of the westerly right-of-way line of Old National Highway with the southerly right-of-way of Flat Shoals Road; thence S 2 degrees 8;ft; W along the westerly right-of-way of Old National Highway a distance of 440 feet to a point; running thence N 88 degrees 07;ft; W 643.96 feet along the northerly side of Phase II-B Pineview Plaza to property now or formerly owned by Glover; running thence along the easterly side of said Glover property N 01 degree 16;ft; E 424.58 feet to the southerly side of Phase I-B; running thence S 89 degrees 27;ft; E a distance of 663.6 feet to the westerly side of the right-of-way of Old National Highway to the point of beginning; "less and excepting any portion of the frontage of said property not to exceed a strip of 6 feet in width, that has been heretofore been required by the Georgia DOT and/or Fulton County, Georgia for road widening purposes;" and less and excepting the following described property, which is owned by Treadwick Ltd, being more particularly described as follows: 
Being all that tract or parcel of land located in LL 125 of the 13th District, Fulton County, Georgia survey of Watts & Browning Engineers dated August 11, 1986 as revised by Frederic Dean, AIA, commencing on the westerly right-of-way of Old National Highway 960 feet southerly from the intersection of the westerly right-of-way line of Old National Highway with the southerly right-of-way of Flat Shoals Road; running thence S 2 degrees 8;ft; along the westerly right-of-way of Old National Highway a distance of 130 feet to a point; running thence westerly along a course that forms an interior angle of 90 degrees with the last preceding course a distance of 220 feet to a point; running thence northerly along a course that forms an interior angle of 90 degrees with the last preceding course and parallel with the course along Old National Highway a distance of 130 feet to a point; at the southerly line of 45 foot wide driveway being constructed, running thence easterly along a course that forms an interior angle of 90 degrees with the last preceding course and along the southerly line of said driveway a distance of 220 feet to the westerly right-of-way line of Old National Highway and the true point of beginning; "less and excepting any portion of the frontage of said property, not to exceed a strip of 6 feet in width, that has been heretofore been required by the Georgia DOT and/or Fulton County, Georgia for road widening purposes;" together with the unobstructed right, in common with all other granted similar rights by Lessor to use a 45 foot wide driveway area located north of and contiguous to the above described premises. 
Parcel D: 
Together with the following tract: 
Being all that tract or parcel of land located in LL 125 of the 13th District Fulton County, Georgia, per survey of Watts & Browning Engineers dated October 24, 1972 as revised October 20, 1987, commencing on the westerly right-of-way of Old National Highway (100;ft; r/w) 1,355 feet southerly from the intersection of the westerly right-of-way line of Old National Highway with the southerly right-of-way of Flat Shoals Road; (80;ft; r/w); thence S 2 degrees 8;ft; W along the westerly right-of-way of Old National Highway a distance of 425.7 feet to the southerly line of LL 125; thence N 88 degrees 07;ft; W along the southerly line of said LL 125 a distance of 650.4 feet to a concrete marker located at the southeasterly corner of property now or formerly owned by Glover; running thence along the easterly side of said Glover property N 01 degree 16;ft; E a distance of 425.72 feet to the southerly side of Phase II-A Pineview Plaza running thence south 88 degrees 07;ft; E along the southerly side of said Phase II-A a distance of 643.96 to the point of beginning; "less and excepting any portion of the frontage of said property, not to exceed a strip of 6 feet in width, that has been heretofore been required by the Georgia DOT and/or Fulton County, Georgia for road widening purposes." 
Parcel E: 
Together with the following tract: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 125 of the 13th District of Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING at a point on the southerly land lot line of Land Lot 125 of the 13th District of Fulton County, Georgia, a distance of 936.77 feet easterly from the land lot corner common to Land Lots 125, 126, 131 and 132; thence S 89 degrees 29;ft; 29;inch; E a distance of 587.59 feet to a point; thence N 0 degree 42;ft; 21;inch; E a distance of 1,898.43 feet to a point on the southerly right-of-way of Flat Shoals Road; thence easterly along the southerly right-of-way of Flat Shoals Road a distance of 326.13 feet to a point; thence S 0 degree 42;ft; 21;inch; W a distance of 1,870.12 feet to a point on the southerly land lot line of Land Lot 125; thence N 89 degrees 29;ft; 29;inch; W along the southerly land lot line of Land Lot 125 a distance of 325.00 feet to a point and the point of beginning. 
Said tract of land containing 14.06 acres. 
Parcel F: 
Together with the following tract: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 125 of the 13th District of Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING at a point on the southerly land lot line of Land Lot 125 of the 13th District of Fulton County, Georgia, a distance of 936.77 feet easterly from the land lot corner common to Land Lots 125, 126, 131 and 132; thence North 1 degree 50 minutes 19 seconds West, a distance of 775.02 feet to a point; thence North 0 degree 23 minutes 40 seconds East, a distance of 1,178.78 feet to a point on the southerly right-of-way of Flat Shoals Road; thence easterly along the southerly right-of-way of Flat Shoals Road a distance of 630.59 feet to a point; thence South 0 degree 42 minutes 21 seconds West, a distance of 1,898.43 feet to a point on the southerly land lot line of Land Lot 125; thence North 89 degrees 29 minutes 29 seconds West, along the southerly land lot line of Land Lot 125, a distance of 587.59 feet to a point and the point of beginning. 
Said tract of land containing 27.28 acres. 
Parcel G: 
Together with the following tract: 
Being all that tract or parcel of land located and being in LL 132, 13th District of Fulton County, Georgia and being shown as Tract One of boundary survey for Bennie and Leon Auerbach, by Civil Design, Inc., John E. Didicher, R.L.S. #1905 and being more particularly described as follows: 
Start at the common corner of LL 125, 126, 131 and 132 of said district at a one-half inch rebar at the Northwest corner of said LL 132; run thence S 87 degrees 32;ft; 44;inch; E along north line of said LL 855.94;ft; to a concrete monument which is the true point of beginning; continue then easterly along the same course as the previous course 526.19;ft; to a rock corner at the northwesterly corner of property now or formerly owned by West Henry Land Corp; run thence S 01 degree 42;ft; 28;inch; E 1,265.03;ft; along the westerly side of said West Henry Land Corp. property to a point; run thence N 88 degrees 23;ft; 57;inch; W 342.00;ft; along the northerly side of Tract Six of said plat; run thence N 61 degrees 32;ft; 27;inch; W 189.76;ft; to a point; run thence N 88 degrees 18;ft; 48;inch; W 14.70;ft; to the southeasterly corner of Tract Two of said plat; run thence N 01 degree 42;ft; 27;inch; E 1,187.12;ft; to the concrete monument at the true point of beginning 15.13 acres per said plat. 
Together with an easement 320;ft; in length and 75;ft; in width along the westerly side of said West Henry Land Corp. property; said easement extending from the southerly side of said 15.13 acre tract to Woodward Road. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  College Park Riverdale Road Enterprise Zone [Created November 21, 2001]. 
Within the area delineated below, it is determined that (1) the average rate of unemployment within the nominated area for the preceding calendar year is at least 20 percent higher than the state average unemployment, (2) general distress in the nominated area is evidenced by high incidence of crime, abandoned or dilapidated structures, deteriorated infrastructure and substantial population decline, and (3) there is evidence of underdevelopment within the area showing that the level of development in the nominated area is at least 20 percent lower than development activity within Fulton County as a whole. Accordingly, there is hereby created an enterprise zone with the following geographic boundaries: 
The Riverdale Road corridor of College Park, Georgia in Land Lot 4 of the 13th District of Fulton County and more particularly described as follows: 
All those tracts or parcels of land lying and being in Land Lot 4 of the 13th District of Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
POINT OF BEGINNING is the southeast corner of Camp Creek Parkway (State Route 6) and Herschel Road; thence South +/2,524.23 feet along the eastern right-of-way of Herschel Road to the 
TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING which is the northeast corner of Herschel Road and Herschel Park Drive, thence 523.0 feet N 89;deg; 06;min; E to an iron pin found (IPF); thence 249.2 feet N 00;deg; 41;min; W to IPF; thence 173.4 feet S 89;deg; 09;min; W to IPF; thence 125.0 feet N 00;deg; 41;min; W to IPF, thence 415.0 feet N 89;deg; 11;min; E to IPF, thence 351.1 feet N 89;deg; 11;min; E to IPF, thence +/- 140 feet N 01[;deg;] 56;min; 31;sec; E to iron pin set (IPS); thence 322.37 feet S 66;deg; 17;min; 28;sec; E along the southern right-of-way of Former Green Valley Drive to the eastern land lot line shared with land lot 5; thence +/- 320 feet S 02 00;deg; 17;min; W along the eastern land lot line to an IPS; thence 664.75 feet S 02;deg; 00;min; 17;sec; W along the eastern land lot line to IPF; thence 49.76 feet S 03[;deg;] 05;min; 20;sec; W along the eastern land lot line and western right-of-way of First Avenue to IPF; thence 150.0 feet S 89;deg; 37;min; W to IPS set on southern land lot line shared with land lot 29; thence 577.9 feet S 89;deg; 31;min; W along the southern land lot line to IPF; thence 586.3 feet N 00;deg; 31;min; W to IPF; thence 700.4 feet S 89;deg; 01;min; W to IPF, thence 200.0 feet S 89;deg; 01;min; W to a point on the eastern right-of-way of Herschel Road, thence 156.0 feet north along the eastern right-of-way of Herschel Road to IPF; thence 60.0 feet N 01;deg; 00;min; W along the eastern right of Herschel Road across Herschel Park Drive to the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING. 
(f)  Porshe Cars North America Industrial Urban Enterprise Zone. 
Within the area delineated below, it is determined that: (1) the average rate of unemployment within the nominated area for the preceding calendar year (2013) is 57 percent higher than the state average unemployment; (2) general distress in the nominated area is evidenced by abandoned or dilapidated structures, and deteriorated infrastructure; and (3) pervasive poverty rate is widespread within the nominated area as evidenced by two U.S. Census Tracts 72 and 108. Accordingly, there is hereby created the Porsche North America Industrial Urban Enterprise Zone with the following geographic boundaries: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 96 of the 14th District, City of Hapeville, Fulton County, Land Lot 65 of the 14th District, City of Atlanta, Fulton County, and Land Lots 11 and 12 of the 13th District, Clayton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Commence at the intersection of the line common to Land Lots 11 and 12, 13th District, Clayton County, Georgia, and the South boundary line of Land Lot 65, 14th District, Fulton County, Georgia, said Point of Commencement being located North 88 degrees 49 minutes 32 seconds West a distance of 307.92 feet as measured from a concrete monument found at the intersection of said county line and the northwesterly right-of-way of Interstate Highway 1-75 (having a varied right-of-way); run thence along the said South boundary line of Land Lot 65 South 88 degrees 49 minutes 32 seconds East a distance of 69.64 feet to an iron pin set, said iron pin set also being THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING; 
From THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING as thus established, run South 00 degrees 59 minutes 39 seconds West for a distance of 135.01 feet to a point; thence run South 06 degrees 47 minutes 07 seconds West for a distance of 110.57 feet to a 12" rebar found; thence run South 89 degrees 01 minutes 28 seconds East for a distance of 205.14 feet to a 12" rebar found, said 12" rebar found being located on the westerly right-of-way of Leslie Drive; thence run along the said westerly right-of-way of Leslie Drive South 16 degrees 06 minutes 40 seconds West for a distance of 56.14 feet to a point; thence continue to run along the said westerly right-of-way of Leslie Drive South 16 degrees 34 minutes 15 seconds West for a distance of 45.19 feet to a point; thence continue to run along the said westerly right-of-way of Leslie Drive South 19 degrees 14 minutes 13 seconds West for a distance of 228.78 feet to an iron pin set; thence leave the said westerly right-of-way of Leslie Drive and run North 89 degrees 37 minutes 50 seconds West for a distance of 163.51 feet to an iron pin set; thence run North 89 degrees 37 minutes 49 seconds West for a distance of 388.80 feet to an iron pin set; thence run North 00 degrees 15 minutes 32 seconds East for a distance of 365.19 feet to an iron pin set; thence run North 89 degrees 09 minutes 30 seconds West for a distance of 16.73 feet to an iron pin set; thence run North 00 degrees 01 minutes 12 seconds East for a distance of 44.94 feet to an iron pin set; thence run South 88 degrees 59 minutes 21 seconds East for a distance of 85.90 feet to an iron pin set; thence run North 00 degrees 51 minutes 50 seconds East for a distance of 157.21 feet to an iron pin set; thence run North 00 degrees 51 minutes 50 seconds East for a distance of 103.03 feet to an iron pin set; thence run South 89 degrees 35 minutes 09 seconds East for a distance of 163.93 feet to an iron pin set; thence run North 00 degrees 24 minutes 44 seconds East for a distance of 1,637.12 feet to a nail set on the southerly right-of-way of Henry Ford II Avenue (public road having a variable width right-of-way); thence run along said right-of-way South 63 degrees 35 minutes 46 seconds East for a distance of 19.79 feet to a nail set; thence continue to run along the said southerly right-of-way of Henry Ford II Avenue South 01 degrees 25 minutes 46 seconds East for a distance of 87.03 feet to a concrete monument found; thence continue to run along the said southerly right-of-way of Henry Ford II Avenue North 49 degrees 11 minutes 35 seconds East for a distance of 83.48 feet to a concrete monument found; thence continue to run along the said southerly right-of-way of Henry Ford II Avenue South 74 degrees 56 minutes 05 seconds East for a distance of 215.00 feet to a concrete monument found; thence continue to run along the said southerly right-of-way of Henry Ford II Avenue South 73 degrees 38 minutes 40 seconds East for a distance of 214.51 feet to a concrete monument found, said concrete monument found being located at the northwesterly corner of the mitered right-of-way of the intersection of the said southerly right-of-way of Henry Ford II Avenue and the westerly right-of-way of Interstate Highway 1-75; thence run along the said mitered right-of-way South 25 degrees 08 minutes 14 seconds East for a distance of 67.20 feet to a concrete monument found, said concrete monument found being located at the southeasterly corner of said mitered right-of-way; thence leave said mitered right-of-way and run along the said westerly right-of-way of Interstate Highway 1-75 the following courses and distances: South 14 degrees 38 minutes 38 seconds West for a distance of 462.64 feet to a point; thence run along a curve to the left having a radius of 236.51 feet and an arc length of 162.21 feet, said arc being subtended by a chord with a bearing of South 05 degrees 00 minutes 13 seconds East and a length of 159.05 feet, to a point; thence run South 24 degrees 47 minutes 31 seconds East for a distance of 86.70 feet to a point; thence run South 23 degrees 26 minutes 55 seconds East for a distance of 203.39 feet to a concrete monument found; thence run along a curve to the right having a radius of 676.20 feet and an arc length of 266.23 feet, said arc being subtended by a chord with a bearing of South 05 degrees 47 minutes 01 seconds East and a length of 264.51 feet, to a concrete monument found; thence run South 10 degrees 52 minutes 49 seconds West for a distance of 194.36 feet to a concrete monument found; thence run South 14 degrees 38 minutes 06 seconds West for a distance of 169.36 feet to a concrete monument found; thence run North 75 degrees 22 minutes 01 seconds West for a distance of 20.00 feet to a concrete monument found; thence run South 14 degrees 37 minutes 59 seconds West for a distance of 50.93 feet to a concrete monument found; thence leave the said westerly right-of-way of Interstate Highway 1-75 and run North 88 degrees 49 minutes 32 seconds West for a distance of 238.28 feet to an iron pin set, said iron pin set also being THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING. Said property contains 1,141,885 square feet (26.214 acres). 
TOGETHER WITH the non-exclusive easements appurtenant to the above-described tract of land granted by and more particularly described in that certain Easement Agreement by and between Airport Station, L.L.C., and the City of Atlanta, dated September 30, 2011, filed for record October 5, 2011, recorded in Deed Book 50440, Page 499, Records of Fulton County, Georgia and filed for record October 4, 2011, recorded in Deed Book 10015, Page 66, Records of Clayton County, Georgia, as amended and restated by that certain Amended and Restated Easement Agreement between Airport Station, L.L.C., and the City of Atlanta, dated May 11, 2012. 
The above tract of land is shown on and described according to "ALTAI ACSM Land Title Survey for Porsche Cars North America, Inc., Airport Station, L.L.C., and Chicago Title Insurance Company," prepared by Lowe Engineers, LLC, bearing the seal and certification of Scott C. North, Georgia Registered Land Surveyor No. 3176, dated April 16, 2012, which survey is by this reference incorporated herein and made a part hereof. 
Said Tract I property (described in its entirety hereinabove) lies within three separate municipalities, whose individual portions are described as follows: 
Tract I - Portion within Land Lot 96, 14th District, City of Hapeville, Fulton County, Georgia 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 96 of the 14th District, City of Hapeville, Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
Commence at the intersection of the line common to Land Lots 11 and 12, 13th District, Clayton County, Georgia, and the South boundary line of Land Lot 65, 14th District, Fulton County, Georgia, said Point of Commencement being located North 88 degrees 49 minutes 32 seconds West a distance of 307.92 feet as measured from a concrete monument found at the intersection of said county line and the northwesterly right-of-way of Interstate Highway 1-75 (having a varied right-of-way); thence run along the said South boundary line of Land Lot 65 North 88 degrees 49 minutes 32 seconds West a distance of 158.94 feet to an iron pin set, said iron pin set also being THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING; 
From THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING as thus established run North 88 degrees 49 minutes 32 seconds West for a distance of 164.76 feet to an iron pin set; thence run North 00 degrees 51 minutes 50 seconds East for a distance of 103.03 feet to an iron pin set; thence run South 89 degrees 35 minutes 09 seconds East for a distance of 163.93 feet to an iron pin set; thence run South 00 degrees 24 minutes 44 seconds West for a distance of 105.21 feet to an iron pin set, said iron pin set also being THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING. 
Said property contains 17,111 square feet (0.393 acres). 
Tract I - Portion within Land Lot 65, 14th District, City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 65 of the 14th District, City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
Commence at the intersection of the line common to Land Lots 11 and 12, 13th District, Clayton County, Georgia, and the South boundary line of Land Lot 65, 14th District, Fulton County, Georgia, said Point of Commencement being located North 88 degrees 49 minutes 32 seconds West a distance of 307.92 feet as measured from a concrete monument found at the intersection of said county line and the northwesterly right-of-way of Interstate Highway 1-75 (having a varied right-of-way); thence run along the said South boundary line of Land Lot 65 South 88 degrees 49 minutes 32 seconds East a distance of 69.64 feet to an iron pin set, said iron pin set also being THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING; 
From THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING as thus established run North 88 degrees 49 minutes 32 seconds West for a distance of 228.58 feet to an iron pin set; thence run North 00 degrees 24 minutes 44 seconds East for a distance of 105.21 feet to an iron pin set; thence run North 00 degrees 24 minutes 44 seconds East for a distance of 1,637.12 feet to a nail set on the southerly right-of-way of Henry Ford II Avenue (having a variable width right-of-way); thence run along said right-of-way South 63 degrees 35 minutes 46 seconds East for a distance of 19.79 feet to a nail set; thence continue to run along the said southerly right-of-way of Henry Ford II Avenue South 01 degrees 25 minutes 46 seconds East for a distance of 87.03 feet to a concrete monument found; thence continue to run along the said southerly right-of-way of Henry Ford II Avenue North 49 degrees 11 minutes 35 seconds East for a distance of 83.48 feet to a concrete monument found; thence continue to run along the said southerly right-of-way of Henry Ford II Avenue South 74 degrees 56 minutes 05 seconds East for a distance of 215.00 feet to a concrete monument found; thence continue to run along the said southerly right-of-way of Henry Ford II Avenue South 73 degrees 38 minutes 40 seconds East for a distance of 214.51 feet to a concrete monument found, said concrete monument found being located at the northwesterly corner of the mitered right-of-way of the intersection of the said southerly right-of-way of Henry Ford II Avenue and the westerly right-of-way of Interstate Highway 1-75; thence run along the said mitered right-of-way South 25 degrees 08 minutes 14 seconds East for a distance of 67.20 feet to a concrete monument found, said concrete monument found being located at the southeasterly corner of said mitered right-of-way; thence leave said mitered right-of-way and run along the said westerly right-of-way of Interstate Highway 1-75 the following courses and distances: South 14 degrees 38 minutes 38 seconds West for a distance of 462.64 feet to a point; thence run along a curve to the left having a radius of 236.51 feet and an arc length of 162.21 feet, said arc being subtended by a chord with a bearing of South 05 degrees 00 minutes 13 seconds East and a length of 159.05 feet, to a point; thence run South 24 degrees 47 minutes 31 seconds East for a distance of 86.70 feet to a point; thence run South 23 degrees 26 minutes 55 seconds East for a distance of 203.39 feet to a concrete monument found; thence run along a curve to the right having a radius of 676.20 feet and an arc length of 266.23 feet, said arc being subtended by a chord with a bearing of South 05 degrees 47 minutes 01 seconds East and a length of 264.51 feet, to a concrete monument found; thence run South 10 degrees 52 minutes 49 seconds West for a distance of 194.36 feet to a concrete monument found; thence run South 14 degrees 38 minutes 06 seconds West for a distance of 169.36 feet to a concrete monument found; thence run North 75 degrees 22 minutes 01 seconds West for a distance of 20.00 feet to a concrete monument found; thence run South 14 degrees 37 minutes 59 seconds West for a distance of 50.93 feet to a concrete monument found; thence leave the said westerly right-of-way of Interstate Highway 1-75 and run North 88 degrees 49 minutes 32 seconds West for a distance of 238.28 feet to an iron pin set, said iron pin set also being THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING. 
Said property contains 829,625 square feet (19.045 acres). 
Tract I - Portion within Land Lots 11 and 12, 13th District, Clayton County, Georgia 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 11 and 12 of the 13th District, Clayton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
Commence at the intersection of the line common to Land Lots 11 and 12, 13th District, Clayton County, Georgia, and the South boundary line of Land Lot 65, 14th District, Fulton County, Georgia, said Point of Commencement being located North 88 degrees 49 minutes 32 seconds West a distance of 307.92 feet as measured from a concrete monument found at the intersection of said county line and the northwesterly right-of-way of Interstate Highway 1-75 (having a varied right-of-way); thence run along the said South boundary line of Land Lot 65 South 88 degrees 49 minutes 32 seconds East a distance of 69.64 feet to an iron pin set, said iron pin set also being THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING; 
From THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING as thus established run South 00 degrees 59 minutes 39 seconds West for a distance of 135.01 feet to a point; thence run South 06 degrees 47 minutes 07 seconds West for a distance of 110.57 feet to a 12" rebar found; thence run South 89 degrees 01 minutes 28 seconds East for a distance of 205.14 feet to a 12" rebar found, said 12" rebar found being located on the westerly right-of-way of Leslie Drive; thence run along the said westerly right-of-way of Leslie Drive South 16 degrees 06 minutes 40 seconds West for a distance of 56.14 feet to a point; thence continue to run along the said westerly right-of-way of Leslie Drive South 16 degrees 34 minutes 15 seconds West for a distance of 45.19 feet to a point; thence continue to run along the said westerly right-of-way of Leslie Drive South 19 degrees 14 minutes 13 seconds West for a distance of 228.78 feet to an iron pin set; thence leave the said westerly right-of-way of Leslie Drive and run North 89 degrees 37 minutes 50 seconds West for a distance of 163.51 feet to an iron pin set; thence run North 89 degrees 37 minutes 49 seconds West for a distance of 388.80 feet to an iron pin set; thence run North 00 degrees 15 minutes 32 seconds East for a distance of 365.19 feet to an iron pin set; thence run North 89 degrees 09 minutes 30 seconds West for a distance of 16.73 feet to an iron pin set; thence run North 00 degrees 01 minutes 12 seconds East for a distance of 44.94 feet to an iron pin set; thence run South 88 degrees 59 minutes 21 seconds East for a distance of 85.90 feet to an iron pin set; thence run North 00 degrees 51 minutes 50 seconds East for a distance of 157.21 feet to an iron pin set; thence run South 88 degrees 49 minutes 32 seconds East for a distance of 393.34 feet to an iron pin set, said iron pin set also being THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING. 
Said property contains 295,149 square feet (6.776 acres). 
(Ord. No. 99-0408, § 1, 3-17-99; Ord. No. 01-1259, § 1, 11-21-01; Ord. No. 14-0361, 5-21-14) 
Section 4. Qualification and incentives. 
(a)  In order to encourage revitalization within the designated enterprise zone, the following exemptions from state and county ad valorem taxes are available to qualifying business and service enterprises: 
(1)  One hundred percent of the state and county ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the first five years; 
(2)  Eighty percent of the state and county ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the next two years; 
(3)  Sixty percent of the state and county ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the next (eighth) year; 
(4)  Forty percent of the state and county ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the next (ninth) year; and 
(5)  Twenty percent of the state and county ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the last (tenth) year. 
(b)  A qualifying business or service enterprise is an enterprise which increased employment by five or more new full-time job equivalents in the enterprise zone designated in section 3 of this ordinance and which enterprise provides additional economic stimulus in such enterprise zone. The quality and quantity of such additional economic stimulus shall be determined, on a case-by-case basis, by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners. Such business or service enterprise may be new, an expansion project for an existing business or service enterprise, a reinvestment into an existing business or service enterprise, or a successor to such business or service enterprise. At no time shall this ordinance be construed to apply to a business or service enterprise's land, buildings, equipment or other property that existed at the time of enactment of this ordinance unless such business or service enterprise qualifies under section 4(d) of this ordinance. Whenever possible, ten percent of the above-described new full-time job equivalents shall be filled or staffed with low-income or moderate-income individuals. 
(c)  For a qualifying business or service enterprise located within the enterprise zone designated herein, the schedule provided for in paragraph (a) of this section shall begin in the calendar year following said enterprise's designation as a "qualifying business or service enterprise" by the Mayor and City Council of East Point and the Fulton County Board of Commissioners. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed as giving any business or service enterprise or property owner a vested right to be designated as a qualifying business or service enterprise. A minimum of five new jobs must be created and maintained for a qualifying business or service enterprise to maintain eligibility for the tax exemption provided for in this ordinance. Evidence of the creation and maintenance of all new jobs within the enterprise zone shall be submitted to the Fulton County Economic Development Division by the qualifying business or service enterprise at such times as required by said division, and no less frequently than annually. 
(d)  If, on or after the effective date of this ordinance [April 15, 1998], a project within the designated enterprise zone consists of rehabilitation and improvement of an existing structure and the value of said improvement exceeds the value of the accompanying tract or parcel of land by a ratio of five to one, then the exemption schedule in paragraph (a) of this section shall also apply whether or not the rehabilitation project is carried out by a qualifying business or service enterprise. The tax exemptions pursuant to this paragraph shall commence in the year following designation of the project by the Mayor and City Council of East Point and the Fulton County Board of Commissioners as a qualifying project under this paragraph. This designation shall not be requested until completion of the rehabilitation project. 
(e)  In no event shall the value of the property tax exemptions granted within Fulton County as a whole exceed ten percent of the value of the property tax digest of Fulton County. 
Section 5. Duration. 
The area hereby designated as an enterprise zone shall remain in existence for ten years from the first day of the calendar year immediately following the effective date of this ordinance [April 15, 1998]. Ad valorem tax exemptions available to a qualified business or service enterprise in the enterprise zone herein created shall remain in effect for the full ten-year period established in section 4(a) of this ordinance, regardless of the termination of the designation of an enterprise zone. 
Section 6. Administration. 
The Fulton County Economic Development Division, together with the East Point Department of Community Services, shall administer and enforce this ordinance for the purpose of determining the applicability of the exemptions provided herein. 
Section 7. Application. 
(a)  Each enterprise desiring designation as a "qualifying business or service enterprise" under this ordinance must apply to the Fulton County Economic Development Division as well as the East Point Department of Community Services. In addition to other information requested by the Fulton County Economic Development Division, the application should be accompanied by the following items: 
(1)  A description of the business(es) conducted by the applicant at the subject location within the enterprise zone; 
(2)  Documentation reflecting the number of full-time job equivalents maintained by the applicant at the subject location within the enterprise zone as of the date of application, as compared to the number of such full-time job equivalents maintained as of the effective date of this ordinance [April 15, 1998]; 
(3)  The name and address of each employee occupying each new full-time job at the subject location within the enterprise zone, and a determination of whether each such employee was a low-income or moderate-income individual as of the date of hire for the new full-time job; 
(4)  A description and documentation of any additional economic stimulus provided within the enterprise zone by the applicant. 
(b)  For those enterprises applying for exemption under section 4(d) of this ordinance, the application to the Fulton County Economic Development Division shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A description of the business(es) conducted by the applicant at the subject location within the enterprise zone; 
(2)  Documentation reflecting expenses of rehabilitation of the existing structure; 
(3)  An appraisal or appraisals reflecting the value of the structure both before and after rehabilitation; 
(4)  An appraisal or appraisals reflecting the value of the accompanying tract or parcel of land both before and after rehabilitation of the structure; and 
(5)  Photographic documentation of the structure both before and after rehabilitation. 
Section 8. Separate business locations. 
Where a business is operated at more than one location, only a location within the enterprise zone shall be eligible for the tax exemptions provided in this ordinance. 
Section 9. Record of exemption to be maintained. 
Any locations for which the tax exemptions provided in this ordinance have been granted shall maintain documentation relating to the grant of said exemptions at the address for which the exemptions were approved. Said documentation shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer of Fulton County when so requested. 
Section 10. Contractual agreement. 
As a condition of receiving the tax exemptions provided for in this ordinance, a qualifying business or service enterprise shall consent to enter into a contractual agreement that outlines the tax exemptions offered to such business or service enterprise and that further provides guidelines for the recapture, revocation or reimbursement of taxes should the terms of the contractual agreement, this ordinance or the Georgia Enterprise Zone Employment Act of 1997 be violated by the business or service enterprise. 
Chapter 122 - COURTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Justice system coordinating committee, § 102-631 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 146. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Courts, ch. 10. 

Sec. 122-1. - Use of annex buildings for judicial operations and court services. 
(a)  The county annex building located in South Fulton County on Stonewall Tell Road and the county annex building in North Fulton County on Roswell Road are hereby declared county sites and designated for all uses and purposes otherwise allowable by law at such annex buildings by the superior court, state court, probate court and juvenile courts, provided that said courts maintain their court and their central depository for the keeping of all records at their present courthouses in the City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia. 
(b)  To the extent allowed by the law and Constitution of the State of Georgia, the judges of the above-named courts of Fulton County are authorized to sit and hold court at the annex buildings on all matters within their jurisdiction. 
(c)  The chief judge of the state court is respectfully requested to implement the act of 1980 providing for the appointment of magistrates by designating and directing the newly appointed magistrates to maintain offices and conduct hearings and trials at the annex buildings. 
(Code 1983, § 25-1-1) 
Sec. 122-2. - Security. 
The rules and regulations regarding security for the Fulton County Superior Court building promulgated by the judges of the supreme court, effective June 11, 1984, are hereby incorporated by reference as a part of this chapter. Further, the director of public buildings is directed to comply with those same rules and regulations. 
(Code 1983, § 25-1-5) 
Sec. 122-3. - Supervision of law library. 
The law library shall be under the supervision of the court administrator of the superior court. 
(Code 1983, § 25-3-1) 
State Law reference— County law libraries, O.C.G.A. § 36-15-1 et seq. 
Sec. 122-4. - Display and maintenance of flags in courtrooms. 
The county manager and director of public buildings shall have the American flag properly displayed in each courtroom in the superior, criminal, and civil courts. The officers shall be responsible for keeping of all of the American flags in a clean condition. 
(Code 1983, § 23-3-36) 
Sec. 122-5. - Waiver of costs to City of Atlanta. 
Fulton County shall waive all court costs, save stenographic fees, in all litigation in the several courts of Fulton County to which the City of Atlanta is a party and in which the City of Atlanta is charged with the payment of costs. The Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton County and the Sheriff of Fulton County are hereby authorized to recognize this waiver of costs and to make such entries on their official records as may be required to relieve the City of Atlanta of court costs under the authority of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 25-1-3) 
Sec. 122-6. - Designation of satellite courthouse on Fulton Industrial Boulevard. 
(a)  The building located at 5500-B Fulton Industrial Boulevard, Atlanta, Georgia 30336 is hereby declared a satellite courthouse pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-6-18(c)(1) and designated for all judicial operations, court services, uses and purposes otherwise allowable by law by superior, state and magistrate courts. 
(b)  To the extent allowed by the law and Constitution of the State of Georgia, the judges of the Superior, State and Magistrate Courts of Fulton County are authorized to sit and hold sessions of court and to conduct all other superior, state and magistrate court business at this satellite courthouse location. 
(14-0932, 11-5-14; 15-0516, 6-17-15) 
Chapter 126 - CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 126-1—126-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ART[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Arts and science program authorized, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(10). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 126-31—126-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ARTS COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 

Sec. 126-46. - Creation; organization; members. 
The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County does hereby create a council of citizens known as the Fulton County Arts Council, to be structured and to function as follows: 
(1)  The arts council shall be composed of 15 residents of the county. 
(2)  Initially each member of the board of commissioners shall appoint two persons to serve on the council, one person to serve for a one-year term and one person to serve for a two-year term. Thereafter, each year each member of the board of commissioners shall appoint one member for a two-year term. 
(3)  The chairman of the arts council shall be appointed to a two-year term by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. 
(4)  The council shall elect a vice-chairman and a secretary from its membership. 
(Code 1983, § 22-6-1(a)) 
Sec. 126-47. - Annual art plan; contents; priorities of art council. 
(a)  More specifically, the board of commissioners will request the arts council to submit an art plan for each calendar year which will include: 
(1)  A definition of needs; 
(2)  A resolution of these needs; and 
(3)  A request for support of programs by specific contracts which would include: 
a.  Contracts with larger organizations for annual programs; and 
b.  Contracts with smaller organizations for semiannual programs. 
(b)  The arts council, as here established, shall give priority to programs which will introduce the arts to new audiences, and will ensure that the enjoyment of the arts is available to all citizens of the county and most especially children, the elderly, the handicapped, and those citizens who, because of economic or other circumstances, have not had ready and regular access to the arts. 
(Code 1983, § 22-6-1(b)(3)) 
Secs. 126-48—126-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ART IN PUBLIC PLACES PROGRAM 

Sec. 126-66. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Art or works of art or art works means the objects resulting from the application of skill and taste to production of tangible objects, designs, and/or environments according to aesthetic principles including, but not limited to, paintings, sculptures, engravings, carvings, frescoes, mobiles, murals, collages, mosaics, statues, bas-reliefs, tapestries, photographs, and drawings. 
Construction costs means the total costs of acquiring and constructing a capital project, including, without limitation, legal, architectural, engineering, and other professional fees, site work, contingency allowances, and change orders. 
FCAC means the Fulton County Arts Council, or such other body as may be created by the board of commissioners from time to time for the purpose of advising or managing the support, presentation and maintenance of the county's art and/or art programs or for the purpose of performing the duties reserved to the FCAC hereunder. 
Public art committee means the public art committee of the FCAC or such other similar committee of the FCAC as the FCAC or the Fulton County Commission may establish from time to time for purposes including performance of the duties reserved to the public art committee hereunder. 
Public places means buildings, real property, or other facilities owned or operated by Fulton County. 
Renovation means any construction or cosmetic change costing over $100,000.00 in manhours or supplies. This excludes regular maintenance of facilities such as painting, gutters, etc. 
(93-RC-112, § 4, 4-7-93) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 101-2. 
Sec. 126-67. - Creation. 
There is hereby created a Fulton County Art in Public Places Program. 
(93-RC-112, § 1, 4-7-93) 
Sec. 126-68. - Execution of contracts; conditions. 
No contract shall be executed by Fulton County for the construction, acquisition, or renovation of any governmental building or other capital facility owned or to be acquired by the county (capital project) unless at least one percent of the construction costs for such capital project are used for the presentation, commissioning, purchase, conservation, transportation, installation, protection, and maintenance of art in public places, which amounts are referred to as art funds. 
(93-RC-112, § 2, 4-7-93) 
Cross reference— Purchases and contracts, § 102-351 et seq. 
Sec. 126-69. - Use of art funds. 
The art funds portion of any contract referred to in section 126-68 shall be disbursed for use in connection with such capital project as directed by the FCAC through its public art committee for the purposes of providing art in public places. Such art funds shall be used to provide works of art in, on, or near such new or renovated capital project, as appropriate, and in, on, or near existing public places owned, funded, or operated by Fulton County. In addition, such art funds may be used for: 
(1)  The transportation, installation, protection, conservation, and maintenance of art in public places including, without limitation, costs of program administration, staff, insurance, security, conservation, restoration or other repair, framing, and maintenance of any works of art owned by or in the possession of the county; 
(2)  Payment of any and all expenses associated with the borrowing of art works from other persons, entities, or institutions for exhibit in public places; 
(3)  Payment of any and all expenses associated with the commissioning of art for public places including, without limitation, the preparation and dissemination of requests for proposals; 
(4)  Payment of any and all expenses associated with the presenting, commissioning, and/or judging of exhibitions of art works to be presented in public places by the county, the FCAC or others; and 
(5)  Payment of curatorial expenses, consulting fees and other professional fees or expenses incurred in the implementation of this art in public places division. 
(93-RC-112, § 3, 4-7-93) 
Sec. 126-70. - Capital project contracts; review and certification required. 
No contract for a capital project shall be presented for approval by Fulton County unless it has been reviewed by the FCAC and contains a certification that the provisions of this division have been complied with. 
(93-RC-112, § 5, 4-7-93) 
Chapter 130 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 130-1—130-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 

Sec. 130-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for and the execution of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to mitigate, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin, caused by enemy attack, sabotage, civil disturbance, major accident, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, oil spill, or other water contaminations requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 101-2. 
Sec. 130-32. - Policy and purpose of article. 
Because of the existing and increasing possibility of the occurrence of emergencies or disasters, resulting from manmade or natural causes, or enemy attack, and in order to ensure that the preparations of Fulton County will be adequate to deal with such emergencies or disasters, and generally to provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the people of Fulton County and to carry out the functions, duties, and responsibilities contained in the Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950 (Public Law 81-920) and the Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981 (O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.), it is hereby found and declared to be necessary to: 
(1)  Create a department of emergency management services for Fulton County; 
(2)  Authorize this department to take such steps as are necessary and appropriate to carry out the provisions of this law so that all emergency management functions for Fulton County are coordinated to the maximum practical extent with the comparable functions of the State of Georgia and its political subdivisions, of the federal government including its various departments and agencies, of other states and localities, and of private agencies, of every type, to the end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of the available manpower, resources, and facilities in dealing with any emergency or disaster that may occur. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-1) 
Sec. 130-33. - Atlanta-Fulton County Emergency Management Agency designated as county department of emergency management services. 
The Atlanta-Fulton County Emergency Management Agency is hereby designated as the Fulton County Department of Emergency Management Services, to coordinate the planning and execution of all emergency management functions for Fulton County in accordance with the Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981 (O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.), as heretofore and hereafter amended from time to time. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-3) 
Sec. 130-34. - Emergency management director; appointment. 
(a)  The department shall be under the direction and control of an emergency management director who shall be appointed by the Governor of the State of Georgia upon nomination by the Chairman of the Fulton County Board of Commissioners and the Mayor of the City of Atlanta, in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The director of emergency management is also designated the disaster coordinator for Fulton County. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-4) 
Sec. 130-35. - Policy development and implementation. 
(a)  The department and the director shall operate under policies established by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners and the county manager. The emergency management director shall be responsible directly to the Fulton County Board of Commissioners and the county manager and shall serve as the director of emergency and disaster planning for the county, to include planning required for the management of resources and economic stabilization in the event of enemy attack, planning required for mitigation, response and recovery operations for natural disasters, and coordination of emergency planning with Georgia and federal planning agencies. 
(b)  The emergency management director shall serve as the senior liaison officer between Fulton County and the State of Georgia Department of Defense and state and federal military forces. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-5) 
Sec. 130-36. - Director's duties. 
(a)  The emergency management director is hereby authorized and directed to: 
(1)  Represent Fulton County in all matters pertaining to emergency management and disaster preparedness; 
(2)  Utilize all other department heads and all county officials as required in the preparation, development, and execution of emergency management plans; 
(3)  Assist county officials in planning the organization of county departments for emergency operations; 
(4)  Develop and maintain emergency management plans, in conjunction with county departments, for emergency functions in consonance with state and federal emergency plans, and to implement these plans when required; 
(5)  Establish an emergency management plan for the continuity of county government in the event of any enemy attack or other emergency; 
(6)  Maintain and, where feasible, improve public fallout shelters, and the attack warning system; maintain a community shelter plan in readiness for publication on short notice; train fallout shelter managers and radiological monitoring personnel; take such other readiness steps toward preparedness against enemy attack as are prudent and practical; and to institute equivalent readiness measures and planning against manmade and natural disasters; 
(7)  Maintain an adequate emergency communications system encompassing all county departments and other agencies and an emergency operations center; and 
(8)  Establish and maintain an organization of sufficient staff and operating agencies to implement approved emergency plans, approximately as set forth in section 130-38. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-6) 
Sec. 130-37. - Organization and functions. 
The county manager is hereby authorized and directed to: 
(1)  Provide policy guidance to the director in the administration of the emergency management program; 
(2)  Assist in providing effective mobilization of all private and public resources of the county in time of emergency; 
(3)  Prepare and recommend for approval by the Fulton County Commission all resolutions, regulations, and ordinances necessary or convenient to implement the emergency management program; 
(4)  Review emergency management plans prepared by the department; and 
(5)  Approve the annual operating budget request of the department and approve other special emergency management services fund requests. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-7) 
_____
Sec. 130-38. - Emergency management services. 
The emergency management organization shall consist of governmental and voluntary emergency services. The chief officer of a governmental service unit shall be the head of the department providing the service as an emergency management function. Directors of volunteer services shall be chosen by the director. Services shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 

 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-8) 
_____
Sec. 130-39. - Additional duties of director. 
The emergency management services director shall: 
(1)  Coordinate the operations and actions of all the services in time of emergency; 
(2)  Maintain a permanent staff sufficient to carry out the duties and responsibilities of the department and ensure that the staff is professionally trained and fully qualified; 
(3)  Ensure that an adequate emergency operations center (EOC) is available and properly equipped as needed for the conduct of emergency operations; 
(4)  Through coordination with the state emergency management division department of public defense and the Federal Emergency Management Agency, ensure that county plans and activities are consistent with state and federal guidelines; 
(5)  Prepare and periodically update basic emergency operations plan, to include an annex (plan) for each service which shall be prepared and authenticated by the service chief; and 
(6)  Plan and implement preparedness measures in readiness for implementation of emergency plans. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-9) 
Sec. 130-40. - Budgets; financial records. 
(a)  The director shall be the chief executive officer and responsible administrator of the emergency management services department. 
(b)  The director shall prepare all budgets to meet operating and administrative expenses and shall operate the department in accordance with the approved budget appropriations of Fulton County to include anticipated federal matching funds, as projected by the Georgia Emergency Management Division, Department of Public Defense, with staff pay based upon an approved emergency management staffing pattern and pay scales of the Georgia Merit System. Proposed budget requests shall be approved by the Fulton County Manager. 
(c)  Financial records, personnel and administration records, and such other records as are desired, shall be subject to audit at any time by designated county officials. 
(Code 1983, § 27-4-10) 
Secs. 130-41—130-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide ambulance and emergency rescue services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); emergency medical services, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 130-76—130-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 

Sec. 130-91. - Creation. 
The Fulton County Board of Commissioners hereby creates the Fulton County Emergency Medical Services Board. 
Sec. 130-92. - Membership; terms. 
(a)  The membership of the Fulton County Emergency Medical Services Board shall be comprised of the Fulton County Fire Chief, the Fulton County Director of Public Health, the Fulton County Chief of Police, the Fulton County Director of Emergency Medical Services, the Fulton County Director of 911 Communications, a representative from the City of Atlanta, a board certified emergency medical physician, and other members for such terms as may be appointed by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners. 
(b)  The Fulton County Board of Commissioners shall appoint the physician to the emergency medical services board and that the representative from the City of Atlanta shall be appointed by mayor of the City of Atlanta for such terms as delineated by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners. 
(94-RM-766, 12-7-94) 
Sec. 130-93. - Director. 
The Fulton County Emergency Medical Services Board shall be served by an executive director who shall also serve as the Fulton County Director of Emergency Medical Services and who shall be responsible for implementing the policies and procedures of that board. 
(94-RM-766, 12-7-94) 
Sec. 130-94. - Functions. 
(a)  The Fulton County Board of Commissioners recognizes that the State of Georgia, through the region III emergency medical services council, has the sole authority and responsibility for administering the emergency medical systems communications program within Fulton County. However, the Fulton County Emergency Medical Services Board shall advise the board of commissioners concerning appropriate recommendations to be made to the region III emergency medical services council. The Fulton County Emergency Medical Services Board shall address and concern itself with recommending appropriate policies and procedures to guide the Fulton County Emergency Medical System; exploring adequate performance standards, and the possibility of sanctions, penalties and/or incentives for providers within the system; evaluating the cost and quality of emergency medical service being provided to the citizens of Fulton County; and performing such other tasks as may be assigned by the Fulton County Manager and/or the Board of Commissioners. 
(b)  The board of commissioners may enact rules and regulations governing the Fulton County Emergency Medical Services Board, but the enactment of such rules shall not be construed as designating the Fulton County Emergency Medical Services Board as a legal entity capable of entering into contracts or being sued. 
(94-RM-766, 12-7-94) 
Chapter 134 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; ordinances pertaining to environment, ch. 26; open burning, § 30-36 et seq.; ordinances pertaining to health and sanitation, ch. 34; resolutions pertaining to health and sanitation, ch. 138. 

Sec. 134-1. - Hazardous material advisory council. 
(a)  There is established the Hazardous Material Advisory Council of Fulton County which shall be composed of members from the following county agencies: 
(1)  County manager's office; 
(2)  Sheriff of Fulton County; 
(3)  Fulton County Health Department; 
(4)  Atlanta-Fulton County EMA; 
(5)  Fulton County Legal Counsel; 
(6)  Fulton County Fire Department; and 
(7)  Fulton County Communications. 
(b)  The Atlanta-Fulton County Emergency Management Agency shall solicit additional participation for the Hazardous Material Advisory Council of Fulton County by inviting the following organizations to also become members: 
(1)  Fire department from each of the incorporated cities of Fulton County; 
(2)  Atlanta Chamber of Commerce; 
(3)  Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA); 
(4)  National Defense Transportation Association (NDTA); 
(5)  Atlanta Bureau of Pollution Control; 
(6)  American Red Cross; 
(7)  Business and industry representatives; 
(8)  Fulton DeKalb Hospital Authority; 
(9)  Public information group representative (media); 
(10)  Community group representative; and 
(11)  Technical experts. 
(c)  The council shall: 
(1)  Pursue the development of an awareness program involving industry, the community, local government and the news media; and 
(2)  Evaluate available resources for preparing for and responding to potential incidents. 
(d)  The Atlanta-Fulton County Emergency Management Agency shall be responsible as a consultant to the hazardous material advisory council and shall furnish all administrative support attendant to council activities. 
(Res. of 6-1-88) 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 
Sec. 134-2. - Citizens commission on the environment. 
(a)  The board of commissioners does hereby establish the Fulton County Citizens Commission on the Environment to make recommendations to the board of commissioners on environmental policies and to disseminate information to the community on environmental issues. 
(b)  The Fulton County Citizens Commission on the Environment shall consist of citizens from throughout Fulton County to be appointed by the members of the board of commissioners. 
(95-1364, 11-15-95) 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 
Chapter 138 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Massage parlors, § 18-146 et seq.; ordinances pertaining to environment, ch. 26; open burning, § 30-36 et seq.; ordinances pertaining to health and sanitation, ch. 34; resolutions pertaining to environment, ch. 134. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 138-1. - County board of health designated community mental health, mental retardation and substance abuse service board. 
Fulton County hereby authorizes the Fulton County Board of Health to serve the community mental health, mental retardation and substance abuse service board. 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-12.1. 
Secs. 138-2—138-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY MEDICAL EXAMINER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Medical examiner, § 22-71 et seq. 
State Law reference— Georgia Death Investigation Act, O.C.G.A. § 45-16-20 et seq. 

Sec. 138-31. - Professional services. 
To the extent that the duties of the medical examiner will permit him to accept outside professional work, the medical examiner should be permitted to engage in the same. Professional work includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the following: 
(1)  Lectures on professional subjects; 
(2)  Limited teaching engagements; 
(3)  Expert testimony for third persons where no other qualified pathologist in this area could perform the same work and for the same purpose; and 
(4)  Attendance at professional meetings, including meetings of the medical society and particular disciplines of the medical examiner. 
(Code 1983, § 23-2-32) 
Secs. 138-32—138-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITIES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 
State Law reference— Hospital authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 138-56—138-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FULTON-DEKALB HOSPITAL AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Fulton-DeKalb Hospital Authority controls Henry Grady Hospital. 

Sec. 138-71. - Created; composition. 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Fulton-DeKalb Hospital Authority, which said authority shall consist of a board of ten trustees, with all the powers, privileges, immunities, rights, and liabilities as provided by law. 
(Code 1983, § 13-2-11) 
Sec. 138-72. - Members; terms of office. 
The terms of members of the authority shall be for four years. 
(Code 1983, § 13-2-12) 
Sec. 138-73. - Appointees of City of Atlanta; submission of names by Mayor of Atlanta. 
The Mayor of the City of Atlanta may submit to the Commissioners of Fulton County and DeKalb County the names of not more than five members which he recommends the commissioners of the respective counties appoint to serve on the board of trustees. Should persons recommended by the Mayor of the City of Atlanta be appointed by the Commissioners of Fulton and DeKalb Counties, the Mayor of the City of Atlanta shall likewise recommend to the commissioners successors to such appointees in the event of vacancy or the expiration of the term of office of any such trustee or trustees. 
(Code 1983, § 13-2-13) 
Sec. 138-74. - Relevant jurisdiction. 
The area of operation of the Fulton-DeKalb Hospital Authority is hereby defined as including all the territorial limits and affecting all the citizens within the limits of the boundaries of said counties. 
(Code 1983, § 13-2-14) 
Sec. 138-75. - Contracts with commissioners. 
The board of commissioners shall enter into negotiations with said authority for the use of the services and facilities of the authority and for the construction and maintenance thereof and the execution of a contract or contracts in connection therewith, as may be deemed necessary and advisable to accomplish the purposes hereby intended. 
(Code 1983, § 13-2-15) 
Secs. 138-76—138-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY OF FULTON COUNTY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The Hospital Authority of Fulton County controls Northside Hospital. 

Sec. 138-90. - Created; composition. 
There is hereby created in and for Fulton County, a public body, corporate and politic, to be known as Hospital Authority of Fulton County, which shall consist of a board of nine members to be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County for staggered terms. 
(Code 1983, § 13-2-21) 
Sec. 138-91. - Members—Terms of office. 
Each term shall be for a period of four years. 
(Code 1983, § 13-2-22) 
Sec. 138-92. - Same—Reappointment of members. 
Any member of the authority shall be eligible for reappointment at the expiration of the term, and such member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed or qualified. 
(Code 1983, § 13-2-23) 
Sec. 138-93. - Functions of authority. 
The authority shall have and exercise all of the powers granted and prescribed in the Hospital Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq.). 
(Code 1983, § 13-2-24) 
Secs. 138-94—138-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FULCO HOSPITAL AUTHORITY 

Sec. 138-111. - Declaration of need. 
There is hereby determined and declared to be a pressing, existing, and future need for an additional hospital authority (as more fully described and defined in the Hospital Authorities Law, and more specifically O.C.G.A. § 31-7-73), to function in Fulton County for the purpose of providing adequate and proper public health facilities in said area, thereby promoting the general welfare of the citizenry. 
(Code 1983, § 13-2-31) 
Sec. 138-112. - Creation. 
There is hereby activated the public body corporate and politic known as the Fulco Hospital Authority, which was created upon the adoption and approval of the Hospital Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-73. 
(Code 1983, § 13-2-32) 
Sec. 138-113. - Appointment of trustees; service till successor appointed. 
(a)  Upon the termination of the term of office of any trustee for any reason, the board of commissioners shall fill any vacancy on the board of trustees of the hospital authority in the following manner: 
(1)  The board of commissioners shall submit a list of three eligible persons to the board of trustees of the hospital authority. 
(2)  The board of trustees of the hospital authority at its next regular meeting shall select one of the three persons named in said list. 
(b)  If, at the end of any term of office of any trustee, a successor thereto shall have not been elected, then the trustee whose term of office shall have expired shall continue to hold office until his successor shall be so elected. 
(Code 1983, § 13-2-33) 
Sec. 138-114. - Organization; operations. 
The board of trustees hereinbefore elected shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities, and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Hospital Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq.), as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Code 1983, § 13-2-34) 
Chapter 142 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Nondiscrimination in purchasing and contracting, ch. 102, div. 8. 

Sec. 142-1. - Creation of office of disability affairs. 
An office of disability affairs is hereby created. 
(93-RM-181, 4-21-93) 
Sec. 142-2. - Commission on disability affairs; creation; membership; terms. 
(a)  A commission on disability affairs is hereby formed. 
(b)  The commission on disability affairs shall consist of a total of 16 members to serve staggered two-year terms and appointed as follows: 
(1)  Each member of the board of commissioners shall appoint two members, one of said appointees shall have an initial term of one year; and 
(2)  The commission on disability affairs shall appoint two members, who receive the consent of the majority of the members of the commission on disability affairs, and one of the appointees shall have an initial term of one year. The commission on disability affairs appointees shall be made for the purpose of maintaining diversity. 
(93-RM-181, 4-21-93) 
State Law reference— Handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-1-1 et seq. 
Chapter 146 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Justice system coordinating committee, § 102-631 et seq.; resolutions pertaining to courts, ch. 122; mandatory drug testing of public safety and law enforcement employees and employees carrying firearm, § 154-8. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 146-1. - Policies governing use of force. 
(a)  The board of commissioners does hereby state, clarify, and reiterate the policies governing the use of force by peace officers employed by Fulton County as follows: 
(1)  In effectuating an arrest, peace officers shall only use such force as is reasonably necessary to effectuate the arrest. 
(2)  Peace officers shall only threaten or use force against another when, and to the extent, that he or she reasonably believes that such threat or force is necessary to defend himself, herself, or a third person against such others' eminent use of unlawful force. 
(3)  Peace officers shall only be justified in using force which is intended or likely to cause death or great bodily harm if he or she reasonably believes that such force is necessary to prevent death or great bodily injury to himself, herself, or a third person, or to prevent the commission of a forcible felony. 
(4)  All peace officers shall be required to submit a written report of any use of force to their respective chief, sheriff, or marshal. 
(b)  The law enforcement agencies under the jurisdiction of the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County shall continue to ensure, through training and monitoring, that peace officers comply with the above-stated policies of subsection (a) of this section. 
(93-RC-214, 6-16-93) 
Secs. 146-2—146-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for police protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; county police, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 146-31. - Fulton County Police Force established to full operation. 
Police protection for unincorporated Fulton County shall be provided by an independent Fulton County Police Force established as follows: 
(1)  The Fulton County Police Force shall be under the supervision, direction, and command of the county police chief who shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County and who shall report to the county manager. The term of office of the county police chief shall be fixed by the board of commissioners. 
(2)  The salary of the county police chief shall be not less than $25,000.00 per year. 
(3)  The county manager, together with the county police chief when appointed, shall develop, subject to the approval of the board of commissioners, rules, regulations, and procedures for the establishment, direction, and operation of the county police force. Said procedure shall provide for recruitment, training, and equipping of adequate forces to give full police protection to the county, and shall further include procedures providing for protection of pension and retirement rights, orderly advancement and promotion policy, and other employee benefits commensurate with existing county policies, and such other procedures as are necessary to implement the establishment of the Fulton County Police Force with full operating capacity. 
(Code 1983, § 27-1-1) 
Sec. 146-32. - Departmental regulations. 
The rules and regulations of the Fulton County Police Department approved by the board of commissioners July 25, 1979, and effective August 15, 1979, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. Copies of those regulations are on file in the police department and in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1983, § 27-1-2) 
Sec. 146-33. - Unclaimed property; authority to sell at auction. 
(a)  Generally. The county police department shall have the authority to sell, at public outcry, to the highest bidder for cash any and all the articles of personal property that have come into their hands and which, after diligent effort has been made to ascertain the true owner thereof without success, remain unclaimed for a period of 60 days. 
(b)  Records required. It shall be the duty of the Fulton County Police Department to maintain a separate and complete catalog record of all property coming into their hands, such property to be identified in detail by its usual name, make and model, manufacturer's name and serial number, if any, and if no identifying name or numbers, to be fully described on the catalog record as to its physical properties and appearance. The record shall also show the date the property came into the hands of the department and the disposal thereof. 
(c)  Responsibility to try to find owner. It shall be the duty of the county police department to make a diligent effort to find the true owner of any article of personal property coming into their hands and if an owner can be found, to deliver the property to him. In the event that the true owner of any article cannot be found and the property remains unclaimed for a period of not less than 60 days next preceding the date of sale as hereinafter provided, the department may proceed to sell any article or articles as hereinafter provided. 
(d)  When sale conducted; terms of sale. On the first Monday in February, the first Monday in May, the first Monday in August, and the first Monday in November, in each year, the county police department shall hold a public sale of all unclaimed articles of personal property held by them for at least 60 days immediately preceding the date of sale at the headquarters of the county police department or any other location that may be designated by the county police department. All articles sold shall be sold for cash to the highest bidder on an as is basis, and no warranties of any nature, either express or implied, either as to merchantable title, quality, or performance as made by the Fulton County Police Department. 
(e)  Advertisement of sale. The sale referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the county once each week for two weeks immediately preceding the next sale date. The advertisement shall be of sufficient size and type to be easily read and understood by the general public and shall state definitely the time and place of the sale; that it shall be open to the public; and, that all sales are to be made to the highest bidder for cash. The advertisement may refer to the sale as an "ole hoss" sale or by any other appropriate name, and shall state that only unclaimed property which has come into the possession of the Fulton County Police Department is being sold; that the department makes no warranties whatsoever, either express or implied as to merchantable title, quality, or performance; and all articles are sold as is. 
(f)  Conduct of sale. The Fulton County Police Department shall appoint a licensed auctioneer, a member of its own force, or any other individual to conduct the sale under the guidance of an employee of the department and more than one such person may act at any sale, either alternately or at the same time, as the circumstances may dictate, and in the discretion of the employee of the department who is in charge of the sale. The auctioneer or other individual acting shall be the sole arbiter in the case of a disputed sale, and he shall not make a sale until all bidding on the article offered has ceased. However, there shall be no required number of bids before a sale is made. 
(g)  Announcement to be made at sale. It shall be the duty of the auctioneer or other person holding the sale to make public announcement before opening the sale that the Fulton County Police Department does not warrant title to any article, nor is there any other warranty, either expressed or implied, as to any article sold; that all sales are final; and all articles are sold as is. It shall be the duty of the auctioneer or other person in charge to make this announcement at intervals during the progress of the sales. 
(h)  Disposition of proceeds. It shall be the duty of the Fulton County Police Department to make a true accounting to the finance department of all the property sold and money collected from the sale conducted as provided herein, which money shall be deposited in the general fund and used as the law prescribes. 
(Code 1983, § 27-1-3) 
Secs. 146-34—146-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JAIL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— County chaplain to inspect correctional facilities, § 102-186; county chaplain perform other functions at jail, § 102-188. 
State Law reference— Jail construction generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-9; jails generally, O.C.G.A. § 42-4-1 et seq.; state/county correctional institutions, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 146-61. - Fees for arresting and holding prisoners. 
The sheriff shall not charge any fees for arresting and holding prisoners in the county jail. 
(Code 1983, § 27-2-2) 
Sec. 146-62. - Certification of requests for payment. 
The Fulton County Manager is hereby authorized to certify requests for payment addressed to the state board of corrections covering sums authorized under O.C.G.A. § 42-5-53 and to forward these requests to the state board of corrections for payment. 
(Code 1983, § 27-2-3) 
Secs. 146-63—146-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COUNTY JAIL WELFARE FUND[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 102-251. 

Sec. 146-81. - Establishment. 
The sheriff is hereby authorized to establish a bank account in the name of county jail welfare fund, for recording all concession purchases, sales, and all other welfare disbursements, and all funds for the welfare of persons committed to the jail shall be promptly deposited in said account, and not less than twice weekly. 
(Code 1983, § 27-2-11) 
Sec. 146-82. - Committee established to take responsibility for purchases. 
A committee composed of the sheriff, the chief jailer, and the chairman of the board of commissioners or his appointee is hereby established, who shall be responsible for all items purchased out of the welfare fund. 
(Code 1983, § 27-2-12) 
Sec. 146-83. - Duties of jail food supervisor. 
The jail food supervisor shall be responsible for all concession purchases from a list approved by the committee and all concession sales, and may designate a salaried deputy sheriff to assist him, provided the name of this employee is recorded in an appropriate record of daily sales. The food supervisor shall have continuing responsibility for all inventory, sales, and money relating to the welfare fund. 
(Code 1983, § 27-2-13) 
Sec. 146-84. - Financial records. 
All purchases and other disbursement shall be made by check signed by the chief jailor and countersigned by the sheriff. All financial records relating to said welfare fund shall be approved and audited by the internal audit division of the comptroller's office and also subject to the general county audit. 
(Code 1983, § 27-2-14) 
Chapter 150 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to parks and recreation, ch. 50; impact fees, § 58-161 et seq. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 30. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 150-1—150-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 

Sec. 150-31. - Creation. 
The board of commissioners hereby establishes the Fulton County Parks and Recreation Advisory Board for unincorporated Fulton County to be structured and to function as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-7-89(2)) 
Sec. 150-32. - Composition; membership; terms; compensation. 
(a)  The Fulton County Parks and Recreation Advisory Board for unincorporated Fulton County shall be composed of 16 members to include: three citizens from unincorporated North Fulton, three citizens from unincorporated Sandy Springs, and four from unincorporated South Fulton. The superintendent or a person designated by the superintendent to represent the Fulton County Board of Education shall act in an ex-officio and nonvoting capacity as the 11th member. The remaining five members shall be individuals who demonstrate enthusiasm, interest, and involvement in Fulton County park facilities and recreation programs. 
(b)  The terms of the advisory board members will be two years. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed by the board of commissioners. Members may serve an unlimited number of consecutive terms. Members shall serve without pay. 
(Ord. of 6-7-89(2); 94-RC-299, 6-15-94) 
Sec. 150-33. - Functions. 
The primary purpose of the Fulton County Parks and Recreation Advisory Board will be to represent the views of the general community regarding residents' needs for parks, recreation programming, and open space for unincorporated Fulton County. The board will act in an advisory capacity to the board of commissioners in regard to parks and recreation matters. It will provide information and reports to the commissioners on current operations and future need of parks and recreation facilities in Fulton County. 
(Ord. of 6-7-89(2); 91-RC-548, 10-16-91) 
Chapter 154 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to general provisions and county governing authority, ch. 1; ordinances pertaining to officers and employees, § 2-36 et seq.; resolutions pertaining to officers and employees, § 101-36 et seq.; clerk to board of commissioners, § 102-111 et seq. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Personnel, ch. 34. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 154-1. - Personnel regulations incorporated by reference. 
A certain document, entitled "Personnel Regulations of Fulton County," adopted by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County on December 22, 1982, is hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this chapter by reference. A copy of the rules and regulations shall be maintained on file in the office of the personnel director and in the office of the clerk to the county commission. 
(Code 1983, § 24-1-1) 
Sec. 154-2. - Pay schedule and compensation plan. 
The official pay schedule and compensation plan shall be annually updated and adopted by the personnel board and the county commission, and a copy of such schedule and plan shall be maintained on file in the office of the personnel director and the office of the clerk to the county commission. 
(Code 1983, § 24-1-2) 
Sec. 154-3. - Policy of equal opportunity. 
(a)  It is the policy of Fulton County that there will be equal opportunity for every citizen and employee based upon merit without regard to race, color, religion, national origin, gender, age, disability, or sexual orientation. 
(b)  The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County hereby directs that the personnel director, when advertising positions, to institute a practice of placing job advertisements in culturally specific and minority publications so as to enhance recruitment from all segments of Fulton County's racially and culturally diverse citizenry. 
(92-RC-390, 8-19-92) 
State Law reference— Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq. 
Sec. 154-3.5. - Office of equal employment opportunity; creation. 
The board of commissioners hereby directs the county manager to implement the equal employment policy of the board of county commissioners by developing recommendations to the board of commissioners regarding the creation of a (properly staffed) "Office of Equal Employment Opportunity" which plan shall include, but not be limited to (1) goals and objectives (2) organizational structure, and (3) a list of positions with primary duties and responsibilities. 
(Res. No. 97-1173, 10-15-97) 
Sec. 154-4. - Discrimination and harassment in workplace. 
The Fulton County Board of Commissioners does express in the strongest terms possible its opposition to any discrimination and harassment in the workplace based on race, color, religion, national origin, gender, age, disability, or sexual orientation. 
(96-0632, 6-19-96) 
Sec. 154-5. - Sexual harassment policy and procedures. 
(a)  Introduction. In an effort to foster a working environment which enhances productivity and promotes the mutual respect and personal dignity of all employees of Fulton County the county manager, the board of commissioners and department heads are committed to a policy which ensures that employees are not subjected to sexual harassment in the workplace. The following policy and procedures are designed to prohibit sexual harassment, coercion, intimidation, exploitation and/or reprisal to employees from supervisory officials which result from sexually harassing behavior. It is further the policy of Fulton County to ensure compliance with all state and federal laws and regulations prohibiting sexual harassment. 
(b)  Statement of policy. Sexual harassment of any person employed by Fulton County is hereby prohibited. 
(c)  Scope of policy. This policy shall apply to all Fulton County employees, department heads, and elected or appointed officials. 
(d)  Definition. The definition of sexual harassment is as follows: All unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical contact of a sexual nature, if submission to such conduct is made explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment or contractual standing; or submission to or reject of such conduct by an individual is used as a basis for employment or decisions affecting an individual's employment; or such conduct unreasonably interferes with an individual's work performance or creates a working environment that is intimidating, hostile, or offensive. Examples of sexually harassing conduct include, but are not limited to: sexual innuendo; leering or ogling; insults; whistling; suggestive comments; obscene gestures; pressure for sexual activity between employees; posting of nude or sexually suggestive pictures, calendars, jokes, or cartoons; sexual remarks or inquiries about a person's clothing or body; inappropriate touching or brushing of the body; sexual propositions; coerced sexual intercourse or other sexual conduct; inquiries about an employee's sexual practices or habits; suggestive or insulting sounds; impeding or blocking of movement of an employee; and patting or pinching. 
(e)  Procedures for investigating complaints of sexual harassment. The department of contract compliance and EEO shall have responsibility for investigating complaints of sexual harassment. Such complaints shall have priority and shall be handled in a timely manner. Any employee who believes that he or she has been subjected to sexual harassment should file a written complaint with the department of contract compliance and EEO. This complaint should include a description of the behavior complained of, the dates of the behavior, the identity of the person committing the sexual harassment, a brief description of the circumstances and facts surrounding the events of sexual harassment, and the name of any person who may have knowledge of facts or circumstances surrounding the complaint. After receiving the complaint, the department of contract compliance and EEO shall review the complaint and discuss the allegations with the complainant. Thereafter, the department of contract compliance and EEO shall confer privately with the person alleged to have committed the sexual harassment. The department of contract compliance and EEO will invite, but not require, the alleged offender to respond to the complaint in writing. The department of contract compliance and EEO will investigate the facts contained in the complaint, including reviewing all documentary information and interviewing persons who may have knowledge of the complaint, and consulting with legal counsel, if necessary. The investigation shall be confidential, and all documents received in connection therewith shall be considered confidential and privileged. The department of contract compliance and EEO will make a recommendation to the county manager and, if appropriate, the department head, regarding whether the complainant has been a victim of sexual harassment, and any recommendation regarding possible disciplinary action. The department of contract compliance and EEO will also advise the complainant of the results of the investigation, as well as other alternatives for redress. All complaints should be filed as soon as possible within 30 days of the occurrence. Nothing in this policy shall be construed to require a complainant to file a written complaint with the department of contract compliance and EEO prior to or in lieu of seeking redress with other agencies or the courts. 
(f)  Disciplinary action. All disciplinary action for violation of this policy shall be governed by the guidelines set forth in article 13, PR 1800-2 of the Personnel Regulations of Fulton County. Appeals of disciplinary actions by classified employees shall be made to the personnel board or to the grievance review committee in accordance with the provisions of the Personnel Regulations of Fulton County. Department heads and nonclassified employees may seek redress for any disciplinary action through the grievance review committee. Officials appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County may seek redress for any disciplinary action before the board. Nothing in this policy shall be construed to prohibit any person from seeking redress with any federal or state agency, or the courts. 
(91-RC-534, §§ I—VI, 11-6-91) 
Sec. 154-6. - Workers' compensation claims. 
(a)  The county attorney is hereby vested with the final authority to determine whether a claim against Fulton County under the workers' compensation laws shall be recognized. 
(b)  A committee consisting of the county manager, county attorney, and head of the department whose employee was injured shall be appointed by the county commission to investigate, consider, and pass upon claims under workers' compensation requests; provided, however, that the county manager file a monthly report of all claims presented and paid during the month at the next regular meeting. 
(c)  Employees of the county injured in line of duty, where coverage under the Workers' Compensation Act O.C.G.A. tit. 34, art. 9 (O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq.) is obvious and undisputed, are to be paid the proper compensation due them under the Workers' Compensation Act, at the regular time when other employees of the county of similar compensation and classification are paid, and there shall be no need that payment of the compensation be delayed while the paper work and other mechanics of processing the claim are being completed. Nothing in this chapter, however, shall be construed to eliminate or delay necessary preparation and execution of the proper documents to comply with the requirements of this board and of the workers' compensation board. 
(d)  In the absence of the county manager, compensation may be paid immediately upon the approval of the head of the department in which the employee is employed and of the county attorney. 
(Code 1983, §§ 24-2-1—24-2-4) 
Sec. 154-7. - Regular pay for 90 days for employees injured in line of duty. 
The county shall pay employees who are injured in the line of duty up to 90 calendar days at their regular salary, and whatever amount they receive from workers' compensation shall be deducted from their regular salary. 
(Code 1983, § 24-2-5) 
Sec. 154-8. - Drug testing of public safety and law enforcement employees carrying firearms. 
(a)  There shall be mandatory random drug testing of all public safety and law enforcement employees who regularly carry firearms in connection with the discharge of their duties and/or who guard prisoners or inmates at any jail or correctional institution maintained or operated by Fulton County and/or who dispatch public safety or emergency medical services through the 911 system in the Fulton County Communications Department. 
(b)  Any firefighter or public safety and law enforcement employees who regularly carry firearms in connection with the discharge of their duties and/or who guard prisoners or inmates at any jail or correctional institution maintained or operated by Fulton County and/or who dispatch public safety or emergency medical services through the 911 system in the Fulton County Communications Department shall be required to submit to mandatory drug testing based upon a reasonable individualized suspicion that he or she is impaired by or under the influence of illegal drugs while on duty. 
(c)  All applicants for employment with Fulton County shall be required to submit to a drug screen in connection with the preemployment physical examination conducted by the Fulton County Board of Health. 
(d)  The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County shall adopt a written employee drug testing program in accordance with existing legal requirements, which policy shall be published and promulgated prior to any testing and shall specifically set forth guidelines and procedures governing the time, place, and manner of testing of the employees covered by this section, and the use of results for disciplinary or rehabilitative action. It is the intention of the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County that the guidelines place emphasis on rehabilitative rather than disciplinary action for employees with positive test results, and that any disciplinary action taken against an employee shall be in accordance with the guidelines of progressive discipline and the Personnel Regulations of Fulton County. 
(e)  It is the intention of the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County to protect the privacy interest of its employees while furthering the compelling interest of Fulton County in maintaining a drugfree and safe work environment. 
(f)  The board of commissioners, in conjunction with the Fulton County Board of Health, shall explore feasible alternatives for employee drug rehabilitation and assistance programs. 
(Res. of 8-16-89; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
Cross reference— Mandatory drug testing of members of board of commissioners, § 101-37; law enforcement, ch. 146. 
Secs. 154-9—154-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Firefighter's Mediation Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 154-36. - Statement of policy. 
It shall be the policy of Fulton County to recognize, meet and confer with employee organizations in an orderly manner through a formal, structured process. This policy delineates the methodology used to recognize the organization, the process used to meet and confer with the organization, the methodology used to authorize dues deductions if requested, and the methodology used to pay deducted dues to organizations. 
(90-RCM-661, 8-15-90; Ord. No. 10-0347, 3-17-10) 
Sec. 154-37. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Community of interests means a group of employees who share common interests in wages, hours, and other conditions of employment. 
Dues authorization card means the official finance department form used by an employee to authorize the deduction of dues or political contributions from their payroll checks and the payment of these deductions to a recognized employee organization. 
Eligible employees means all employees who share a community of interests and who are not: 
(1)  In an executive, professional, or administrative position as defined by the Fair Labor Standards Act; 
(2)  Directors; 
(3)  Department heads; 
(4)  Confidential employees who work directly with and report directly to a department head or director; and 
(5)  Employees who have the actual authority to hire, fire, or discipline. 
When an eligible employee no longer satisfies the above-mentioned criteria, he or she is no longer an eligible employee and can no longer belong to the employee organization. 
All county employees are eligible employees for the Fulton County Employees Association. All county employees who receive a Fulton County payroll check may have their member dues deducted from their payroll checks and paid to a recognized employee organization. Only eligible employees, however, shall enjoy, meet, and confer, or have other representational rights provided in this article. 
Employee organization means any organization recognized by a resolution of the board of commissioners which represents 50 percent, plus one of those employees eligible to belong to such employee organization. The Fulton County Employees Association and AFSCME Local 3 shall he considered employee organizations even though their membership is less than that required fur new employee organizations. Once any new employee organization has been recognized by the board of commissioners, and has attained a membership level of 300 or more eligible employees, then such organization shall be allowed to represent any member of their organization in any county department. 
Fulton County means Fulton County, or any officer, agency, department, bureau, division, board or commission thereof, or any other political subdivision within or thereof. 
(90-RCM-661, 8-15-90; 93-RC-234, 5-19-93; 94-RC-504, 10-19-94; 95-0231, 2-15-95; Ord. No. 10-0347, 3-17-10) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 101-2. 
Sec. 154-38. - Applicability of article. 
This policy shall apply to all Fulton County employees who receive a Fulton County payroll check and any current or future employee organization as defined above. 
(90-RCM-661, 8-15-90; Ord. No. 10-0347, 3-17-10) 
Sec. 154-39. - Procedures. 
(a)  Any eligible employee snail have the right to form and join an employee organizations and to meet and confer with Fulton County relative to wages, hours, and working conditions through the exclusive employee organization of their own choosing. 
(b)  Any employee organization which is designated or selected by a majority of eligible employees as their exclusive representative for purposes of this article shall request recognition to the to the board of commissioners by filing a written request on the organization's letterhead with the county manager. The county manager shall submit the request to the board of commissioners with an analysis and recommendations within 14 days of filing. This analysis shall include the number of employees affected. administrative costs, and any other factors deemed necessary by the county manager. If satisfied as to the majority status of the employee organization, the board of commissioners shall recognize and certify the employee organization as the exclusive employee organization representing eligible employees in the designated unit. If recognition of the employee organization is granted, the county manager will so notify the director of finance and the employee organization. 
(c)  If the board of commissioners does not recognize and certify the employee organization based upon the request by the employee organization, the employee organization may file a written petition with the board of commissioners for certification as the exclusive employee organization representing eligible employees in the designated unit The petition shall be accompanied by dated statements signed by at least, 30 percent of the employees in the designated unit, indicating that such employees desire to be exclusively represented for the purposes of this article by the petitioning employee organization. The board of commissioners shall investigate the petition to determine its sufficiency and if it has reasonable cause to believe that the petition is sufficient, shall provide for an appropriate hearing upon due notice. If the board of commissioners finds the petition to be insufficient, it may dismiss the petition. If the board of commissioners finds upon the record of the hearing that the petition is sufficient, it shall immediately, order an election by secret ballot, The date, time, location, rules and procedures for the election shall be decided upon by mutual agreement of the petitioning employee organization and Fulton County and reduced to writing within 14 days of the filing of the petition. 
(d)  When an employee organization is selected by simple majority of the employees voting in an election, the board of commissioners shall certify the employee organization as the exclusive representative of all employees in the designated unit. 
(e)  No petition may be filed seeking an election in any proposed or existing unit of eligible employees to determine an exclusive employee organization within 12 months after the date of certification covering any of the employees in designated unit or within 12 months of the execution of an agreement concerning wages. hours or working conditions. 
(f)  Any Fulton County employee who receives a Fulton County payroll check may join the exclusively recognized employee organizations and have their member dues deducted from their payroll checks and paid to the employee organization by properly completing the dues within 30 days of signing the dues authorization card. This deduction will be in force unless employment is terminated, the employee stops deduction, the dues authorization expires, or the employee organization is no longer recognized by the board of commissioners. The above-mentioned deduction is also conditioned upon the fact that any employee or any official or member of an organization individually or collectively will not strike, and will not take part in any strike, sit-down, slow-down, or any interference with the operation of Fulton County by picketing, patrolling, demonstrating, or any stoppage of work, or similar activities. In addition, the deduction of dues is conditioned upon there being no campaigning or soliciting or membership on Fulton County property during working hours except as defined in MOU. The dues deduction shall not be made in the event the wages of an employee for any period of pay, after making all deductions required by law and previously authorized by the employee, should not equal the amount of such dues. 
(g)  After deducting the cost to Fulton County of implementing such deduction of dues, the director of finance will remit the balance of dues collected to the employee organization, together with a list of names of those employees from whom the dues were collected on the last business day of each month. 
(90-RCM-661, 8-15-90; 90-RC-695, 12-15-90; Ord. No. 10-0347, 3-17-10) 
Sec. 154-40. - Prohibited discrimination. 
There shall be no discrimination against any Fulton County employee because of the fact that such employee is a member of a recognized employee organization, nor shall such members receive any advantage or preferential treatment of any kind over those employees who are not members of an employee organization. No employee shall be required, as a condition of employment with Fulton County, to become a member of any employee organization. 
(90-RCM-661, 8-15-90; Ord. No. 10-0347, 3-17-10) 
Sec. 154-41. - Adverse actions and reprisals. 
No disciplinary action or other adverse action shall be taken or threatened against any employee, nor shall any employee be intimidated by any supervisor or department head who has the authority to take, direct others to take, recommend, or approve any personnel action as a reprisal for an employee's membership or participation in any employee's organization or union. All members of employee organizations and unions shall be allowed to conduct standard and customary union activities, subject to the employee's compliance with Fulton County's leave policy or prior board of commissioners' approval for attending Fulton County functions. The personnel director is hereby directed to devise a policy and procedure for enforcement of the provisions of this section and further, to develop appropriate penalties for violations of this section, which penalties shall include dismissal for cause. 
(95-0230, 2-15-95; Ord. No. 10-0347, 3-17-10) 
Sec. 154-42. - Meetings. 
When an employee organization requests to meet and confer with the county, the designated county representative shall meet at mutually agreed times with the appointed or elected representatives of the employee organization for the mutual purpose of discussing wages, hours, or working conditions, insofar as such may be appropriate under county, state, and federal laws, and the county personnel regulations. 
(90-RCM-661, 8-15-90; Ord. No. 10-0347, 3-17-10) 
Sec. 154-43. - Agreements. 
An exclusive employee organization may present proposals to Fulton County concerning wages, hours, or working conditions. Whenever such proposals are presented by the exclusive employee organization the designated county representative shall meet, confer and discuss such proposals with the exclusive employee organization. Upon the completion of discussions, the results shall be reduced to writing and be presented to the appropriate administrative, legislative or other governing body in the form of a binding agreement, ordinance, resolution, bill, law or other form required for adoption. Unless and until the writing is adopted as law, any part of an agreed upon proposal in conflict with existing Fulton County laws or regulations shall be void and unenforceable. 
(Ord. No. 10-0347, 3-17-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-0347, adopted March 17, 2010, renumbered the former § 154-43 as § 154-44 and enacted a new § 154-43 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
Sec. 154-44. - Representative of the county. 
The personnel director of the county shall designate a person in the personnel department to serve as the county's representative to meet with employee organizations when appropriate. 
(90-RCM-661, 8-15-90; Ord. No. 10-0347, 3-17-10) 
See the editor's note to § 154-43. 
Secs. 154-45—154-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PENSIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Pensions, § 34-146 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(14); Public Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 154-71. - Public safety employees pension fund abolished; transfer of assets to employee retirement system; participant rights. 
(a)  The Fulton County Public Safety Employees Pension Fund created by a resolution adopted February 14, 1977, as amended, and the board of trustees heretofore existing thereunder are hereby abolished. All assets and liabilities of said fund, including the liability to make future pension payments and other benefits, are hereby transferred to the Fulton County Employees Retirement System. The Board of trustees of the Fulton County Employees Retirement System shall perform all functions heretofore performed by the board of trustees of the Fulton County Public Safety Pension Board. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not affect any heretofore existing rights of any participant in the aforementioned pension fund or the beneficiary of any such participant. Any active participant may continue to make the contributions heretofore required by law and continue to accrue benefits by reason thereof; provided, however, that any such individual may elect to participate in the provisions of the Fulton County Employees Retirement System. 
(91-FM-219, §§ 1, 2, 11-13-91) 
Sec. 154-72. - Eligibility of nonparticipating employees under prior plan. 
Eligible employees that do not elect to participate in the pension plan established in division 2 of this article as effective on September 1, 1991, shall be eligible for benefits under the prior pension plan, if any, applicable to them as set forth in the supplements to the plan and trust established in division 2 of this article. 
(91-RC-669, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-73. - Health and life insurance benefits. 
All individuals who have heretofore retired or shall hereafter retire and commence to receive a pension benefit, including individuals who shall commence to receive a reduction in force pension and elected officials and department heads who shall receive a pension benefit, excluding, however, individuals who shall receive a vested pension benefit, shall be entitled to receive as an additional pension benefit health insurance coverage equal to or in a greater amount than the coverage which is provided to active Fulton County employees and also the life insurance benefits provided for retirees by action of the board of commissioners. The cost of such individuals for such health insurance shall not exceed the same percentage of the total cost of such health insurance coverage as is paid by active employees. The cost to such individuals for such life insurance shall not exceed the cost to be paid by such individual at the time of the adoption of this section. The balance of the cost for such insurance shall be an additional pension benefit. Any prefunding of the benefits conferred by this section may be maintained as part of the same investment pool as the fund receiving employer and employee contributions to pay the cost of providing other retirement benefits under the Fulton County Employees Retirement System; provided, however, that such funds are separately accounted and separate records are maintained with respect to each fund. The funds to provide benefits provided by this section may be invested and reinvested in accordance with law, particularly the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 47-20-10(f). 
(91-RC-668, § 1, 12-18-91; 93-RM-357(H-4), § 1, 9-15-93) 
Sec. 154-74. - Pension benefits due elected county officials and certain department heads. 
(a)  All elected officials whose compensation is paid, in whole or in part, by the Director of Finance of Fulton County and the department heads specified in subsection (b) of this section shall be entitled to the pension benefits calculated in accordance with section 4.1 and 4.2 of the Fulton County Employee Pension Resolution upon their retirement from active county employment; provided, however, that such elected officials or department heads shall retire with the creditable service specified in and under the circumstances described in section 4.1(d) of the Fulton County Employee Pension Resolution. 
(b)  In addition to persons elected by the people, the following department heads shall be entitled to the benefits specified in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Airport director; 
(2)  Director, office of community services and job training; 
(3)  Clerk to commission; 
(4)  County manager; 
(5)  Director of data processing; 
(6)  Finance director; 
(7)  Fire chief; 
(8)  Director of grounds; 
(9)  Health commissioner; 
(10)  Director of inspections and permits; 
(11)  Juvenile court judge; 
(12)  Land agent; 
(13)  County attorney; 
(14)  Library director; 
(15)  Marshal (incumbent at the time of the adoption of this division only); 
(16)  Medical examiner; 
(17)  Director of parks and recreation; 
(18)  Personnel director; 
(19)  Director of planning and economic development; 
(20)  Police chief; 
(21)  Director of public buildings; 
(22)  Public defender; 
(23)  Director of public information; 
(24)  Director of public works; 
(25)  Purchasing agent; 
(26)  Elections supervisor; 
(27)  State court clerk; 
(28)  Superior court administrator; 
(29)  Tax assessor; 
(30)  Tax commissioner; and 
(31)  Zoning director. 
(c)  All sums needed to fund any actuarial deficit created by the foregoing provisions of this section shall be paid from general county funds to the pension fund from which any of the above individuals receives pension payments. 
(d)  All elected officials whose compensation is paid in whole or in part by the Director of Finance of Fulton County and all department heads specified in subsection (e) of this resolution, who participate in the Fulton County Employees' Retirement Systems as established by a resolution of this board on September 11, 1991, as restated in December of 1991, shall have their pension benefits computed as a department head under the provisions of section 1.20 and section 1.24 of the afore-mentioned 1991 resolution. Provided, however, that no individual affected hereby shall have their pension computed in such a way as to produce a smaller pension benefit than he/she would have been entitled to received had the afore-mentioned 1991 pension resolution not been enacted. 
(e)  In addition to persons elected by the people, the following department heads shall be entitled to the benefits specified in subsection (a) hereof: 
(1)  Arts and culture, director; 
(2)  Chief clerk of state court/state court administrator; 
(3)  Clerk to the commission; 
(4)  Commission chairman, chief of staff; 
(5)  Contract compliance, director; 
(6)  County attorney; 
(7)  County manager; 
(8)  County manager, deputy; 
(9)  Director of emergency communications; 
(10)  Environment and community development, director; 
(11)  Family and children services, administrator; 
(12)  Finance, director; 
(13)  Fire chief; 
(14)  Health and wellness, director; 
(15)  Human services, director; 
(16)  Information and public affairs, director; 
(17)  Information technology, director; 
(18)  Juvenile court administrator/clerk of the court; 
(19)  Library systems, director; 
(20)  Marshal; 
(21)  Medical examiner; 
(22)  Mental health/mental retardation/substance abuse, director; 
(23)  Parks and recreation, director; 
(24)  Personnel, director; 
(25)  Police chief; 
(26)  Public buildings and grounds, director; 
(27)  Public defender; 
(28)  Public works, director; 
(29)  Purchasing and land, director; 
(30)  Registration and elections, director; 
(31)  State court manager; 
(32)  Superior court administrator; 
(33)  Supply, maintenance and transportation, director; 
(34)  Tax commissioner; 
(35)  The heads of such other county departments of county government which may be created by action of the board of commissioners upon recommendation of the county manager. 
(f)  All sums needed to fund any actuarial deficit created by the foregoing provision shall be paid from general county funds to the pension fund. 
(Res. of 5-20-87, §§ 1—3; 93-RM-357, § 1(5—7), 9-15-93; Res. No. 99-1355, § 1(5—7), 10-20-99) 
Secs. 154-75—154-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PENSION PLAN OF 1991 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 154-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accrued benefit means the amount of retirement benefit payable under the plan and trust, which benefit accrues on the basis of creditable service and final average monthly earnings. 
Active participant means an eligible employee satisfying the criteria set forth in section 154-111 who has not lost that status pursuant to section 154-112. 
Actuary means the enrolled actuary or firm of actuaries selected by the board of trustees to make the actuarial computations in connection with the plan and trust. 
Adjusted pensioner index means the pensioner base index adjusted, on a cumulative basis, for all percentage adjustments made in benefits before the current annual adjustment date. The adjusted pensioner index shall be applicable to any beneficiary becoming entitled to benefits under the plan in the same manner as it would have been applicable to the participant had he lived. 
Annual adjustment date means each January 1. 
Base pension. A participant with 15 or more years of creditable service under the plan or plan supplements who is not otherwise eligible for an early retirement benefit under their plan shall be entitled to a "base pension," as set by the county commissioners. Effective December 20, 2007, the monthly base pension is $300.00. 
Beneficiary. The beneficiary of a participant who is married shall be his eligible spouse, or shall be the person with whom s/he is in a "certified committed relationship" as defined by Fulton County Code of Laws, section 154-469, established pursuant to section 154-471, and not otherwise terminated pursuant to section 154-477. If there is no eligible spouse and no person with whom s/he is in a certified committed relationship, then the beneficiary shall be the child or children of the participant under the age of 18 years. No other person shall be a beneficiary. 
Board or board of trustees means the board of trustees of the Fulton County Employees Retirement System, as specified in this division, or any successor or successors that accept appointment to execute the duties of a trustee under the plan and trust. 
Certified committed relationship. "Certified committed relationship" shall be as defined by Fulton County Code of Laws, section 154-469, established pursuant to section 154-471, and not otherwise terminated pursuant to section 154-477. 
Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or any future corresponding United States Internal Revenue law. References to specific section numbers shall be deemed to refer to the corresponding provisions of any future Internal Revenue law. 
Creditable service means: 
(1)  General. Subject to the provisions below, the period of time between an individual's employment commencement date and his severance from service date, without regard to the number of hours worked or credited in any 12-month period. The term "creditable service" shall include all service rendered by a participant in the pension system created by this division to Fulton County or to the Fulton County Department of Family and Children Services following the effective date of this division, provided that all employee contributions are made. Creditable service shall include accumulated sick leave credit. 
(2)  Credit for temporary service and C.E.T.A. service with the employer. A participant shall receive creditable service for temporary service and C.E.T.A. service with the employer, subject to the following terms and conditions: 
a.  Such service must have been for full-time, continuous employment; 
b.  Such service must have immediately preceded and led into permanent employment by the employer and participation in the plan; 
c.  The participant shall pay the same employee contribution that he would have paid had he been participating in the plan during such period of service based on the compensation he received during the period for which he claims the creditable service. If such employee contribution is insufficient to fund the actuarial liability created by crediting such prior service, the employer shall pay any additional amounts required to make up such shortfall from its general funds. 
(3)  Prior service with certain other employers. Any participant who was employed by the State of Georgia; a member of the General Assembly of Georgia; employed by a municipality located in whole or in part in Fulton County, the Fulton County Board of Education, or the Atlanta-Fulton County Recreation Authority; or an active member of the United States armed forces may claim credit for such prior service as creditable service, subject to the following terms and conditions: 
a.  No credit shall be given for part-time or temporary service. 
b.  Once such participant has worked for the employer for five years, he shall be eligible to receive creditable service for any such periods of prior service, not to exceed four years for military service and not to exceed ten years when combined with any other prior service, other than military service, claimed under the plan. 
c.  To obtain prior service credit, such participant shall pay into the plan, in addition to any other amount required by this plan, eight percent of the current compensation of such participant times the period of service claimed. 
d.  No service credited under this subsection shall be used to obtain pension benefits in any other pension system supported in whole or in part with public funds, with the exception of social security benefits. 
e.  Any participant seeking creditable service under this subsection must furnish to the board of trustees proof of the prior service in such manner as the board may prescribe. 
(4)  Special service rules for judges and the district attorney. Judges of the Superior Court of Fulton County and the District Attorney of the Atlanta Judicial District who elect to participate in the plan pursuant to section 154-111(c) shall receive creditable service for years of prior service during which they received compensation from the employer or from municipalities located, in whole or in part, in Fulton County, active service in the United States armed forces, and service in the General Assembly of Georgia; provided, however, that no such creditable service in excess of ten years, plus four years of military service, if applicable, will be granted in the case of service for an entity other than the employer. Except in the case of service rendered to the employer, the participant must contribute the amount required by section 1 of the act approved on March 30, 1971, 1971 Ga. Laws, page 2309, as amended, to receive such creditable service under the plan. The participant shall contribute the amount he would have contributed had the plan been in effect during such prior period of service. Such payments may be made in interest bearing installments as provided under section 154-163. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the participant participated in a pension plan supported, in whole or part, by the employer, such participant may receive credit for such prior service credited under such pension plan by authorizing the transfer of contributions made to such plan to the plan. 
Current average cost-of-living index means the average of the monthly Consumer Price Index for the 12-month period from November 1 through October 31, before the applicable annual adjustment date, as determined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor for all items and major groups, United States city average. 
Deferred retirement date means the day following the termination of employment by a participant who continues to be employed by the employer beyond the occurrence of his earliest normal retirement event. 
Disability retirement date means the day following the date on which a participant who terminates employment on account of total disability is no longer on the payroll of the employer. 
Early retirement date means the day following the date on which a participant terminates employment after becoming entitled to an early retirement benefit before his earliest normal retirement date. 
Eligible certified committed relationship. An individual who has been in a certified committed relationship to a participant for the one-year period ending on the participant's date of death. 
Eligible employee means, with the exception of ineligible employees, as defined in this section, the following individuals who shall be entitled to participate in the retirement system established by this division: 
(1)  All state and county officers, deputies, and employees whose salary or wages are paid, in whole or in part, by the Finance Department of Fulton County. 
(2)  All state officers, deputies, and employees and court employees whose salary or wages are paid, in whole or in part, by the Finance Department of Fulton County. 
(3)  The executive secretary and staff of the pension system created hereby. 
(4)  All officers elected by the people whose salaries are paid, in whole or in part, by the Finance Department of Fulton County. 
(5)  All officers or employees of the Atlanta-Fulton County Recreation Authority, provided that such officers or employees shall be employed by Fulton County, and the Atlanta-Fulton County Recreation Authority shall reimburse Fulton County for employer contributions made on behalf of such officers or employees. Contributions for persons eligible to participate in the fund established by this division under the provisions of this section shall be based upon the total compensation of such individuals from both Fulton County and the Atlanta-Fulton County Recreation Authority. 
(6)  All employees of the Fulton County Department of Family and Children Services who were participating in the Fulton County General Employees Pension Fund on December 18, 1991. 
(7)  All individuals who were or had been properly members of any pension fund maintained by Fulton County prior to December 18, 1991. 
Eligible spouse means an individual who has been married to a participant for the one-year period ending on the participant's date of death. 
Employee means any individual who is employed by the employer, including elected or appointed officials, and including any individual who is an employee solely by reason of being a leased employee within the meaning of section 414(n)(2) of the code. 
Employer means Fulton County, Georgia. 
Employment commencement date means the date on which an employee performs his first hour of service with the employer. 
ERISA means the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended from time to time. 
Final average monthly earnings means the average of the monthly earnings of the highest three 12-month periods of employment. If a participant receives a lump sum payment for compensatory time, accumulated vacation time, bonus pay, or similar benefits, the amount of such payment shall be equally distributed over the period of time in which such compensation or benefit was earned or accumulated. In the case of an elected official or department head, final average monthly earnings shall be the average of the monthly earnings during the 12 months preceding the date of computation of benefits. For purposes of calculating the amount of a 1991 early retirement window benefit under section 154-137, the final average monthly earnings of the participant shall be the average monthly earnings received by the participant during the 12 consecutive month period when the participant received his highest compensation, plus 14 hours pay for accumulated annual leave and 1/36 of any amounts received for cumulative compensatory time. 
Fulton County service means creditable service earned with respect to service in the employ of the employer or service with the City of Atlanta that must be considered as service for the employer pursuant to Georgia law. 
Ineligible employees. Notwithstanding the definition of eligible employee, the following persons shall be ineligible to participate in the plan: 
(1)  "Leased employees" under section 414(n)(2) of the code. 
(2)  Temporary or casual employees. 
(3)  Employees hired on a contract basis for a specific task. 
(4)  Poll officers and election workers who are not regular employees. 
(5)  Members of the Fulton County Board of Commissioners and personnel such as attorneys in the Fulton County Legal Department who are not required by law or the terms of their employment to work on a full-time basis for the employer and who were initially employed, appointed, or elected after August 1, 1988. 
(6)  Employees of the Fulton County Department of Family and Children Services who were not participating in the Fulton County General Employees Pension fund on September 11, 1991. 
(7)  Any assistant district attorney for the Atlanta Judicial Circuit who participates in any retirement system for the officers or employees of the State of Georgia. 
Editor's note— Subsection (1) of this definition shall become effective Jan. 1, 2000. 
Investment adviser means the one or more persons or entities appointed pursuant to section 154-213 to manage all or a designated part of the assets of the trust fund. 
Minimum pension. The "minimum pension" is the amount set by the county commissioners as the minimum monthly entitlement to be paid to a participant or a retiree who is retiring or already retired under any normal retirement event. 
Monthly earnings means all salary and wages paid to an employee by the employer on a monthly basis, including overtime pay, vacation pay, bonus pay, or similar benefits; provided, however, that monthly earnings shall not include any incentive awards which may have been paid to an individual on an irregular basis. Monthly earnings that on an annualized basis exceed $150,000.00 on January 1, 1996 (or such greater amount as the Secretary of the Treasury shall determine pursuant to section 401(a)(17) of the code) shall be disregarded for all purposes under the plan, except, however, that with respect to an individual who was a participant on or before December 31, 1995, only monthly earnings that on an annualized basis exceed $235,840.00 shall be so disregarded. 
Editor's note— The amendment to this definition shall be effective Jan. 1, 1996. 
Normal retirement age. The normal retirement age is the age at which a participant would attain a normal retirement event under the plan when credited with the amount of creditable service the participant has accrued as of their early retirement date. Such normal retirement age is to be used solely for purposes of calculating the reduction penalty under the early retirement benefit of section 154-133 of this plan, or under the applicable early retirement benefit section of a supplemental plan for those participants eligible for benefits under a supplemental plan, and for no other purpose. 
Normal retirement date means the day following the individual's normal retirement event pursuant to which he was retired. 
Normal retirement event means the attainment of: 
(1)  Age 65 and ten years of creditable service; 
(2)  Age 60 and 15 years of creditable service; 
(3)  Age 55 and 30 years of creditable service; 
(4)  In the case of an elected official or department head participating in the Fulton County Employees' Pension Fund who resigns, fails to be reelected or to run for reelection, or whose office is abolished, ten years of creditable service, provided that in such a case benefits will not be paid until the participant has attained the age of 55; 
(5)  In the case of a peace officer, the age of 55 and 25 years of creditable service; or 
(6)  A combined age and years of creditable service that equals at least 80, with at least ten years of Fulton County Service. 
Participant means an active participant or any other living individual who has an accrued benefit under the plan and trust. 
Peace officer means any individual who is required by the terms of his employment to be a firefighter or a candidate therefor as defined in O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq., Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act, or a certified peace officer or a candidate therefor as defined in O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq., Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act. 
Pensioner base index means the average of the Consumer Price Index for the 12-month period ending two months before a participant's retirement date. If the Bureau of Labor Statistics changes the base year for computing the monthly Consumer Price Index, the board of trustees shall, with the advice of the actuary, adjust the pensioner base index of each retired participant and beneficiary receiving benefit payments under the plan, effective for benefit payments commencing during the first year in which such change was made, so as to effect the original intent of section 154-141 in an equitable manner. The pensioner base index shall be applicable to any beneficiary becoming entitled to benefits under the plan in the same manner as it would have been applicable to the participant had he lived. 
Plan and trust means the Fulton County Employees Retirement System, effective September 1, 1991, as it may be amended from time to time. 
Plan year means the calendar or fiscal year on which the records of the plan and trust are kept, which at present is the 12-month period ending on December 31 of each year. 
Prior plan participant means an individual who is or was at the relevant time a participant in a prior plan. 
Prior plans means the Fulton County Employees Pension Fund, the Fulton County General Employees Pension Fund, the Fulton County Public Safety Employees Pension Fund, and the Fulton County Judges and Solicitors Pension Fund. 
Retirement date means the date on which payment of the participant's retirement income is to commence. 
Supplemental benefit arrangement. Such portion of the plan that is described in subdivision IX. 
Editor's note— This definition shall become effective Jan. 1, 2000. 
Severance from service date means the day on which the employee quits, is discharged, retires, dies, or otherwise ceases to be employed by the employer. 
Total disability or totally disabled means the disability of a participant that is total and permanent and that is the result of injury, ill health, advanced age, or infirmity. 
Trust means the trust established by this division, which trust is an integral part of the plan and trust. 
Trust fund means all funds or property received by the trustees, including all income, profits, or increments thereon. 
Trustee means any individual member of the board of trustees. 
(91-RC-669, art. 1, 12-18-91; 92-RM-443, §§ 1—7, 9-2-92; 95-0273, 3-8-95; 00-1471, §§ 1—3, 12-20-00; Res. No. 06-1060, 11-1-06; Res. No. 06-1277, § 1, 12-20-06) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 101-2. 
Sec. 154-92. - Accrued benefit. 
The accrued benefit at any given date of a participant stated as a monthly amount in the form of single life annuity for the life of the participant commencing at normal retirement date, shall be equal to two percent of the participant's final average monthly earnings, multiplied by the number of his years of creditable service. The accrued benefit of an individual who has not elected to participate or is not required to participate in the plan as effective September 1, 1991, shall be determined pursuant to the prior plan, if any, in which he is a participant as set forth in the applicable supplement to the plan. 
(91-RC-669, § 3.1, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-92.5. - Qualified military service credit. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the plan to the contrary, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with code section 414(u). 
(00-1471, § 4, 12-20-00) 
Editor's note— Section 154-92.5 shall be effective Dec. 12, 1994. 
Sec. 154-93. - Limitation on amount. 
(a)  Basic limitation. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan and trust to the contrary, in no event shall the amount of a participant's annual retirement income, calculated as a single life annuity, exceed the lesser of: 
(i)  $90,000.00, adjusted as of the first day of each limitation year to the dollar limitation determined by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue pursuant to regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury under the authority granted him by section 415(d) of the code as provided below (the "maximum permissible dollar amount"), or 
(ii)  100 percent of such participant's average annual compensation (as defined in section 415(c)(3) of the code), including overtime and bonuses, for the three consecutive limitation years during which he was a participant in the plan and trust and during which his compensation was the highest. 
The provisions of subsection 5.1(a)(ii) shall become inapplicable as of the first limitation year commencing after December 31, 1994. 
As of January 1 as of each calendar year, the dollar limitation as determined by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue for that calendar year will become effective as the maximum permissible dollar amount of the plan and trust for that calendar year. The maximum permissible dollar amount applies to limitation years ending with or within that calendar year. The dollar limitation applicable to participants who have commenced receiving their benefits under the plan and trust shall be adjusted annually to reflect any changes to the maximum permissible dollar amount. 
Contributions made by the employer pursuant to subsection 6.1(b) shall be considered part of the employer provided benefit subject to the limitations of this subsection 5.1(a). Employee contributions for credit for prior service with certain other employers shall be subject to the rules of section 5.2. Employee contributions not made pursuant to subsection 6.1(b) and not made for credit for prior service with certain other employers shall be converted to an annual benefit amount pursuant to section 411(c)(2)(B) of the code and shall be subtracted from the total annual plan benefit subject to the limitations of this subsection 5.1(a), provided that such contributions shall be considered to be a separate defined contribution plan maintained by the employer and subject to the limitations of section 415(c) of the code and subsection 5.1(e) of the Plan. 
(b)  Exception to basic limitation. If the annual retirement income benefit payable to a participant under the plan and trust and all other defined benefit plans of the employer does not exceed $10,000.00 for the limitation year with respect to which the determination is being made or any prior limitation year, and the employer has not at any time maintained a defined contribution plan in which the participant participated, the limitation otherwise imposed by subsection 5.1(a) shall not apply. 
(c)  Reduction for less than ten years of participation. If a participant has completed less than ten years of participation in the plan and trust as of the date such participant begins to receive retirement income benefits, the maximum permissible dollar amount shall be adjusted by multiplying such limitation by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the participant's years of participation as of such date (and any fraction thereof) and the denominator of which is ten. The foregoing reduction shall not apply to either (i) disability retirement benefits received by a Participant pursuant to section 4.4 of the plan or (ii) the death benefit received by the beneficiary of a participant pursuant to section 4.11 of the Plan. 
(d)  Actuarial adjustment when benefits commence before age 62 or after age 65. In any case in which a participant's annual retirement income benefit commences before the attainment of age 62, the maximum permissible dollar amount for such participant for the limitation year in which such benefit commences, as determined under subsection 5.1(a), shall be reduced so that the Maximum permissible dollar amount is the actuarial equivalent of the maximum permissible dollar amount that would be applicable if the retirement income benefit had commenced at age 62. If such benefit commences on or after age 55, the maximum permissible dollar amount shall not be reduced below $75,000.00, and if the benefit commences before age 55, the maximum permissible dollar amount shall not be reduced below the actuarial equivalent of the $75,000.00 limitation for age 55. In making such actuarial reduction, an interest rate assumption of five percent shall be used. In any case in which a participant's annual retirement income benefit commences after the attainment of age 65, the maximum permissible dollar amount determined under subsection 5.1(a) for such Limitation year shall be actuarially increased so that it is the actuarial equivalent of an annual retirement income benefit in the amount of such maximum permissible dollar amount commencing at age 65. In making such actuarial increase, an interest rate assumption of five percent shall be used. For distributions commencing after January 1, 2000, the actuarial adjustments to the maximum permissible dollar amount described in this section 5.1(d) shall be computed on the basis of the mortality table prescribed by Revenue Ruling 95-6, 1995-1 C.B. 80, or any successor revenue ruling, notice or other guidance provided by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue that establishes a replacement mortality table pursuant to section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the code. In any case in which a participant's annual retirement income benefit commences between the ages of 62 and 65, no actuarial adjustment shall be made to the maximum permissible dollar amount pursuant to this section 5.1(d). 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the maximum permissible dollar amount shall not be reduced by reason of the commencement of annual retirement income benefits before age 62 for (i) a peace officer with 15 years of full-time service (including military service) at retirement, (ii) disability retirement benefits paid to a participant pursuant to section 4.4 of the Plan or (iii) the death benefit paid to the beneficiary of a participant pursuant to section 4.11 of the Plan. 
(e)  Limitation applicable to multiple plans. If the employer maintains any other defined benefit or defined contribution plan qualified under section 401(a) or 403 of the code, the benefits under the plan and each such other plan will not exceed the limits set forth in section 415(e) of the code. In the event the restrictions of this subsection 5.1(e) would apply, the board of trustees shall coordinate with the trustee, plan administrator or other appropriate party with respect to such plan or plans as to which contributions shall be limited or benefits shall be restricted and shall first reduce benefits as necessary under any defined benefit plan or plans, then shall reduce contributions under any money purchase pension plan or plans and then shall reduce contributions under any profit-sharing plan or plans (with such reductions being applied pro rata if there is more than one of such types of plans). The provisions of this subsection 5.1(e) will become inapplicable as of the first limitation year commencing after December 31, 1999. 
(f)  Compensation and limitation year. For purpose of the limitations of this section 5.1, compensation shall have the meaning set for in section 415(c)(3) of the code and Treasury Regulation section 1.415-2(d) and shall not include any contributions made by the employer pursuant to subsection 6.1(b). The term "limitation year" shall mean, in the case of the plan and trust, the plan year, and in the case of any other plan referred to in this section 5.1, the limitation year for such plan as provided in section 415 of the code. 
(g)  Plan limit. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan and trust to the contrary, in no event shall the amount of a participant's annual retirement benefit at the time of commencement exceed 75 percent of such participant's final average monthly earnings, provided, however, that a participant's benefit may be increased thereafter by cost-of-living adjustments provided under the plan. 
(91-RC-669, § 5.1, 12-18-91; 92-RM-443, §§ 1—7, 9-2-92; 00-1471, § 5, 12-20-00) 
Sec. 154-94. - Treatment of employee contributions for prior service with certain other employers. 
(a)  Basic limitations. If an employee makes one or more contributions to the plan to purchase permissive service credit, the requirements of section 154-93 shall be treated as met if either: 
(1)  The requirements of section 415(b) of the code are met, determined by treating the accrued benefit derived from all contributions to the plan for permissive service credit as an annual benefit for purposes of section 415(b) of the code, provided, however, that the plan shall not fail to meet the reduced limit under section 415(b)(2)(C) of the code solely by reason of this section 5.2; or 
(2)  The requirements of section 415(c) of the code are met, determined by treating all contributions to the plan for permissive service credit as an annual addition for purposes of section 415(c) of the code, provided, however, that the plan shall not fail to meet the percentage limitation under section 415(c)(1)(B) of the code solely by reason of this section 5.2. 
(b)  "Permissive service credit." For purposes of this section 5.2, the term "permissive service credit" shall mean prior service credit with certain other employers that is (i) purchased pursuant to subsections (c), (d) and (e) of section 1.9 of the Plan or an applicable supplement to the plan and (ii) for which the participant paid an amount that did not exceed the amount necessary to fund the benefit attributable to such service credit. 
(00-1471, § 5, 12-20-00) 
Secs. 154-95—154-110. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Eligibility and Participation 

Sec. 154-111. - General rules for becoming an active participant. 
(a)  New employees. Each individual who becomes an eligible employee on or after September 1, 1991, shall automatically become an active participant as of the date on which he or she becomes an eligible employee and shall be required to participate in the plan. 
(b)  Participation by existing employees. An eligible employee employed before September 1, 1991, who chooses to participate in the plan and to be entitled to any increased benefits must file a written election to participate in the plan renouncing all other benefits under any prior plan and authorizing the transfer to the plan of all contributions to the credit of such eligible employee in any prior plan. If such eligible employee has not paid the maximum employee contribution required by law to be paid by participants in the prior plan, or if such eligible employee has withdrawn all or any part of such contributions, then such eligible employee shall pay to the plan the total amount that he was required to contribute, less any amount transferred to the plan by the prior plan. Such repayment shall include interest from the end of the calendar year in which the contributions were withdrawn or were not paid, compounded annually at a rate of eight percent. If such eligible employee was a member of the Fulton County General Employees Pension Fund, then in addition to the above specified amount he shall pay the additional contributions that would have been required of him had he elected to become a member of the Fulton County Employees Pension Fund as of January 1, 1982, including interest compounded at the rate of eight percent annually from the end of the calendar year in which such additional contributions would have been made. If such eligible employee was employed by the Fulton County Department of Family and Children Services, no interest shall be due on such additional sum. Upon such authorization or payment, such participant shall be entitled to creditable service for all years of service with which he was credited in the applicable prior plan. 
(c)  Protection of existing rights. Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, no individual employed by Fulton County before September 1, 1991, who chooses to participate in the plan shall have his pension computed in such a way so as to produce a smaller pension benefit than he would have been entitled to receive had this division not been enacted. 
(d)  Judges and the district attorney. A Judge of the Fulton County Superior Court or the District Attorney of the Atlanta Judicial Circuit shall participate in the plan only if he files an election to participate within six months of taking office. 
(e)  Elected officials and department heads. Elected officials and department heads may waive in writing the right to participate in the plan. Such waiver shall be irrevocable. 
(f)  Rule for previously employed employees. An eligible employee who has been previously employed by the employer and is reemployed will become an active participant on the first day on which he performs an hour of service. 
(91-RC-669, § 2.1, 12-18-91; 95-0886, § 1, 8-9-95) 
Sec. 154-112. - Loss of status as an active participant. 
(a)  Generally. An individual who is or becomes an active participant pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision shall remain an active participant until he or she ceases to be an eligible employee, at which time he or she shall cease to be an active participant unless and until he or she again becomes an active participant in accordance with this subdivision. 
(b)  Employees in state retirement systems. All individuals who have previously participated in the prior plans, and who being eligible to do so have elected to participate in the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia established by the act of the General Assembly of Georgia approved February 3, 1949, shall cease to be members of the plan or any prior plan. Any individual who may hereafter become a member of the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia shall cease to be a member of the plan or any prior plan effective with commencement of membership in the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia. Upon receipt by the executive secretary of the board of trustees of proof that any person previously participating in a prior plan has become a member of the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia, the total amount of the contribution of such person to a prior plan shall be transferred to the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia. With the exception of the right to transfer funds provided by this subsection, every right of an individual so transferring to the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia, or of his personal representative or beneficiary, in and to such prior plan or the plan shall cease effective with commencement of membership in the state pension system. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any persons who become a member of the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia before January 1, 1991, or to any tax commissioner who shall be required to be a member of the Employees' Retirement System by the provisions of Georgia law. 
(c)  Criminal activity. An individual who is convicted of committing a public employment related crime (as defined in O.C.G.A. § 47-1-20(6)) in the capacity of a public employee shall cease to participate in the plan or a prior plan as of the date of final conviction as provided under O.C.G.A. §§ 47-1-21 and 47-1-22. Moreover, with respect to individuals employed or reemployed by the employer after July 1, 1990, conviction of a drug-related crime (as defined in O.C.G.A. § 47-1-20(1.1)) will result in the cessation of active participation in the case of an individual with a vested benefit and in the cessation of any participation in the case of an individual whose benefit is not vested as of the date of final conviction as provided under O.C.G.A. § 47-1-22.1. 
(91-RC-669, § 2.2, 12-18-91) 
Secs. 154-113—154-130. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Eligibility For Benefits, Amount of Benefits and Commencement of Benefits 

Sec. 154-131. - Normal retirement benefits. 
(a)  Eligibility. Normal retirement benefits shall be paid monthly to a participant whose employment with the employer terminates upon the occurrence of a normal retirement event for any reason other than death. A participant shall have a fully vested interest in his accrued benefit on and after satisfying conditions of any normal retirement event. 
(b)  Amount. The normal retirement benefit, stated as a monthly amount in the form of a single life annuity for the life of the participant, shall be such participant's accrued benefit at his normal retirement date, as determined pursuant to section 154-92; provided, however, that in the case of elected officials and department heads who retire pursuant to an event described in subsection (4) of the definition of normal retirement event in section 154-91, such monthly benefit shall not be less than $500.00. 
(c)  Commencement. The normal retirement benefit shall be payable monthly commencing on the participant's normal retirement date and continuing on the first day of each month for the life of the participant (subject to the provisions on the effect of reemployment and death on benefits in sections 154-140 and 154-142). 
(d)  Minimum pension. A participant or retiree retiring or already retired under a normal retirement event under the plan or plan supplements shall be entitled to a minimum pension as set by the county commissioners. Effective February 1, 2008, the minimum pension is $460.00. 
(e)  Continuing employment beyond normal retirement date. A participant who continues employment with the employer beyond his normal retirement date shall be entitled to a deferred retirement benefit, in lieu of a normal retirement benefit. 
(91-RC-669, § 4.1, 12-18-91; Res. No. 06-1277, § 2, 12-20-06; Res. No. 08-0191, § II, 2-20-08) 
Sec. 154-132. - Deferred retirement benefits. 
(a)  Eligibility. The deferred retirement benefit shall be paid to a participant whose employment with the employer terminates after his normal retirement date for any reason other than death. 
(b)  Amount. The amount of the deferred retirement benefit, stated as a monthly amount in the form of a single life annuity for the life of the participant, shall be equal to the participant's accrued benefit at his deferred retirement date determined pursuant to section 154-92. 
(c)  Commencement. The deferred retirement benefit shall be payable commencing on the participant's deferred retirement date and shall continue on the first day of each month for the life of the participant, subject to the provisions on the effect of reemployment and death on benefits in sections 154-140 and 154-142. 
(91-RC-669, § 4.2, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-133. - Early retirement benefit. 
(a)  Eligibility. A participant employed by the employer who has completed 15 years of creditable service may receive an early retirement benefit pursuant to paragraphs (c)(i) and (ii) below following his termination of employment with the employer before satisfying the conditions of any normal retirement event for any reason other than death, but only if he or she elects in accordance with subsection (b) below to receive such early retirement benefit; provided, however, that no person shall be entitled to retire under the provisions of this subsection unless the benefit computed hereunder shall equal or exceed a monthly benefit of $300. In addition, any peace officer who has at least 25 years of creditable service may elect to retire under this provision and receive an early retirement benefit pursuant to paragraph (c)(i) and (iii) below. 
(i)  Base pension. If a participant is not eligible under the early retirement benefit qualifying criteria set forth above in subsection (a), then such participant, including peace officers, who have 15 or more years of creditable service, shall be eligible, at any age, to elect to retire and receive a monthly $300.00 "base" pension. Such "base" pension may be increased at any time in the sole discretion of the Fulton County Board of Commissioners The "base" pension is a different, separate, and distinct concept and amount from that of the "minimum" pension described in section 154-91 and section 154-131(d). Participants who retire can receive either the "base" pension or the "minimum pension," but not both. 
(ii)  A participant in a supplemental plan who has 15 years of creditable service but is not otherwise eligible for the early retirement benefit as set forth in that participant's supplemental plan shall also be entitled to the base pension. 
(b)  Election. Such election may be made at any time during the period commencing 90 days before participant completes 15 years of service (25 years of creditable service in the case of a benefit under paragraph (c)(i) and (iii) below) and ending 90 days before the month in which his earliest normal retirement event would occur by filing with the board of trustees a written election, signed and dated by the participant, on a form approved by the board of trustees. The election shall specify when the participant desires to have such benefits commence, which shall be either: 
(i)  The participant's early retirement date; or 
(ii)  The first day of any month thereafter, but not later than the month in which the participant reaches his earliest normal retirement event. 
The board of trustees shall prescribe such rules concerning such elections as in its judgment are desirable for the orderly administration of early retirement benefits, including without limitation rules as to the period before the beginning of a month in which the election must be filed to be effective. 
(c)  Amount. The early retirement benefit, stated as a monthly amount in the form of a single life annuity for the life of the participant, shall be the amount determined as follows: 
(i)  The participant's accrued benefit at his early retirement date shall be computed in accordance with section 154-92; and 
(ii)  In the case of a participant with 15 years of creditable service, the benefit determined under paragraph (i) above shall be reduced by one-half of one percent for each month (not to exceed 60 months) that the commencement of benefit payments precedes the participant's attainment of their normal retirement age, and one-quarter of one percent per month for each month thereafter until their actual age on their early retirement date; or 
(iii)  In the case of a peace officer with 25 years of creditable service, the benefit determined under paragraph (c)(i) above shall be reduced by one-twelfth of three percent per month for each month by which the commencement of benefit payments precedes the participant's attainment of their normal retirement age. 
(d)  Commencement. Subject to a participant's election, the early retirement benefit monthly payments shall be payable commencing on the participant's early retirement date, or on the first day of any month thereafter but before the month in which the participant reaches his first normal retirement event, and continuing on the first day of each month for the life of the participant (subject to the provisions on the effect of reemployment and death on benefits in sections 154-140 and 154-142). 
(91-RC-669, § 4.3, 12-18-91; Res. No. 06-1277, § 3, 12-20-06) 
Sec. 154-134. - General disability retirement benefits. 
(a)  Eligibility. Disability retirement benefits shall be paid monthly to a participant who becomes totally disabled before becoming otherwise entitled to retirement benefits under the plan, has completed ten years of creditable service or becomes totally disabled in the line of duty, and is employed by an employer on the date he or she becomes totally disabled. Disability retirement benefits will be granted only upon certification of at least two physicians, one of whom shall be a Fulton County physician. The board of trustees shall have the authority to promulgate such uniform and nondiscriminatory rules as may be necessary to provide disability retirement benefits under the plan. 
(b)  Amount. The disability retirement benefit, stated as a monthly amount in the form of a single life annuity for the life of the participant, shall be the participant's accrued benefit at his disability retirement date, computed in accordance with section 154-92, without adjustment for commencement before the normal retirement date. 
(c)  Commencement. The disability retirement benefit shall be payable commencing on the participant's disability retirement date and continuing on the first day of each month until the earlier of the participant's recovery from total disability or death, subject to the provisions on the effect of recovery and death on benefits in subsection (d) of this section and in section 154-142. 
(d)  Effect of recovery from disability. Disability retirement benefits shall cease if the participant recovers from his total disability. If the participant returns to employment with the employer, the prior period of total disability shall not constitute creditable service, but creditable service earned before the onset of total disability shall be credited toward any future benefit to which the participant becomes entitled under the plan. 
(91-RC-669, § 4.4, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-135. - Peace officers' disability pension. 
(a)  Eligibility. Any participant who is a peace officer and who becomes totally disabled in the line of duty shall be entitled to receive a peace officers' disability pension. 
(b)  Amount. The peace officers' disability pension, stated as a monthly amount in the form of a single life annuity for the life of the participant, shall be: 
(1)  His accrued benefit determined as if the participant has 35 years of creditable service and final average monthly earnings calculated, based on the salary paid to a six-year policeman or fireman as of the time of the onset of the participant's total disability; or 
(2)  The participant's salary as of the commencement of his total disability, whichever would produce the greater benefit. 
(c)  Commencement. The peace officers' disability pension shall be payable monthly commencing on the participant's disability retirement date and continuing on the first day of the month until the earlier of the participant's recovery from total disability or death, subject to the provisions on the effect of recovery in subsection (d) of this section and of death on benefits in section 154-142. 
(d)  Effect of recovery from disability. The peace officers' disability pension shall cease if the participant recovers from his total disability. If the participant returns to employment with the employer, the prior period of total disability shall not constitute creditable service, but creditable service earned before the onset of total disability shall be credited toward any future benefit to which the participant becomes entitled under the plan. 
(91-RC-669, § 4.5, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-135.5. - Members of sheriff's reserve as employees participating in worker's compensation plan. 
Members of the sheriff's reserve who are certified by the Georgia Peace Officers' Standards and Training Council shall be considered employees in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1(a) for purposes of receiving worker's compensation benefits in the event that such individuals are injured while performing duties at the direction and within the scope of the sheriff of Fulton County. 
Members of the sheriff's reserve are not to be considered employees for any other purposes but, for other such purposes, shall retain the status of volunteer law enforcement personnel. 
The personnel director, in conjunction with the sheriff and county attorney, is hereby directed to develop the procedural guidelines for implementing this policy. 
(Res. No. 97-0796, 9-3-97) 
Sec. 154-136. - Reduction in force pension. 
(a)  Eligibility. A participant discharged from employment with the employer by reason of a reduction in force who has completed at least ten years of creditable service shall receive a reduction in force pension benefit. 
(b)  Amount. The reduction in force pension, stated as a monthly amount in the form of a single life annuity for the life of the participant, shall be the participant's accrued benefit as of the date he or she ceases to be employed, determined in accordance with section 154-92, with no reduction for commencement before normal retirement date. 
(c)  Commencement. The reduction in force pension shall be payable commencing on the first day of the month coinciding with or following the participant's attainment of age 55 and continuing on the first day of each month for the life of the participant, subject to the provisions on the effect of reemployment and death on benefits in sections 154-140 and 154-142. 
(91-RC-669, § 4.6, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-137. - 1991 early retirement window benefit. 
Any participant in the plan as effective September 1, 1991, who elects to retire before January 1, 1992, and who has completed at least ten years of Fulton County service and whose age and years of Fulton County service equal at least 75, shall be entitled to receive a 1991 early retirement window benefit. The amount of the 1991 early retirement window benefit, stated as a monthly amount in the form of a single life annuity for the life of the participant, shall be the participant's accrued benefit at his retirement date computed in accordance with section 154-92, without adjustment for commencement before the normal retirement date. Notwithstanding the foregoing, upon the certification of a department head filed with the board of trustees that the services of the participant are essential for the efficient operation of the employer, the retirement date of such individual may be postponed to the date specified by such department head, but in no event beyond June 30, 1992. 
(91-RC-669, § 4.7, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-138. - 1996 early retirement window benefit. 
(a)  Any participant in this plan who elects to retire on or before March 31, 1996, and who has completed at least ten years of actual service with Fulton County (or the Fulton County Department of Family and Children Services) and whose age and years of creditable service under this plan equals at least 73 on March 15, 1996, shall be entitled to receive a 1996 early retirement window benefit. The amount of the 1996 early retirement window benefit, stated as a monthly amount in the form of a single life annuity for the life of the participant, shall be the participant's accrued benefit at his retirement date computed in accordance with section 154-92, without adjustment for commencement before normal retirement date; provided, however, that for the purpose of calculating such benefit, the final average monthly earnings of the participant shall be the average monthly earnings received by the participant during the calendar year 1995, plus accrued annual leave not to exceed 14 hours and plus earned compensatory time not to exceed 6.67 hours. 
(b)  All amounts required to amortize the actuarial liability created by this section shall be paid by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County in accordance with the provisions of the Public Retirement System Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq. 
(96-0202, §§ 1, 2, 2-14-96) 
Sec. 154-139. - Vested benefits. 
(a)  Eligibility. Vested benefits shall be paid to a participant: 
(1)  Whose employment with the employer terminates for any reason other than death; 
(2)  Who has at least ten years of creditable service; 
(3)  Who does not retire and become entitled to benefits under sections 154-131, 154-132, 154-133, 154-134, 154-135, 154-136, or 154-137; and 
(4)  Who elects not to withdraw his contributions to the plan. 
(b)  Amount. The vested benefit, stated as a monthly amount in the form of a single life annuity for the life of the participant, shall be the participant's accrued benefit as of the date he or she ceases to be employed determined in accordance with section 154-92. 
(c)  Commencement. Vested benefit payments shall become payable when a participant attains the age of 65 and continuing on the first day of each month for the life of the participant, subject to the provisions on the effect of reemployment and death on benefits in sections 154-140 and 154-142. 
(91-RC-669, § 4.8, 12-18-91; 92-RM-443, § 8, 9-2-92) 
Sec. 154-140. - Reemployment of participant. 
(a)  Suspension of benefits. If a participant receiving benefits under the plan is reemployed by the employer, any benefits payable to him under the plan shall be suspended during such period of reemployment but shall resume as of the first day of the month following the participant's subsequent termination. 
(b)  Effect on amount of benefits. A participant who is reemployed by the employer and becomes an active participant shall accrue benefits under the plan and trust just as any other active participant and shall be paid any such benefits to which he or she may become entitled under this subdivision upon reemployment; provided, however, that the determination of the amount of such individual's accrued benefit at such time shall take into account only those additional years of creditable service that were not used in determining any benefit whose payment is suspended pursuant to subsection (a) of this section or any benefit as to which the entire present value was distributed to the participant. 
(c)  Reemployment. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, an individual receiving benefits under the plan who is reemployed by the employer on a temporary basis not exceeding a period of six months in any calendar year and is ineligible to participate in the plan under the provisions of subsection (2) of the definition of eligible employee in section 154-91 shall continue to receive the pension benefit previously awarded to him, but shall not accrue additional benefits under the plan by virtue of such temporary employment. The compensation payable to such individual shall be adjusted because of the pension benefit being received. 
(91-RC-669, § 4.9, 12-18-91; 92-FM-024, 3-11-92) 
Sec. 154-141. - Cost of living increase in retirement payments. 
(a)  Eligibility and commencement. Each participant or beneficiary who is receiving benefits under the plan shall be eligible for a cost of living increase in his monthly retirement payments as of each annual adjustment date. 
(b)  Amount. As of each annual adjustment date, the board of trustees shall determine the current average cost-of-living index, and the benefits being paid under the plan shall be adjusted as of the annual adjustment date as follows: 
(1)  If the current average cost-of-living index is more than 100 percent of the adjusted pensioner index, the benefit shall be increased by a percentage equal to the difference between 100 percent and the percentage representing the current average cost-of-living index divided by the applicable adjusted pensioner index. 
(2)  If the current average cost-of-living index is less than 100 percent of the adjusted pensioner index, the basic benefit shall be reduced by a percentage equal to the difference between 100 percent and the percentage representing the current average cost-of-living index divided by the applicable adjusted pensioner index. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no increase or decrease in the amount of the monthly retirement benefit due to changes in the current average cost-of-living index effective at any annual adjustment date shall be in excess of three percent of the amount of the monthly retirement benefit payable immediately before such date. The provisions of this subsection shall not be applied so as to reduce the monthly benefit of a participant or beneficiary below the participant's accrued benefit at retirement or, in the case of a beneficiary, 75 percent of such amount. 
(91-RC-669, § 4.10, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-142. - Death benefits. 
(a)  General. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no death benefit shall be payable under the plan. The death benefit payable to a beneficiary shall be equal to 75 percent of the amount the participant: 
(i)  Was receiving at the time of death; 
(ii)  Would have received had he retired with a normal pension benefit at the time of death; or 
(iii)  Would have been receiving as a vested pension benefit had he survived to age 65, as applicable. 
If the beneficiary is an eligible spouse or an individual in an eligible certified committed relationship who has not attained age 60 and is more than five years younger than the participant, the beneficiary's death benefit payments will be reduced by one-twelfth of two percent per month for each month that such beneficiary is more than five years younger than the participant. Death benefits shall commence on the first day of the month next following the death of the participant. Death benefits shall be payable to the eligible spouse or an individual in an eligible certified committed relationship during the term of their natural life. Any new spouse of an eligible spouse beneficiary who remarries shall not be entitled to any retiree health, dental, vision, or life insurance benefits and also shall not become a beneficiary under this plan upon the death of the eligible spouse. After the death of the eligible spouse or the individual in an eligible certified committed relationship, death benefits shall be payable to children under the age of 18, until such time as the youngest surviving child shall reach the age of 18 years. Death benefits shall be payable equally to all children of such participant under the age of 18. 
(b)  Peace officer; death in the line of duty. If a participant who is a peace officer dies as a result of injuries incurred in the line of duty, the plan shall pay to his eligible spouse (or minor children if he has no eligible spouse) the amount of compensation such peace officer would have received from the employer for one year from his date of death. Any compensation received by the participant, his eligible spouse or children from the employer as a result of the injury shall be deducted from the amount of this death benefit. After death benefit payments under this subsection cease, the participant's beneficiary shall be entitled to a death benefit under subsection (a) of this section, if he would otherwise be eligible to receive such benefit. 
(91-RC-669, § 4.11, 12-18-91; Res. No. 06-1060, 11-1-06; Res. No. 08-0158, § 1, 2-20-08) 
Sec. 154-143. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Applicability of supplements. Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, a prior plan participant shall have his eligibility for benefits, as well as the amount and commencement of such benefits, determined under the supplement applicable to the prior plan in which such individual is a participant. 
(b)  Commencement of benefit payments after age 70½. The payment of benefits under the plan and trust to a participant must be made or begun not later than April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which he or she attains age 70½ or, if later, he or she terminates employment with the employer. All distributions under the plan and trust shall be made in accordance with section 401(a)(9) of the code and the regulations thereunder, including the minimum distribution incidental benefit requirements of proposed treasury regulation, section 1.401(a)(9)-2 (or any successor regulation), which provisions shall control in the event of any contrary provision of the plan and trust. 
(c)  Payments for incompetents or minors. With respect to any person to whom a benefit is payable under the plan and trust, if the board of trustees is presented with satisfactory evidence that such person is unable to manage his affairs because he or she is either a minor or physically or mentally incapacitated and no guardian, committee, or other legal representative has been appointed for such person, the board of trustees shall direct that payment be made for the benefit of such person to any other person or entity deemed by the board of trustees to have assumed responsibility for the maintenance of such person otherwise entitled to payments. Any payment made pursuant to this subsection shall be a complete discharge of any liability under the plan and trust therefor. 
(d)  Source of benefit payments. All benefit payments under the plan and trust shall be made solely from the assets of the trust fund. 
(e)  Forfeiture of benefits. Notwithstanding any other provision of the plan, a participant's or other individual's benefits under the plan and trust shall be forfeited in the manner and to the extent provided under O.C.G.A. §§ 47-1-21—47-1-24 in the event of a conviction for the commission of a public employment, drug-related, or other covered crime. 
(f)  Nonassignability of benefits. No participant or beneficiary shall be entitled to alienate, assign, sell, transfer, pledge, borrow on, or otherwise encumber any of his rights in any benefit or to any payment under the plan and trust. 
(91-RC-669, § 4.12, 12-18-91) 
Secs. 154-144—154-160. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Plan Financing and Trust 

Sec. 154-161. - Contributions. 
(a)  Employee contributions. There shall be deducted from the compensation paid by the employer to each individual who becomes a participant in the plan such sum as may be designated by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County as the employee contribution annually at the time of the adoption of the annual budget by such board of commissioners. All sums needed to fund any actuarial deficit created by the provisions of this section shall be paid from county general funds. Individuals who elect not to participate in the plan as effective on September 1, 1991, shall continue to contribute in the same amount as in effect on August 31, 1991, under the prior plan applicable to such individual. Employee contributions on behalf of assistant district attorneys of the Atlanta Judicial District shall be deducted from the portion of the assistant district attorney's salary or compensation paid as a Fulton County supplement but shall be based on the total salary or compensation paid to such assistant district attorney. Employee contributions by employees or officers of the Atlanta-Fulton County Recreation Authority shall be based upon the total compensation of such individuals from both the employer and the Atlanta-Fulton County Recreation Authority. 
(b)  Employer pickup contributions. Effective January 1, 1992, the employer or any other body serving as the employer of a participant (e.g., the Fulton County Department of Family and Children Services, the Atlanta-Fulton County Recreation Authority) shall contribute to the plan and to the prior plans, as applicable, as of each payroll period on behalf of and to the credit of each participant or prior plan participant the amount of employee contributions required for participation after January 1, 1992. No participant or prior plan participant shall be entitled under any circumstances to receive such contributions in cash in lieu of having them contributed to the pension fund by the employer in accordance with the preceding sentence. Such contributions shall be made pursuant to section 414(h) of the code and shall be treated as employer contributions in determining their federal income tax treatment under the code. The employer may reduce the compensation payable to a participant or prior plan participant in an amount not exceeding the amount of the contribution paid by it on behalf of such individual pursuant to this subsection. Such reduction in compensation may be made, notwithstanding the fact that the compensation provided by or pursuant to law for the individual may be reduced thereby. Employee contributions made by the employer on behalf of plan participants and prior plan participants as provided in this subsection shall be included in the monthly earnings of such individuals when determining their accrued benefits, and, except as otherwise provided above and in section 154-93, such contributions shall continue to be employee contributions for all purposes under the plan. 
(c)  Other employer contributions. In addition to the contributions required above, the employer will contribute to the plan and to the prior plans for each plan year the amount required to fund the normal cost of benefits and to pay the necessary portion of the amortized unfunded accrued liability in accordance with the minimum funding standards of section 401(a)(7) of the code as in effect on September 1, 1974, and the minimum funding standards of O.C.G.A. § 47-20-10. The Fulton County Department of Family and Children Services shall pay a similar amount on behalf of the employees of such department who are participants or prior plan participants, not to exceed the percentage amount paid by the department to the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia on behalf of its employees participating in such plan. The Atlanta-Fulton County Recreation Authority shall reimburse the employer for any employer contributions made under this subsection on behalf of the officers or employees of the authority. For purposes of making the required employer contributions provided above, the employer shall be authorized to levy ad valorem taxes sufficient to amortize the unfunded accrued liability under the provisions of the plan and any prior plan in accordance with Georgia laws. If the assets of the plan or any prior plan are not sufficient to meet and pay the retirement benefits of any participant, the employer shall appropriate from current funds amounts sufficient to make up the deficiency as it relates to such participant and deposit such amount into the trust. 
(d)  Irrevocability of employer contributions. 
(1)  Generally. Subject only to subsection (d)(2) of this section, the contributions made by the employer are irrevocable, and it shall be impossible under any conditions for any funds contributed to the trust or any part of the corpus or income of the trust fund to revert to, or be used or enjoyed by, the employer, or be used for or diverted to purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of participants or beneficiaries, such benefit including the payment of the expenses of the plan and trust. 
(2)  Circumstances permitting return of employer contributions. A contribution to the plan and trust by the employer that was made by a mistake of fact shall be returned to the employer. Any such contribution shall be returned within one year after the mistaken payment of the contribution. The amount of the contribution that may be returned to the employer is the excess of the amount contributed over the amount that would have been contributed had there not occurred a mistake of fact. Earnings attributable to the excess contribution may not be returned to the employer, but losses attributable thereto must reduce the amount to be so returned. 
(e)  Gains from terminations. Any actuarial gains arising from deaths or terminations or from any other source shall not be used to increase the benefits of the remaining participants or beneficiaries entitled to benefits under the plan and trust but shall be used to reduce the contributions of the employer under the plan and trust. 
(f)  Return of employee contributions. If a participant or prior plan participant dies, resigns, or otherwise terminates employment without having received or having become eligible to receive a retirement benefit or without having a beneficiary entitled to a retirement benefit, such participant or prior plan participant (or his beneficiary in the event of death) shall be entitled to a refund of the participant's employee contributions made to the plan or a prior plan. A participant may file a written designation with the executive secretary of the plan specifying any person, whether related to him or not, who shall be entitled to receive a refund of such employee contributions in the event of the participant's death. If the participant does not file any such designation, then such refund shall be made to the participant's personal representative. If any participant or prior plan participant begins receiving retirement benefits and dies or otherwise ceases to be eligible for such retirement benefits or his beneficiary ceases to be eligible for such benefits and the total amount paid to such participant or prior plan participant and his beneficiary does not equal the amount of employee contributions made by the participant or prior plan participant, then the excess over the amount paid to such participant, prior plan participant, or his beneficiary shall be refunded to the participant, prior plan participant, his representative or his designee. Refunds of contributions made under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section on or after January 1, 1992, shall bear interest at the rate of four percent compounded annually from the date on which the contributions were made. If any participant shall receive a refund of employee contributions, he shall not be able to claim credit for service for the period of time for which such refund was made unless he shall repay such refund in full, plus interest thereon from date of refund. Such interest shall be at a rate equal to the average rate of return, as determined by the board of trustees, on investment of the trust fund for the fiscal year before the year the election to repay the previously distributed amounts is made. 
(g)  Repayment of employee contributions refund. Any individual who receives a refund of employee contributions upon termination of employment, and is reemployed by the employer within six months of the date the refund was made, must repay such refund, plus interest, from the date of the refund. Such refund may be repaid in any number of installments as may be determined by the individual, over a period not to exceed ten years. Interest on repayment of any refund shall be at the rate prescribed for installment payments by section 154-163. No person shall be entitled to receive any retirement benefits under the terms of the plan unless such repayment has been made. 
(91-RC-669, § 6.1, 12-18-91; 93-RC-357(#1), §§ 2, 3, 9-15-93; 96-0477, § 2, 8-7-96) 
Sec. 154-162. - Expenses. 
In addition to the contributions provided for in section 154-161, the employer shall pay all expenses incurred in the administration of the plan to the extent funds are not available to pay such expenses out of the trust fund. 
(91-RC-669, § 6.2, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-163. - Payments due plan; installments. 
Any payments due to the plan from the participant may be paid in monthly installments over a period not to exceed ten years. Such installments shall bear interest at the rate of return assumed by the actuaries of the fund or at the prime rate as stated in the Wall Street Journal on the first business day on or after April 1 of any year, plus two percent, whichever rate shall be greater. The amounts due shall be deducted from any compensation due the participant or from retirement benefit payments, as applicable. The board of trustees shall require the assignment of a life insurance policy in an amount at least equal to the amount due to the plan or the maximum amount of life insurance provided to the participant by the employer. No person shall be entitled to receive any retirement benefits under the terms of the plan unless the amount of indebtedness of such individual to the plan is less than the amount of life insurance provided to such individual by the employer. 
(91-RC-669, § 6.3, 12-18-91; 95-0270, § 1, 3-8-95; 96-0477, § 1, 8-7-96) 
Secs. 154-164—154-180. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Plan Operation and Administration 

Sec. 154-181. - Responsibilities of named fiduciaries. 
(a)  Fiduciary responsibilities. The employer and the members of the board of trustees who, as fiduciaries along with the employer, shall be responsible for the administration and operation of the plan and trust. The fiduciaries so named and any other person or entity to whom any fiduciary responsibilities are allocated or delegated shall discharge all duties with respect to the plan and trust solely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries and: 
(1)  For the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to participants and beneficiaries and defraying reasonable expenses of administering the plan and trust; 
(2)  With the care, skill, prudence, and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent person acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of a like character and with like aims; and 
(3)  In accordance with the terms of the plan and trust and applicable law. 
No fiduciary or other person or entity to whom fiduciary responsibilities are allocated or delegated shall cause the plan or the trust to engage in any transaction that he or she knows or should know is a transaction prohibited by applicable law. 
(b)  Liability of employer. Neither the employer nor any employee shall be liable for an act or omission of any person or entity named as a fiduciary in carrying out responsibilities assigned to such person or entity except to the extent that: 
(1)  The employer or an employee knowingly participates in or knowingly undertakes to conceal an act or omission of such person or entity knowing such act or omission to be a breach of such person's or entity's fiduciary duty; or 
(2)  It is clearly imprudent for the employer to name such person or entity as the fiduciary to whom such responsibility is assigned or to continue such person or entity as the fiduciary named to such responsibility. 
(c)  Liability of fiduciary for other fiduciaries. No fiduciary named by the employer and no other person or entity to whom any fiduciary responsibility is allocated or delegated pursuant to the terms of the plan and trust shall be liable for an act or omission of any other fiduciary hereunder except to the extent that: 
(1)  Such fiduciary participates knowingly in or knowingly undertakes to conceal an act or omission of such other person or entity, knowing such act or omission is a breach of such other person's or entity's fiduciary duty; 
(2)  Such fiduciary, by the failure to carry out his duties in accordance with the standards set forth in subsection (a) of this section in the administration of his specific responsibilities that give rise to fiduciary status, has enabled such other person or entity to commit a breach; 
(3)  Such fiduciary has knowledge of a breach by such other person or entity, unless he or she makes reasonable efforts under the circumstances to remedy such breach; or 
(4)  Such fiduciary violates the standards set forth in subsection (a) of this section with respect to the allocation or delegation of fiduciary duties, with respect to the establishment or implementation of the procedure for allocation and delegation of fiduciary duties, or in naming or continuing such other person or entity as a fiduciary under any power of allocation or delegation granted to such fiduciary under the terms of the plan and trust. 
(91-RC-669, § 7.1, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-182. - The board of trustees. 
(a)  Scope of responsibility. The board of trustees shall be responsible for the management, investment, and control of the trust fund and disbursements from the trust fund in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 47-1-12 and free from the control of any Fulton County authority. The board of trustees shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman and shall hold at least one public meeting during each month at the Fulton County Courthouse or the Fulton County Administration Building. Minutes of all proceedings of the board of trustees shall be kept, and a certified copy, duly authenticated by the executive secretary of the board, shall be admissible in evidence in any court in Georgia. Each member of the board of trustees shall take an oath to execute faithfully all duties as a member of the board, which oath shall be in writing and recorded in the minutes of the board. A majority of the members of the board of trustees shall constitute a quorum, which shall be necessary for the transaction of any business; provided, however, that committees of the board may transact such business as may be authorized by the board, including, without limitation, granting benefits and approving investments. Rules and regulations established by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County for the administration and enforcement of retirement systems, consistent with the plan, shall remain in force and effect and shall govern applications to and any procedure before the board. However, the board shall have the authority to establish new rules and regulations consistent with the plan governing matters within its jurisdiction. The board of trustees shall have the specific authority to receive all funds previously held and administered in the prior plans. The board of trustees shall adopt a policy regarding minority business enterprises, women's business enterprises, and disadvantaged business enterprises participation in the financial matters of the plan, consistent with the goals of the employer. 
(b)  Appointment, removal, and resignation. There shall be 11 members of the board of trustees as follows: 
(1)  The Chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County or an individual designated by the chairman to serve in his stead (trustee position 1). 
(2)  Two members of the board of commissioners, other than the chairman or his designee, who shall be elected by the members of the board of commissioners (trustee positions 2 and 3). 
(3)  The County Manager of Fulton County or an individual designated by the county manager to serve in his stead (trustee position 4). 
(4)  The Director of Finance of Fulton County (trustee position 5) who shall also serve as ex-officio executive secretary and treasurer of the board of trustees, dispensing all funds in the trust, and as custodian of the plan. 
(5)  Two persons receiving a retirement benefit from the employer (trustee position 6 and trustee position 12). 
(6)  Four active employees of the employer who are participants in the plan or participants in a prior plan (trustee positions 7, 8, 9 and 10). The individual holding trustee position 7 shall be a peace officer. At such time as one of the trustee positions 8, 9, or 10 becomes vacant due to the resignation, failure to run for re-election, recall, incapacity or death of the Trustee serving in the position, such trustee position shall be automatically abolished. At such time, all remaining trustee positions shall be consecutively renumbered. 
(7)  A member of the public who shall be a resident and taxpayer of Fulton County and not an active or retired public employee or the holder of any public office (trustee position 11). 
(c)  Terms. Except as provided below, members of the board of trustees shall hold office for a term of four years or until their successors have been duly elected and qualified: 
(1)  Trustee positions 2 and 3 shall be filled at a regular January meeting of the board of commissioners. Such members of the board of trustees shall hold office for a term of one year or until their successors have been elected and qualified. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the initial trustee positions 2 and 3 shall be filled at the September 11, 1991, meeting of the board of commissioners, and those individuals shall serve until the January 1992 meeting of the board of commissioners, or until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(2)  The members of the board of trustees holding trustee positions 4 and 5 shall continue to serve on the board of trustees so long as they hold the applicable office. 
(3)  Trustee position 6 and trustee position 12 shall be filled by election by all persons receiving a pension benefit from the employer. The initial holder of trustee position 12 shall be elected on or before November 1, 2008 for an initial term to expire on June 30, 2010, and thereafter upon election each term shall be four years. 
(4)  The initial holder of trustee position 7 shall be elected in June 1992, for a term ending June 30, 1996. 
(5)  The initial holder of trustee position 8 shall be elected in June 1992, for a term ending June 30, 1995. The initial holder of trustee position 9 shall be elected in June 1992, for a term ending June 30, 1994. The initial holder of trustee position 10 shall be elected in June 1992, for a term ending June 30, 1993. 
(6)  Until the initial elections authorized by subsections (c)(4) and (c)(5) of this section take place, the elected employee representatives formerly serving on the Fulton County Employees Pension Board, the Fulton County General Employees Pension Board, and the Fulton County Public Safety Employees Pension Board shall serve on the board of trustees, together with the individuals holding trustee positions 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 11. 
(7)  Trustee position 11 shall be filled by election by the other trustees. The individual holding the citizen member position of the Fulton County General Employees Pension Board and the Fulton County Employees Pension Board shall initially hold such position and shall serve for a term ending June 30, 1996. A successor shall be appointed by the remaining trustees at the July 1996, meeting. 
(8)  All elections for trustee positions 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 shall be conducted under such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the board of trustees. Individuals to serve in trustee positions 7, 8, 9, and 10 shall be elected by all active participants in the plan and the prior plans. 
(9)  Any person designated by the chairman of the board of commissioners or by the county manager to serve in their stead (trustee position 1 or trustee position 4) shall continue to serve as trustee until such designation is revoked in writing, either directly or by the designation of a new individual. All regular elections for trustee positions 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 shall be held in May of each year preceding the expiration of the term of such trustee. 
(10)  No person holding the office of trustee positions 6, 7, 8, 9, or 10 shall be disqualified from holding said office by reason of not being an active participant in the plan until such time as such individual's employment with Fulton County shall be finally terminated and all legal appeals from such termination shall have been exhausted or the time for making such appeals shall have expired. 
(11)  If any vacancy shall occur in the office of trustee positions 6, 7, 8, 9, or 10 by reason of the death, resignation, or disqualification of any individual holding any such position and the time remaining in the term of such individual shall be six months or more, then the board of trustees shall call a special election for the purpose of filling the balance of the unexpired term of such individual. In the event that the balance of the unexpired term of such individual shall be less than six months, then the remaining members of the board of trustees, after receiving input from the represented group, shall appoint an individual to serve the balance of the unexpired term. 
(91-RC-669, § 7.2, 12-18-91; 92-RC-339, 7-15-92; 92-RM-493, § 10, 9-2-92; 93-RC-357(#2), § 1, 9-15-93; 94-RC-177, § 1, 4-20-94; Res. No. 08-0507, § 1, 6-4-08) 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq.; pension board for county employees pension plan of 1982, § 154-296. 
Sec. 154-183. - Administrative duties of the board of trustees and the pension office. 
(a)  General duties. The board of trustees shall be responsible for the administrative and operational functions necessary or appropriate for the administration of the plan and trust. The Director of Finance of Fulton County shall appoint a staff to assist in the administration of the plan (the pension office) and shall prescribe the duties of such individuals. The board of trustees, or the pension office to the extent the board chooses to delegate certain duties, shall perform the administrative functions set forth in this section, in addition to those that may otherwise be imposed by the plan and trust. 
(b)  Agent for service of legal process. The board of trustees shall be the agent for service of legal process on the plan and trust, unless the employer designates some other certified agent for such purpose. 
(c)  Recordkeeping and reports. The board of trustees shall maintain all required records and shall be responsible for filing all reports with governmental agencies. 
(d)  Participant information and forms. The board of trustees shall provide participants, beneficiaries, and other persons or entities entitled to benefits with all notices, forms, reports, and information necessary for the orderly administration of the plan. 
(e)  Payment of accrued benefits; other distributions. The board of trustees shall interpret and construe the provisions and intent of the plan and trust and decide any dispute that may arise with regard to the rights of participants, beneficiaries, other persons or entities entitled to benefits hereunder, parties claiming as such and legal representatives of such persons or entities including, but not limited to, the entitlement to and amount of benefits under the plan and trust. 
(f)  Claims procedure. All claims for benefits shall be reviewed by the board of trustees, and no benefits shall be granted without the concurrence of a majority of the members of the board of trustees, except as provided in section 154-182(a). The decision of the board of trustees shall be based upon sworn testimony of witnesses, documentary evidence provided to the board, and the investigation of the board as to the material facts and circumstances of the claim. Any member of the board of trustees is authorized to swear witnesses testifying before the board. Witnesses shall be compensated by the plan as if testifying before the Superior Court of Fulton County. The claimant and the employer shall be entitled to apply to the board to compel the attendance of witnesses or the production of documents by subpoena or subpoena duces tecum, which subpoenas will be served and effective as provided for by the plan with respect to the superior courts of Georgia. Any witness refusing to produce documents, appear, or answer a question lawfully propounded to him shall be guilty of contempt and, upon certification of such act or omission by any court commissioner serving at such trial or by the board, a Judge of the Superior Court of Fulton County may punish such witness for contempt as if committed before him. 
(g)  Arbitration as to total disability. If, during the course of the board of trustees' determination of the validity of a claim, a dispute arises with respect to whether a participant is totally disabled, either the participant or the employer may demand arbitration of such question before three physicians licensed to practice in the State of Georgia. The party demanding arbitration shall submit his choice of physician to the executive secretary of the board in writing at the time he demands arbitration. The opposite party shall submit his choice within five days, and the two physicians so chosen shall select a third physician. After examination of the participant, the physicians shall determine by a majority vote whether the participant is totally disabled, which determination shall be binding and shall be incorporated in the decision of the board of trustees. Each party shall pay the expenses of its chosen physician, and the expenses of the third physician shall be borne equally by the parties. Any such payments by the employer shall be made from revenue funds. 
(h)  Review of interpretations. If a participant, beneficiary, or other person or entity entitled to benefits believes himself or itself to be adversely affected by an interpretation or construction of any provision of the plan and trust made by the board of trustees, he or it may, within 30 days of the decision of the board of trustees, apply to the Superior Court of Fulton County for a writ of certiorari, which writ the court shall have jurisdiction to grant in the manner and upon the terms and conditions provided by law. 
(i)  Funding policy. To the extent necessary or appropriate, the board of trustees shall establish, and from time to time review and modify as necessary, a funding policy as to the shortterm and longterm financial needs of the plan and trust including liquidity requirements. 
(j)  Selection of advisers. The board of trustees shall have the right to select and employ actuarial, legal, accounting, and other professional advisers to assist in the administration of the plan and trust. The adviser or advisers selected may be adviser or advisers to the employer. To the extent appropriate, the board of trustees shall report to the employer on the performance of the advisors selected and employed. 
(k)  Delegation of authority. The board of trustees may delegate the performance as a fiduciary of any of the administrative responsibilities under the plan, but only if the person or entity to whom such responsibilities are so delegated acknowledges acceptance of such delegation in writing. Any such delegation or allocation shall be in writing, signed by and retained in the records of the board of trustees. The board of trustees, or the person or entity to whom the delegation was made, shall have the authority to terminate such delegation or allocation at any time, with or without cause. Any such termination by the board of trustees shall not be effective until delivery of written notice of termination to the person or entity to whom the delegation was made or at such later time as may be specified in such notice. If the termination is made by the person or entity to whom the delegation is made, it shall not be effective until delivery of written notice of termination to the board of trustees or at such later time as may be specified in such notice. 
(91-RC-669, § 7.3, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-184. - Reliance on advisers. 
The board of trustees and the employer shall be entitled to rely upon all tables, valuations, certificates, and reports furnished or made by an accountant or actuary employed by or on behalf of the plan and trust and upon all opinions and recommendations given by any legal counsel retained by or on behalf of the plan and trust; and it shall be protected to the extent permitted by applicable law in respect to any action taken or permitted by them in good faith in reliance upon any such tables, valuations, certificates, reports, opinions, or recommendations; and all actions so taken or permitted shall be conclusive upon the board and upon all persons or entities having or claiming to have any interest in or under the plan and trust to the extent permitted by law. 
(91-RC-669, § 7.4, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-185. - Providing information; certifications. 
The employer shall provide (or, if requested, certify) to the board of trustees the relevant facts concerning employees, their compensation and periods of employment and such other information as may be requested by the board of trustees to perform its duties under the plan and trust. Any such providing or certification of the information required or permitted to be provided or certified to the board of trustees pursuant to the plan and trust shall, for all purposes of the plan and trust, be binding on all interested parties; provided, however, that whenever it is proved to the satisfaction of the board of trustees that an individual's compensation, period of employment, date of birth or other fact concerning him, as so certified, is incorrect, the board of trustees may direct that the employer correct such certification, unless the individual is deemed to be estopped, and that the benefits affected by such incorrect certification be fairly and equitably adjusted to the extent necessary to take such error into account. Such error will be corrected to the extent feasible to do so in the year such error is discovered. 
(91-RC-669, § 7.5, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-186. - Bonds. 
No bond or other security shall be required of any fiduciary except such as shall be made mandatory by law. 
(91-RC-669, § 7.6, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-187. - Compensation and expenses of board of trustees in the plan. 
All expenses including, without limitation, expenses for legal, accounting, clerical, and other services as may be required in carrying out the provisions of the plan and trust, of the board of trustees and all expenses of the plan and trust shall be reimbursed or paid from the trust fund, if and to the extent that the employer does not pay such expenses. Trustees who are not employees or retirees of Fulton County shall receive a per diem allowance of $100.00 for each meeting of the board of trustees attended by such individual; provided, however, that if such meeting shall exceed four hours in length in any day, such trustees shall receive the sum of $300.00 for such meeting. Trustees elected to the board of trustees (trustee positions 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11) shall receive a per diem allowance of $25.00 in lieu of expenses for each meeting of the pension board attended. Such allowance shall not be considered additional county compensation. Trustees holding a position as trustee by virtue of the office held by them under county government, that is, the members of the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, the Director of Finance of Fulton County and the County Manager of Fulton County, shall not receive any fee or compensation for services rendered to the plan and trust other than the salary and related fringe benefits paid by the employer to such individuals as an employee. 
(91-RC-669, § 7.7, 12-18-91; 93-RM-357(#1), § 1, 9-15-93) 
Sec. 154-188. - Indemnification. 
The employer shall indemnify and hold harmless the board of trustees, any employee or any other person or entity to whom responsibilities, whether fiduciary or otherwise, under the plan and trust have been allocated or delegated pursuant to the procedures set out herein from judgments, fines, penalties, amounts paid in settlement and other costs, expenses, and losses of any kind whatsoever resulting from actions taken in connection with or relating to the plan and trust including, without limitation, attorneys' fees and expenses, but with respect to amounts paid in settlement, only those amounts paid in those settlements approved by the employer, which approval cannot be unreasonably withheld, except where such person or entity has been guilty of gross negligence, knowing and intentional misconduct or lack of good faith. It is not the intention of this section to exculpate any person or entity for his, her, or its actions or for breach of his, her, or its responsibilities, whether fiduciary or otherwise, but this section is instead an agreement to pay such judgments, fines, penalties, amounts paid in settlement and other costs, expenses, and losses and liabilities of such person or entity that may arise from the performance of such duties, but only to the extent such indemnification is not precluded by such person's or entity's own conduct under the standards set forth above, not covered by insurance, and not prohibited by applicable law. If any such indemnification is requested, the employer shall cause a determination to be made as to whether the indemnification of the party requesting indemnification is permitted under the standards and tests set forth above. Upon any such determination that such indemnification is permitted, the employer shall make indemnification payments of all such judgments, fines, penalties, amounts paid in settlement, and other costs, expenses, and losses asserted against, or paid or incurred in his, her, or its capacity under the plan and trust against which he, she, or it is indemnified pursuant to the foregoing. The indemnification obligations of the employer set forth herein shall not be deemed exclusive of any other rights, in respect of indemnification or otherwise, to which any such person or entity may be entitled under any resolution or action concerning indemnification adopted by the employer. 
(91-RC-669, § 7.8, 12-18-91) 
Secs. 154-189—154-210. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Investments by Board of Trustees 

Sec. 154-211. - Acceptance of trust. 
By the execution of this instrument, each member of the board of trustees does approve and accept the trust established hereby. 
(91-RC-669, § 8.1, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-212. - Investment powers, duties, and privileges of the board of trustees. 
The board of trustees shall hold and manage the trust fund and shall have all powers necessary, proper, and convenient for the preservation and management thereof and shall invest the assets of the trust fund in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 47-1-12 and 33-11-1 et seq. and subject to all the terms, conditions, limitations, and restrictions imposed by Georgia law on investments by domestic life insurance companies. No corporation, transfer agent, or other person dealing with the board of trustees or any of its members shall be obliged to see to the application of any money or other property delivered to the board of trustees, or to examine into the terms upon which any property is held by the board of trustees, or to make any inquiry whether the board of trustees is otherwise authorized to take or omit any action; but any such corporation, transfer agent, or other person may deal with such property and with the board of trustees as if it were the outright owner thereof, free from any trust. It is the intention of the parties that to the greatest extent permitted by applicable law any investment made or retained by the board of trustees in good faith shall be considered a proper exercise of its duties. In addition to and not in limitation of the rights, powers, and exemptions elsewhere given to the board of trustees by the plan and trust or by law, the board of trustees shall have the full power and authority, without notice or advertisement and without the order or intervention of any court, subject to the direction of an investment adviser or custodian, if any, as provided in section 154-213 and except as may be specifically limited by section 154-181(c): 
(1)  To buy, exchange, pledge, mortgage, and sell any real or personal property, subject to the limitations in this section, at public or private sale, with or without advertisement, for such prices and upon such terms as it may deem proper; to lend money to others and to borrow money from others at any time and from time to time, upon such terms and conditions as it may determine, and for the sum so borrowed or advanced the board of trustees may issue its promissory note as trustee and secure the repayment thereof by the pledging of any securities or other property in its possession as trustee, and may pay interest thereon at such reasonable rate as it may determine; to continue mortgage investments after maturity either with or without removal or extension; to foreclose mortgages and bid in property under foreclosure and hold, lease and manage the same; to extend the time of payment of any obligation and to rescind, vary, compromise, arbitrate, or litigate any contract or claim in favor of or against the trust (but it shall not be required to institute or continue litigation unless it is in possession of funds available and suitable for that purpose or unless it has been indemnified to its satisfaction against its counsel fees and other expenses and liabilities to which it may in its judgment be subjected by such action, and out of the recoveries of any litigation the board of trustees shall be entitled to reimbursement for its expenses in connection therewith). 
(2)  To invest and reinvest the trust fund and income therefrom in any personal property whatsoever as in its discretion it deems advisable including, without limitation, shares of any investment company, whether incorporated or not, that is registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940 as an open-end management company or trust and that has been organized for not less than ten years and has assets of not less than $25,000,000.00 at the date of investment, stocks, common or preferred, of any solvent corporation (other than a corporation engaged solely in the business of operating real estate or a corporation having substantially all of its assets invested in such corporation), provided that cash dividends have been paid out of current earnings in at least three of the last five years, purchase bonds (both public and private), mortgages, certificates of deposit, savings account, and other evidences of indebtedness or ownership, endowment or annuity contracts, participation certificates, and common collective trust funds. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the board of trustees will not invest the assets of the trust fund except as authorized under O.C.G.A. § 33-11-1 et seq., and no more than 75 percent of the market value of the trust fund shall be invested in common stock or other equities. 
(3)  To invest and reinvest the trust fund and income therefrom in real property, subject to the limitations of O.C.G.A. §§ 33-11-29—33-11-32 and O.C.G.A. § 33-11-39. In no event shall the value of any real estate investments by the trust fund exceed 25 percent of the assets of the trust fund. 
(4)  To vote directly or by general or limited proxy any stock held by it; to exercise any conversion privileges, subscription rights, or other options and to make any payments incidental thereto; to make such exchanges, pay such expenses, and otherwise act as it may deem proper in any merger, reorganization, consolidation, partition, or other transaction affecting any of the property held by it. 
(5)  To hold funds uninvested for temporary periods without liability to pay interest thereon; to register, hold, and carry real and personal property in any name, including the name of a nominee, without the indication of any trust; and to hold any investment in bearer form; provided, however, that the books and records of the board of trustees shall at all times show that all such investments are a part of the trust fund; to execute or join in the execution, acknowledgement, and delivery of all deeds, leases, conveyances, assignments, transfers, or other documents or instruments, whether or not under seal, incident to their rights, powers and discretion; to perform such other acts, whether or not expressly authorized, as may be necessary or proper, and to exercise all such further rights and powers as may be granted to trustees under the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States. 
(91-RC-669, § 8.2, 12-18-91; 92-RM-443, § 9, 9-2-92) 
Sec. 154-213. - Appointment of advisers. 
The employer and the board of trustees shall have the authority, but shall not be required, to appoint one or more investment advisers or custodians to manage (including the power to acquire and dispose of) all or a designated part of the assets of the trust fund, as provided under O.C.G.A. § 47-1-7. Any investment adviser or custodian must accept such appointment in writing, and the designation shall continue until receipt of notice of the resignation or removal of such investment adviser or custodian (or later effective date specified therein). Any investment adviser or custodian shall have a nominee in whose name securities including, without limitation, bonds, stocks, notes, and other evidence of title to intangible personal property, held by the investment adviser or custodian may be registered. The records of such investment adviser or custodian shall at all times clearly show that such securities are held in an agency capacity and shall indicate the trust as the beneficial owner of the securities. Such investment adviser or custodian shall not be relieved of liability for the safe custody, control, and proper distribution of such securities or the income therefrom by reason of the registration of those securities in the name of any nominee. The authorization of any such investment adviser or custodian to register securities in the name of any nominee shall be in writing and may contain such other restrictions as the board of trustees may deem appropriate. To the extent that such investment adviser or custodian is given discretion and control over all or a designated portion of the assets of the trust fund, the board of trustees shall be under no obligation to invest or otherwise manage such assets except in accordance with the directions of such investment adviser or custodian. 
(91-RC-669, § 8.3, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-214. - Records and reports of board of trustees. 
The board of trustees shall keep full records of the administration of the trust, which shall record the receipts and disbursements and all transactions of the trustees. Such accounts and records shall be open to inspection at any time during regular business hours by any person designated by the employer. The board of trustees shall be responsible for having the actuary prepare an actuarial investigation and report of the plan and trust not less frequently than every three years. In addition, the board of trustees will prepare or have prepared a financial report of the trust fund not less frequently than every three years. Such actuarial and financial reports shall be prepared in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 47-1-3 and shall be filed with the state auditor every three years. The employer shall have the right to make or have made an audit of the board of trustees' accounts, including verification of the securities and assets therein, and for that purpose the board of trustees shall make all related records available. Such audit or audits may be made as often as desired. 
(91-RC-669, § 8.4, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-215. - Payment of any taxes. 
The board of trustees shall pay out of the trust fund, or withhold funds for satisfaction or payment of, all real and personal property taxes, income taxes, and any other taxes at any time levied or assessed against the trust fund or any part thereof, other than taxes properly attributable to participants or beneficiaries. The board of trustees shall not be liable for its failure or inability to file any tax return or information which it is unable to file because of the failure of the employer, after written demand by the board of trustees, to furnish the information necessary for the preparation thereof. 
(91-RC-669, § 8.5, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-216. - Relief of the board of trustees from returns, inventories, appraisals, and bond. 
The board of trustees shall not be required to file or make any returns, inventories, or appraisals of the trust property to any court. Except to the extent that it may be required to do so by law, the board of trustees shall not be required to give any bond, surety, or security. 
(91-RC-669, § 8.6, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-217. - Maintenance of single trust fund. 
All of the assets at any time received or held by the board of trustees shall be held as a single trust fund, except that funds held or received by the board of trustees to pay benefits pursuant to subdivision IX of the plan shall be held in a subtrust pursuant to section 154-271. The maintenance of separate accounts or records for operational and accounting purposes shall not be considered as segregating any funds or property from any other funds or property contained in the trust fund, except as provided by section 154-271. 
(91-RC-669, § 8.7, 12-18-91; 00-1471, § 6, 12-20-00) 
Editor's note— The provisions of section 154-217 shall become effective Jan. 1, 2000. 
Sec. 154-218. - Responsibility for adequacy of trust fund. 
The board of trustees shall not be responsible for the inadequacy of the trust fund to meet and discharge any and all payments and liabilities under the plan and trust, other than an inadequacy resulting from the breach by the board of trustees or any individual member thereof of any obligation imposed by the plan and trust or by applicable law. It is expressly understood that this section does not condition the rights of an employee, participant, beneficiary, successor, or assign to benefits upon a sufficiency of assets, but rather limits the recourse of an employee, participant, beneficiary, successor, or assign towards satisfaction of his nonforfeitable benefits solely to or against the trust fund or such insurance company (there being no right against the board of trustees, the employer, or any other person or entity involved in the administration or operation of the plan or trust). 
(91-RC-669, § 8.8, 12-18-91) 
Secs. 154-219—154-235. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VII. - Amendment 

Sec. 154-236. - No amendment to result in reversion of funds to the employer. 
No change may be made in the plan and trust that shall vest in the employer, directly or indirectly, any interest or ownership in or control over the trust fund or any portion thereof. 
(91-RC-669, § 9.1, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-237. - Exclusive benefit of participants. 
No part of the trust fund shall, by reason of any amendment, be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of participants and beneficiaries or for expenses authorized hereunder; nor shall any amendment reduce any then vested interest or accrued benefit of a participant or beneficiary, except that any amendment that is necessary to bring the plan and trust into conformity with governmental regulations may be made retroactively to qualify it for tax exemption even though such amendment may reduce or divest interests that would be vested except for this section. 
(91-RC-669, § 9.2, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-238. - Changes in duties or liabilities of the board of trustees. 
No change may be made in the plan and trust that shall increase or change the duties or liabilities of the board of trustees without its written consent. 
(91-RC-669, § 9.3, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-239. - Amendment of plan by the employer. 
Subject to the limitations stated in the foregoing sections of this subdivision, the employer specifically reserves to itself the right, at any time, to modify or amend the plan and trust, in whole or in part, except as prohibited by Georgia law. Any amendment shall be by an instrument in writing executed by the employer and shall be effective upon its execution by the agents of the employer and by the board of trustees, unless another effective date is provided. Notice of such amendment shall be given to any investment adviser or custodian by promptly delivering to it an executed or certified copy of such instrument. 
(91-RC-669, § 9.4, 12-18-91) 
Secs. 154-240—154-255. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VIII. - Miscellaneous 

Sec. 154-256. - Limited effect of adoption and maintenance of plan and trust. 
The adoption and maintenance of the plan and trust shall not be deemed to constitute a contract of employment between the employer and any employee or to be consideration for, or an inducement or condition of, the employment of any person. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to give any employee the right to be retained in the employ of the employer or to interfere with the right of the employer to discharge any employee at any time, nor shall it be deemed to give to the employer the right to require any employee to remain in its employ, nor shall it interfere with the employee's right to terminate his employment at any time. 
(91-RC-669, § 10.1, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-257. - Nondiscriminatory discretion. 
Whenever it is provided in the plan and trust, directly or by implication, that the employer, the board of trustees, or any other person or entity concerned with the administration of the plan and trust shall exercise discretion in the making of any decision, such discretion shall be exercised in a nondiscriminatory manner. 
(91-RC-669, § 10.2, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-258. - Title to assets in trust fund. 
Reference to the accrued benefit of a participant or beneficiary shall not be interpreted to mean and shall not mean under any circumstances or event that such person has title to any specific asset of the trust fund. 
(91-RC-669, § 10.3, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-259. - Copies of plan. 
Copies of the plan and trust shall be on file with the board of trustees, and shall be available to interested parties for inspection at all reasonable times. 
(91-RC-669, § 10.4, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-260. - Word usage. 
Words used in the plan and trust in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, where applicable, and one gender shall include the other genders when appropriate. 
(91-RC-669, § 10.5, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-261. - Governing law. 
Except to the extent preempted by applicable federal law, the plan and trust hereby established shall be construed, administered, and governed in all respects under and by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(91-RC-669, § 10.6, 12-18-91) 
Sec. 154-262. - Headings. 
The headings of articles, sections, or other subdivisions are included solely for convenience of reference, and if there is any conflict between such headings and the text of the plan and trust, the text shall control. 
(91-RC-669, § 10.7, 12-18-91) 
Secs. 154-263—154-267. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IX. - Supplemental Benefit Arrangement[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— The provisions of subdivision IX shall become effective Jan. 1, 2000. 

Sec. 154-268. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this supplemental benefit arrangement is to provide participants with the full amount of benefits intended under the plan, without regard to the limitations imposed by section 415 of the code. 
(00-1471, § 7, 12-20-00) 
Sec. 154-269. - Benefits. 
If a participant's annual retirement benefit under the plan is reduced as a result of the limitations in section 415 of the code, such participant shall receive an amount from the supplemental benefit arrangement equal to the difference between (i) the amount that would have been payable under the terms of the plan without application of the limitations in section 415 of the code and (ii) the amount payable under the terms of the plan determined with the application of the limitations in section 415 of the code. 
(00-1471, § 7, 12-20-00) 
Sec. 154-270. - Elective deferrals not permitted. 
Participants shall not be permitted to elect to defer compensation either directly or indirectly under the supplemental benefit arrangement at any time. 
(00-1471, § 7, 12-20-00) 
Sec. 154-271. - Subtrust. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the plan and trust, the benefits payable under this subdivision IX shall be paid from the assets of a subtrust established under the existing trust, provided that such subtrust shall be maintained solely for the purpose of providing benefits under the supplemental benefit arrangement. The assets of the trust (other than the subtrust) shall not be used to pay benefits under this subdivision IX. 
(00-1471, § 7, 12-20-00) 
Secs. 154-272—154-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FULTON COUNTY EMPLOYEES' PENSION PLAN OF 1982 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 154-281. - Title of division. 
This division is enacted pursuant to the home rule authority granted to the governing authority of Fulton County. It may hereinafter be referred to as the "Fulton County Employees' Pension Resolution." 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-31) 
Sec. 154-282. - Establishment of pension fund. 
There is hereby established a Fulton County Employees' Pension Fund which shall be administered pursuant to the terms of this division for the benefit of active and retired Fulton County employees. No sum of money paid into said fund shall be subject to garnishment, or to other process, nor to assignment by any participant contributing employee or representative. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-32) 
Secs. 154-283—154-295. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Administration 

Sec. 154-296. - Establishment of pension board. 
(a)  There is hereby created an employee pension board for Fulton County to be composed of seven members, two of whom shall be members of the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, two of whom shall be employees of Fulton County and participants in the fund created by this resolution, and one of whom shall be a member of the public, and the County Manager and the Director of Finance of Fulton County. 
(b)  The members of the pension board who are members of the board of commissioners shall be appointed annually upon recommendation by the chairman of the board of commissioners at its regular January meeting in each year and shall serve for a term of one year, or until their successors are appointed and qualified; provided, however, that the original commissioner members of the board of trustees shall be appointed by the board of commissioners as of the effective date of this division and shall serve for a term ending at the next regular January meeting of the board of commissioners, or until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(c)  The participant members of the pension board shall be elected by contributing participants to the pension fund for a term of two years, commencing on July 1, and until their successors are elected and qualified. Elections shall be conducted at such time and place as may be provided by the rules of the pension board. A majority vote of contributing participants shall be necessary to elect a member. Vacancies on the pension board shall be filled by a special election to be called by the pension board at its next regular meeting following the occurrence of such a vacancy; provided, however, that the initial participant members of the pension board shall be elected at such time and place as may be prescribed by resolution of the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County. Such participant representatives shall take office upon the effective date of this division, and one shall be elected and serve for a term ending on June 30, 1983. The other shall be elected for and shall serve a term ending on June 30, 1984. Successors to such representatives shall be elected for terms of two years, commencing on July 1, as provided in this subsection. The public members of the pension board shall be a citizen and taxpayer of Fulton County and not a public employee or holder of any public office, provided that such public member may be the same individual who serves on the Fulton County General Employees' Pension Board. Such public member shall be elected by the other members of the pension board for a term ending June 30, 1984. His successor shall be elected for a two-year term biannually thereafter. Each such public representative shall hold office until their successor is elected and qualified. 
(d)  The pension board shall elect its own chairman and vice-chairman and shall hold at least one public meeting during each month at the courthouse or the county administration building. Correct minutes of all proceedings of said board shall be kept, and a certified copy, duly authenticated by the secretary of the board, shall be admissible in evidence in any court in this state. The commissioner members and the participant members shall be members of the pension fund created hereby. All members and officers of the pension board created by this division shall serve without pay. Each member of said pension board, before entering upon his or her duty as a member of said board, shall take an oath to faithfully execute all duties as a member of said pension board, which oath shall be in writing and recorded in the minutes of said board. 
(e)  The Director of Finance of Fulton County shall serve as ex-officio treasurer of the pension board and as custodian of the pension fund created by this division. Said director shall handle and disburse all funds in control of the pension board. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-36) 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq.; board of trustees of pension plan of 1991, § 154-182. 
Sec. 154-297. - Jurisdiction and authority of pension board. 
(a)  No participant entitled to benefits under this division and no beneficiary of such participant shall be granted a pension until the judgment of a majority of the members of the pension board created by this division, which judgment shall be entitled in the case, duly entered upon the minutes of said pension board, and shall be binding on the applicant and on Fulton County as parties thereto. The judgment of said pension board shall be based upon the sworn testimony of witnesses, or documentary evidence produced before each board, and the investigations of such pension board shall in every case cover all facts and circumstances material to the fight of the applicant to obtain a pension and the amount thereof. 
(b)  If, during the course of such investigation, either the applicant or Fulton County shall demand arbitration upon any question of disability of a living person, such arbitration shall be granted by referring the question of disability to three physicians licensed to practice medicine in the State of Georgia. One physician so licensed shall be named by the party making the demand by opposite party shall within five days, likewise name his physician, and the two, so chosen, shall select a third physician. Such physicians shall thereupon examine the applicant and determine whether or not the applicant is disabled as claimed. The decision of the majority of physicians so selected shall be conclusive upon all parties on the question of disability and the extent thereof and shall be incorporated in the judgment of the pension board as a part thereof. Each party shall pay the physician chosen by him or it, and the expense of the third physician shall be paid equally by both parties. Payments for Fulton County shall be made from revenue funds. 
(c)  Either the applicant or Fulton County may, within 30 days from the judgment of the pension board, apply to the Superior Court of Fulton County for a writ of certiorari, which writ said superior court shall have jurisdiction to grant, in the same manner and upon the same terms and conditions that such writs are now provided by law. 
(d)  The secretary or any member of said pension board is authorized to swear witnesses testifying before such board. Either party shall be entitled upon application to said pension board to compulsory process for the attendance of witnesses or the production of documents, by subpoena or subpoena duces tecum, signed by the secretary, and bearing teste in the name of the pension board, which subpoenas shall be directed and served, and shall be effective to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents before said board, in the same manner as now provided by law for subpoenas issued by clerks of superior court. Either party may likewise require the production of documents by the opposite party upon notice to produce as now provided for superior court trials. Witnesses appearing and testifying upon trials before said pension board shall be entitled to the same compensation as now provided by law for witnesses appearing and testifying in the Superior Court of Fulton County. Fees of witnesses testifying before said pension board shall be paid from said pension fund. Any witness refusing to produce, appear, or answer, without legal excuse, a question lawfully propounded to him, material to an issue before said board, shall be guilty of contempt and, upon certification of said act by any court commissioner serving at such trial, or by said pension board, the judge of said superior court shall punish such witness for contempt in the same manner as though committed before him. 
(e)  A majority of the members of said pension board shall constitute a quorum, and a quorum of said pension board shall be necessary for the transaction of any business or the conduct of any hearing before said board. Rules and regulations heretofore established by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County for the administration and enforcement of this division, not inconsistent herewith, shall remain in force and effect and shall govern applications to and any procedure before said pension board, with the right and power in the pension board hereby created to establish new rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith governing matters within its jurisdiction. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-37) 
Sec. 154-298. - Investments. 
The treasurer of the pension board is authorized from time to time to invest and reinvest the pension fund created by this division in securities lawfully issued by the United States government, or by the State of Georgia, or in certificates of deposit collateralized by such securities. In addition, the treasurer, subject to the approval of the pension board, is authorized to invest and reinvest not more than 50 percent of the assets of the pension fund in corporate bonds, preferred stock, common stock, or other equities, not to include real estate. The treasurer shall have full power to hold, purchase, sell, assign, transfer, and dispose of any of the securities and investments in which any of the assets of the system are invested, including the proceeds of any investment in any money belonging to the system. The board is hereby authorized to employ an agent or agents including, but not limited to, banks or trust departments thereof, and enter into contracts therewith for the purpose of making such agent or agents acting as investment advisors and counselors, making recommendations for investments and making investments that the board so authorizes. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-38) 
Sec. 154-299. - Executive secretary. 
Subject to the Fulton County Personnel Regulations, the pension board is authorized to employ an executive secretary, who shall be the appointing authority for the pension office and other employees, and prescribe their duties and fix their salaries, which shall be payable from the pension fund hereby created. The executive secretary and such staff may be employed jointly by the pension board created for the administration of this division and the School Pension Board of Fulton County, and the board of trustees of the public safety employees' pension fund, and the general employees' pension fund of said county. The amount of salary of such individuals to be used as a basis for contributing or for measuring the amount of pension benefits payable under this division, shall be the combined salary paid to such individuals by all pension board or authorities contributing to the payment of such salaries; and the contribution to be made by such individuals to the pension board shall be measured by and based upon the total salary so paid, by any or all of the pension boards participating therein. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-39) 
Secs. 154-300—154-315. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Participation and Contributions 

Sec. 154-316. - Persons eligible to participate. 
(a)  The following individuals shall be eligible to participate in the pension fund established by this division: 
(1)  All state and county officers, deputies and employees whose salary or wages are paid, in whole or in part, by the Finance Department of Fulton County. 
(2)  All state officers, deputies, and employees, and court employees whose salary or wages are paid, in whole or in part, by the Finance Department of Fulton County. 
(3)  The executive secretary and staff of any pension board in which county employees, or policemen and firemen in Fulton County may participate. 
(4)  All officers elected by the people whose salaries are paid, in whole or in part, by the Finance Department of Fulton County. 
(5)  All officers or employees of the Atlanta-Fulton County Recreation Authority, provided that such officers or employees shall be employed by Fulton County and the Atlanta-Fulton County Recreation Authority shall reimburse Fulton County for employer contributions made on behalf of such officers or employees. Contributions for persons eligible to participate in the fund established by this division under the provisions of this section shall be based upon the total compensation of such individuals from both Fulton County and the Atlanta-Fulton County Recreation Authority. 
(b)  In addition to persons elected by the people, the following department heads shall be entitled to the benefits specified in subsection (c) of this section: 
(1)  Airport director; 
(2)  Director, office of community services and job training; 
(3)  Clerk to commission; 
(4)  County manager; 
(5)  Director of data processing; 
(6)  Finance director; 
(7)  Fire chief; 
(8)  Director of grounds; 
(9)  Health commissioner; 
(10)  Director of inspections and permits; 
(11)  Juvenile court judge; 
(12)  Land agent; 
(13)  County attorney; 
(14)  Library director; 
(15)  Marshal (incumbent on May 20, 1987, only); 
(16)  Medical examiner; 
(17)  Director of parks and recreation; 
(18)  Personnel director; 
(19)  Director of planning and economic development; 
(20)  Police chief; 
(21)  Director of public buildings; 
(22)  Public defender; 
(23)  Director of public information; 
(24)  Director of public works; 
(25)  Purchasing agent; 
(26)  Elections supervisor; 
(27)  State court clerk; 
(28)  Superior court administrator; 
(29)  Tax assessor; 
(30)  Tax commissioner; and 
(31)  Zoning director. 
(c)  All elected officials whose compensation is paid, in whole or in part, by the Director of Finance of Fulton County and the department heads specified in subsection (b) of this section shall be entitled to the pension benefits calculated in accordance with subdivision IV of this division upon their retirement from active county employment. However, such elected officials or department heads shall retire with the creditable service specified in and under the circumstances described in section 154-336(4). 
(d)  All sums needed to fund any actuarial deficit created by the foregoing provisions shall be paid from general county funds to the pension fund from which any of the above individuals receives pension payments. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-46) 
Sec. 154-317. - Persons ineligible to participate in pension fund. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 154-316, the following persons shall be ineligible to participate in the pension fund established by this division: 
(1)  Temporary or casual employees of Fulton County. 
(2)  Employees of Fulton County hired on a contract basis for a specific task. 
(3)  Elected officials who shall waive in writing the right to participate in pension funds maintained by Fulton County, in the manner provided by law. 
(4)  Poll officers and election workers who are not regular employees of Fulton County. 
(5)  Any person who shall be a contributing member or who shall be drawing pension benefits or has vested his rights under any pension fund maintained in whole or in part by Fulton County or from funds of Fulton County. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, any person initially participating in the plan established hereby shall not be entitled to any pension benefit for himself or any beneficiary if he shall have been discharged from county employment for cause. The sole benefit which such individual shall receive will be a refund of contributions made to the pension fund established hereunder without interest. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-47) 
Sec. 154-318. - Compulsory participation. 
Participation in the pension fund created by this division shall be compulsory for all eligible persons specified in section 154-316, and not excluded by section 154-317, who shall become employed or reemployed by Fulton County on or after the effective date of this division. Participation shall also be compulsory as to any employee of Fulton County employed prior to the effective date of this division if such employee shall have filed an election to participate in this fund, as provided in subdivision VII of this division. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-48) 
Sec. 154-319. - Contributions by participants. 
There shall be deducted from the total salary of any officer or employee participating under the provisions of this plan the sum of eight percent which shall include provision for payment of a pension to a beneficiary. Deductions required by this section shall be effective with the effective date of this division, or with the initial date of the employment of the participant, whichever date shall later occur. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-49) 
Sec. 154-320. - Employer contributions. 
(a)  In addition to the funds derived from deductions from salaries and wages as required by section 154-319, it shall be the duty of the governing authority of Fulton County to appropriate and pay into the pension fund each year an amount which shall be equal to the actuarially determined percentage of members' salary and wages necessary to pay the normal cost contribution of benefits earned by members and to amortize the unfunded accrued liability of the pension fund within 40 years after deduction of contributions required of officers and employees. 
(b)  For the purposes of paying the required employer contributions provided above, the governing authority of Fulton County shall be authorized to levy ad valorem taxes to pay to the pension fund sufficient to amortize the unfunded accrued liability under the provisions of this division within 40 years from the effective date of this division. 
(c)  Should said pension fund at any time be insufficient to meet and pay the pension due to such officers and employees, the governing authority of Fulton County shall appropriate from current funds amounts sufficient to make up the deficiency as it relates to the respective officers and employees, and deposit the same into said pension fund. 
(d)  Provided, however, commencing with the effective date of this division, the required employer contribution shall be not less than ten percent of the salaries and wages of members of this pension fund. Commencing January 1, 1983, and each January 1 thereafter, the required employer contribution shall be increased by at least one percent of salary and wages of members of the pension fund until such increase of one percent would exceed the actuarially determined contribution rate provided above and at such time, and thereafter, the required employer contribution rate shall be the actuarially determined employer contribution rate. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-50) 
Secs. 154-321—154-335. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Benefits 

Sec. 154-336. - Normal retirement benefits. 
All officers and employees of Fulton County who shall be participants under this plan and who shall retire as a matter of right from creditable service shall receive a monthly pension benefit hereinafter set forth and referred to as a "normal monthly pension benefit." Such normal monthly pension benefit shall be equal to two percent of such person's average monthly earnings multiplied by the number of such person's average monthly earnings multiplied by the number of such person's years, or fraction thereof, of creditable service, or in the case of the individuals specified in subsection (4) of this section, a minimum of $500.00 per month. Years of creditable service shall include accumulated unused sick leave days credited to such employee or officer, not to exceed a total of 90 working days or 4½ months' maximum. The following classes of persons shall be entitled to a normal monthly pension benefit upon their retirement from active service: 
(1)  Individuals 60 years of age or older with 15 years of creditable service; 
(2)  Individuals 65 years of age or older with ten years of creditable service; 
(3)  Individuals 55 years of age or older with 30 years of creditable service; 
(4)  Any elected official or department head participating in the Fulton County Employees' Pension Fund who shall resign, shall fail to be reelected, or to offer for reelection, or shall fail to be reappointed, or shall be removed by operation of law, or who shall be requested to resign their office or whose office shall be abolished, provided that such individual has at least ten years of creditable service; or 
(5)  Current average cost-of-living index. Any individual who is retired by operation of law with ten or more years of actual service, with the exception of individuals whose employment is terminated for cause. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-56) 
Sec. 154-337. - Average monthly earnings. 
For the purpose of computing all benefits under this plan, average monthly earnings shall be the average of the monthly earnings of the highest three years' salary or earnings during the terms of employment or, in the case of individuals specified in section 154-336(4), the highest monthly earnings attained by the person or officer during his employment. In computing the average monthly earnings, if the officer or employee shall have received a lump sum payment for compensation, accumulated vacation, sick leave, bonus pay, or similar benefits, the amount of such payment shall be equally distributed over the period of time in which such compensation or benefit was earned or accumulated. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-57) 
Sec. 154-338. - Early retirement benefits. 
All persons who shall participate under this plan may, as a matter of right, retire from active service and receive an early retirement benefit, provided such person shall have served 15 years in the active service of such county. Such early retirement benefit shall be a pension equal to a normal monthly pension benefit less one-half of one percent per month for each month not to exceed 60 months that the officer or employee lacks in being 60 years of age, and one-quarter of one percent per month of each month in excess of 60 months that the officer or employee lacks in being 60 years of age, provided that no person shall be entitled to retire under the provisions of this section unless the pension benefit computed hereunder, less the penalties provided for, shall equal or exceed any minimum pension benefit which would be required to be paid to such person under other provisions of law; provided, however, as to any officer or employee coming under the terms of this division who was in the employment of Fulton County prior to the effective date of this division, such officer or employee may elect a monthly pension benefit, hereinafter referred to as "reduced monthly pension benefit," provided that such person shall have served 25 years and shall have attained the age of 55 years. Said reduced monthly pension benefit shall be equal to a normal pension benefit, less 1/12 of two percent per month for each month the officer or employee lacks in being 60 years of age. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-58) 
Sec. 154-339. - Vested monthly pension benefits. 
Whenever any person participating under this plan shall have completed at least ten years of active service with such county and not yet have reached the age of 65 years, then such person shall have the right to terminate such person's employment with such county, elect not to withdraw or have paid to such person the amount which said person would have paid into the pension fund prior to terminating such person's employment, and upon subsequently attaining 65 years of age, commence to receive at said time and be paid a monthly pension benefit hereinafter referred to as a "vested monthly pension benefit" which shall be the same amount which such individual would have received had he retired at age 65; provided, however, that no person shall be entitled to benefits under this section, unless the benefits to which he would be entitled at age 65 would equal or exceed any minimum pension benefit which would be required to be paid to such person under other provisions of law at the time that such person terminated his employment with the county. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-59) 
Sec. 154-340. - Limitation on amount of benefits. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 154-336 through 154-339, no pension benefits shall be initially awardable and be payable to any person who shall retire under the provisions of this division which shall exceed 75 percent of the average monthly earnings of such person as hereinabove defined. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-60) 
Sec. 154-341. - Cost of living adjustment. 
Any person receiving a pension payment under the provisions of this division or his beneficiaries shall be entitled to cost-of-living adjustments as hereinafter set forth. As used herein, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Current average cost-of-living index means the average of the monthly Consumer Price Index for the 12-month period from November 1 through October 31, prior to the annual adjustment date, as determined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor for all items and major groups, United States city average. 
(2)  Pensioner base index means the average of the Consumer Price Index for the 12-month period ending two months prior to the date of retirement for any participant who retires under the provisions of this division. In the event the base year used in computing the monthly Consumer Price Index should be changed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the board of trustees shall, with the advice of an independent actuary, adjust the pensioner base index of each retired pensioner and of each pensioner or beneficiary, with benefit payments commencing during the first year in which such change was made, so as to effect the original intent of this section in an equitable manner. 
(3)  Adjusted pensioner index means the pensioner base index adjusted, on a cumulative basis, for all percentage adjustments made in benefits prior to the current annual adjustment date. The adjusted pensioner index and the pensioner base index shall be applicable to any beneficiary becoming entitled to benefits under this resolution in the same manner as they would have been applicable to the pensioner had such pensioner continued in life. 
(4)  Annual adjustment date means January 1 of each year. The board of trustees shall ascertain the current average cost-of-living index as of January 1 each year, and the benefits being paid under this resolution shall be adjusted as of the annual adjustment date as follows: 
a.  If the current average cost-of-living index is less than 100 percent of the adjusted pensioner index, such person's basic benefit shall be reduced by a percentage equal to the difference between 100 percent and the percentage representing the current average cost-of-living index divided by his adjusted pensioner index. 
b.  If the current average cost-of-living index is less than 100 percent of the adjusted pensioner index, such person's basic benefit shall be reduced by a percentage equal to the difference between 100 percent and the percentage representing the current average cost-of-living index divided by his adjusted pensioner index. 
(5)  Current average cost-of-living index. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, no increase or decrease in the amount of the monthly retirement benefit due to changes in the current average cost-of-living index, effective at any annual adjustment date, shall be in excess of three percent of the amount of the monthly retirement benefit payable immediately prior to such date. Neither shall the provisions of this subsection be applied so as to reduce the amount of the benefits of a pensioner or beneficiary of an amount less than that to which such pensioner or beneficiary would be entitled to receive under the other provisions of this division. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-61) 
Sec. 154-342. - Disability. 
In the event that any member, who is not otherwise entitled to a pension under this division and who shall become totally and permanently disabled by reason of injury, ill health, age, or infirmity, and who shall have ten or more years of creditable service or shall become totally disabled in line of duty, he shall be entitled to receive a disability pension based upon the same formula as computing a normal pension benefit, regardless of the age of such individual. Said pension shall be payable during life and the continuation of such disability. Such pension shall be granted only upon certification of at least two physicians, one of who shall be a county physician. The board of trustees shall have authority to make such rules and regulations as may be necessary to determine the procedure for the grant of disability pensions and the continuation of the same. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-62) 
Sec. 154-343. - Refunds. 
Should any person participating in the pension plan established by this division die, resign or be dismissed from the county service of the county without having received or becoming eligible to receive a pension of any kind and without having a qualified beneficiary entitled to a pension to be paid from the pension fund, such person or his estate shall be entitled to a refund of all of the person's contributions made pursuant to this division. Any participant may file a written designation with the executive secretary of the pension board specifying any person whether related to him or not, who shall be entitled to receive a refund of the contribution made by him in the event of his death. In the event this privilege is exercised by participant, then such refund shall be made to the person so designated and not to his personal representative. In the event that any participant in the pension plan established by this division shall commence to receive pension benefits and shall die or cease to be eligible for such pension benefits or his or her beneficiary shall cease to be eligible for such pension benefits and the total amount paid in pension benefits to such individual and his beneficiaries shall not equal the amount of contributions made by such individual to the pension fund established hereby, then the excess over the amount paid to such individual shall be refunded to the person or representative of such contributor or his designee as specified in this section. In the event that any person shall receive a refund of contributions, such person shall not be able to claim the period of time for which such refund was made unless he shall repay such refund in full, plus interest thereon from the date of refund. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-63) 
Sec. 154-344. - Mandatory repayment of refunds. 
Any person who shall have received a refund of pension contributions upon termination of county employment who shall be reemployed by the county within six months from the date that such refund was made must repay such refund, plus interest thereon, from the date of refund. Such refund may be repaid in such number of installments as may be determined by such individual, not exceeding 60. Interest under this section shall be at the annual rate of return determined by the board of trustees under the provisions of section 154-379 for the period of time that said refund was unpaid. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-64) 
Secs. 154-345—154-360. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Beneficiaries 

Sec. 154-361. - Authorized beneficiaries. 
The authorized beneficiary of a participant in this plan shall be the surviving spouse of such participant. In the event there is no surviving spouse, then the authorized beneficiary shall be the child or children of such participant under the age of 18 years. Benefits shall be payable equally to all children of such participant under the age of 18 years. Benefits shall be payable to a surviving spouse during the term of his or her natural life, so long as he or she shall remain unmarried. After the death of a surviving spouse, benefits shall be payable to children under the age of 18 years, until such time as the youngest surviving child shall reach the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-71) 
Sec. 154-362. - Beneficiary benefits. 
Pensions for beneficiaries designated by individuals participating under the terms of this plan shall be three-quarters of the amount the pensioner was receiving at the time of his death, or the amount which such individual would have received had he retired with a normal pension benefit to which such person would have been entitled had he survived to age 65. Such benefits shall be payable to the beneficiary designated under this division, commencing with the date of death of the participant under this plan. However, if said beneficiary is more than five years younger than the pensioner, there shall be deducted from the beneficiary pension 1/12 of two percent per month for each month that such beneficiary is more than five years younger than the pensioner. However, said deduction of 1/12 of two percent per month shall not apply if the beneficiary is 60 years of age, or more, at the time of becoming eligible for benefits. No person shall be entitled to receive beneficiary benefits as a surviving spouse unless he or she shall have been married to the participant under this plan at least one year prior to the time he or she would otherwise become eligible for beneficiary benefits. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-72) 
Secs. 154-363—154-375. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Creditable Service 

Sec. 154-376. - Current Fulton County service. 
Creditable service shall include all service rendered by a participant in the pension fund created by this division to Fulton County following the effective date of this division, provided that all employee contributions are made. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-76) 
Sec. 154-377. - Previous service with Fulton County; credit for temporary and C.E.T.A. service. 
(a)  Previous service. Creditable service shall include all service rendered by a participant to Fulton County prior to the effective date of this division, provided that such participant shall have been a member of a pension fund maintained by Fulton County during such period of service and shall have paid or shall pay the maximum employee contribution which was required by law to be paid by participants in the pension fund in which such individual participated. To receive credit for such service, a participant shall in writing renounce all benefits under any other pension plan maintained by Fulton County, and shall authorize the transfer of contributions made to a previous pension plan to the pension fund created by this division. In the event that such participant shall have withdrawn his pension contributions, or in the event that such participant shall fail to have paid the full amount required by this section, then such participant shall pay directly to the pension fund the entire amount required by this section, together with interest from the end of the calendar year in which such pension contributions were withdrawn or in which such contributions were not paid. Any individual who shall be employed by Fulton County on the effective date of this division must comply with the provisions of section 154-397 in order to receive credit for prior service with Fulton County. 
(b)  Credit for temporary service and C.E.T.A. service with Fulton County. Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, an individual shall be entitled to claim credit for temporary service and C.E.T.A. service with Fulton County as creditable service under this division under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Such service must have been for full-time, continuous employment by Fulton County. 
(2)  Such service must have immediately preceded and led into permanent employment by Fulton County and participation under the terms of this division. 
(3)  The person claiming such service shall pay the same employee contribution which such person would have paid had he been participating in the pension fund established by this division during such period of temporary service with the same compensation as he was receiving at the time of claiming such credit. Such sum shall be matched by Fulton County. 
(4)  In the event that the sums paid under subsection (b)(3) of this section shall not be sufficient to fund the actuarial liability created by the allowance of the credit authorized by this section, any additional sums which may be necessary shall be paid by Fulton County from general funds. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-77) 
Sec. 154-378. - Previous service with other employers. 
Any participant in the pension fund established by this division who was employed by the State of Georgia or was a member of the General Assembly of Georgia or was employed by a municipality located, in whole or in part, in Fulton County, or who was employed by the Fulton County Board of Education or the Atlanta-Fulton County Recreation Authority, or who was an active member of the United States armed forces may claim credit for such service rendered prior to his employment with Fulton County, a year of such service counting for purposes of this division the year of service in Fulton County upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  No credit shall be given for part-time or temporary service. 
(2)  When such participant has served five years with Fulton County, he shall be eligible to receive credit for any periods of prior service and not to exceed ten years when combined with any other prior service, other than military, claimed hereunder. 
(3)  Application must be made for prior service credit within six months after first becoming eligible for claiming such service, or six months after the effective date of this section, whichever date shall be later. Any participant who does not claim prior service under this section within said period of six months shall pay into the pension fund interest computed under subsection (7) of this section on the total amount due the fund from six months following the date such person first became eligible to claim such service. 
(4)  To obtain prior service credit, such participant shall pay into the pension fund, in addition to all other sums required by this article, a sum representing 12 percent of his total salary during such period of time, plus six percent of such total amounts. 
(5)  No years of credit allowed under this section shall be used to obtain pension benefits in any other pension system supported, in whole or in part, with public funds. 
(6)  It shall be the responsibility of the officer or employee taking application for such credit to furnish to the board of trustees proof for the years of service and the monthly rate of compensation in such manner as the board may by rule prescribe. 
(7)  Interest to be charged under the provisions of subsection (3) of this section shall be at the rate of earnings of the pension fund from six months following the time such employee first became eligible to claim such service until the actual date of election. 
(8)  Sums due hereunder may be payable in such number of monthly installments (not exceeding 60) as may be determined by the pension board. However, such installments shall bear interest at a rate equal to the rate of return of the pension fund for the year preceding the date of such election to pay in installments and, further, payment of all sums due hereunder shall be made in full prior to the receipt of pension payments. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-78) 
Sec. 154-379. - Payment in installments. 
Any payments due to the pension fund created by this division and the terms of this subdivision of this division, may be paid in equal monthly installments not to exceed 60. Such installments shall bear interest at a rate equal to the average return on the pension fund investments for the fiscal year preceding the date in which the election to pay in installments is made. Such average rate of return shall be determined annually by the board of trustees of the pension fund created hereby for the year 1981, and such rate of return shall be that earned by the Fulton County General Employees' Pension Fund. The amounts shall be deducted from any compensation due the participant or from pension payments. The board of trustees shall require an assignment of a life insurance policy in an amount at least equal to the amount due to the pension fund or the maximum amount of life insurance provided to the participant by Fulton County. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-79) 
Secs. 154-380—154-395. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VII. - Miscellaneous Provisions 

Sec. 154-396. - Effective date. 
This division shall become effective on January 1, 1982. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-86) 
Sec. 154-397. - Participation by existing employees. 
Employees of Fulton County on the payroll of the county prior to the effective date of this division shall not be required to participate in the pension fund created hereby. However, such employees may participate if they file a written election to participate in this fund, renouncing all other benefits under any other pension plan maintained by Fulton County and authorize the transfer to the fund created hereby of all contributions to the credit of such participant in any other pension fund maintained by Fulton County. In the event that such participant shall not have paid the maximum employee contribution required by law to be paid by participants in the pension funds in which such an individual previously participated or, in the event that such individual shall have withdrawn all or any part of such contribution, then such participant shall pay to the fund created by this division, the total amount which he would have contributed, less such amount as may be transferred by the pension fund in which he previously participated. Upon such authorization or payment, such participant shall be entitled to credit sole service for all years of service with which he was credited in the previous pension plan. In addition thereto, if the election of such participant is filed within six months following the effective date of this division, such participant shall be entitled to receive credit for all years of creditable service with Fulton County and years of service for employment by Fulton County or municipalities located, in whole or in part, in Fulton County, or public agencies required by law to be supported from funds of Fulton County, active service in the United States armed forces, and for service in the General Assembly of Georgia, a year of such service counting for the purposes of this resolution as a year of service in Fulton County, provided that such person shall have made the contributions required by section 1 of the act approved March 30, 1971, 1971 Ga. Laws, page 2309, as amended; provided, however, that no person shall receive more than ten years' prior service credit for service rendered to any employer other than Fulton County, plus actual military service not to exceed four years. In the event that such election to participate is filed prior to the effective date of this division, it shall be filed with the Executive Secretary of the Fulton County General Employees' Pension Board. In the event it is filed subsequent to the effective date of this division, it shall be filed with the executive secretary of the pension board created by this division. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-87) 
Sec. 154-398. - Additional payment for participation. 
In the event that any employee of Fulton County who was employed on the effective date of this division, shall fail to file the election required by section 154-397, on or before six months following the effective date of this division, such employee shall not be entitled to claim credit for any service rendered prior to his election to participate in the pension fund created by this division, unless he shall pay, in addition to the sums required by section 154-397, a sum which when added to the sums required to be paid by section 154-397 shall be sufficient to actuarially fund the benefit to which such individual shall become entitled to under the provisions of this division, plus the cost of the actuary for the pension fund for computing such sum. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-88) 
Sec. 154-399. - Installment payments. 
Payments required to be made under the provision of sections 154-397 and 154-398 may be made in installments bearing interest in the same manner as prescribed in section 154-379. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-89) 
Sec. 154-400. - Prohibition against receiving additional county compensation. 
No person receiving pension benefits under the provisions of this division shall receive any other compensation from Fulton County; provided, however, that nothing herein shall prohibit the receipt of workmen's compensation benefits, or payment to a pension as an election or poll worker. In addition, any person who shall have been awarded a pension under the provisions of this division may, upon written notification to the executive secretary of the pension board, cause his pension payments to be suspended during such period of time as he receives compensation from Fulton County. 
(Code 1983, § 24-3-90) 
DIVISION 4. - PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEES' PENSION PLAN OF 1977 

Sec. 154-401. - Board of trustees. 
The name of the system shall be the Fulton County Public Safety Employees' Pension Fund. It shall be governed by a board of trustees composed of five members, one of whom shall be a member of the board of commissioners, appointed by the chairman of the board of commissioners; one of whom shall be the county manager; one of whom shall be a citizen of Fulton County, who shall not be an employee of Fulton County and who shall be appointed by the county commission member and the county manager; one of whom shall be a member of the county police; and one of whom shall be a member of the county fire department. Both the policeman and the fireman members of the board of trustees shall be active members in good standing of the pension fund. The policeman member shall be elected by the policemen members of the fund, and the fireman member shall be elected by the firemen members of the fund, in February of each even-numbered year, and shall serve a term of two years, or until their successors are elected and qualified. The director of finance, or such person who shall perform the duties which are now performed by the director of finance, shall be the treasurer of the public safety employees' pension fund, and shall handle and disburse all funds in control of the board of trustees. The secretary of the public safety employees' fund shall be the secretary of the general employees' pension fund and shall perform such duties as may be necessary. It shall be the duty of the board of trustees of the public safety employees' pension fund to operate and maintain said fund for the benefit of the members of said fund. Said board of trustees shall meet at least once a month. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-1) 
Sec. 154-402. - Eligibility to participate. 
All persons employed by Fulton County as a policeman or a fireman shall be eligible to participate in the public safety employees' pension fund, provided, that such persons shall not have waived, in writing, the right to participate in pension funds maintained in whole or in part with funds of Fulton County. No person who is a participant in the public safety employees' pension fund shall participate in any other county pension fund. No employee of Fulton County, other than policemen and firemen, shall participate in the public safety employees' pension fund. No elected official of Fulton County shall be entitled to participate in the public safety employees' pension fund. Any person eligible to participate in the public safety employees' pension fund shall affirmatively elect to so participate within 60 days of his employment, or within 60 days after December 14, 1977, whichever date shall be later. Whenever any person who has been a member of any other pension fund maintained by Fulton County shall become a member of the public safety employees' pension fund all amounts contributed by that person to the other pension fund, together with employer matching funds, shall be transferred to the public safety employees' pension fund. Any obligations undertaken by that person to pay for prior service shall be payable to the public safety employees' pension fund. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-2) 
Sec. 154-403. - Age of retirement; reduced benefits for early retirement. 
All members who shall retire as a matter of right must attain the age of 55 years and shall have served 25 years before being eligible to retire; provided, however, that any member who has served 25 years may elect to retire on a reduced pension, the reduction to be 1/12 of three percent per month the member lacks being 55 years of age; provided, however, that the provisions of this section as to age limit shall not apply to any person claiming a pension by reason of total and permanent disability. When that member shall retire as a matter of right, he shall be paid a monthly pension equal to two percent of his monthly (base and service) earnings, multiplied by his years of creditable service. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division, when any employee shall retire under the provisions of this division "years of creditable service" used for the computation of pension benefits shall include all unused sick leave which shall be to the credit of such individual, not exceeding a total of 90 days. Monthly earnings shall be the average of the highest 36 months base and service salary during the term of employment. Partial years of service shall be used in computation of benefits unless a person is retired by reason of age. No pension awarded under this division shall exceed 75 percent of monthly earnings as defined herein. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-3) 
Sec. 154-404. - Disability benefits. 
Partial pensions and pensions for total and permanent disability shall be computed by the same formula as is used for computing service pensions in section 154-403 above; provided, further, that disability incurred in the line of duty shall be computed by the same formula as used for computing service pensions in section 154-403 above, or in monthly pension equal to the amount the member would have been eligible to receive with 35 years' service with average monthly earnings being not less than the salary being paid a six-year policeman or fireman, or the actual amount which the member would have received had he retired, whichever shall be greater. No person shall be entitled to a partial pension for disability not in the line of duty unless he or she shall have at least five years of creditable service. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-4) 
Sec. 154-405. - Benefits to beneficiaries. 
Pensions for spouses as beneficiaries designated under the terms of this division shall be three-quarters of the amount the pensioner was receiving at the time of death on service pensions, total and permanent disability pensions not in line of duty, and death not in line of duty prior to eligibility for retirement, and three-quarters on disability or death incurred in the line of duty with the police or fire department of the amount the pensioner was receiving or would have received had he or she exercised his or her right to retire for and during her widowhood, or his widowerhood, and his or her life, and, provided, further, that the pension benefits for spouses shall be given to the minor child or children (natural or legally adopted) upon the prior deaths or remarriage of the spouse until the youngest child shall have become 18 years of age; provided, further, that if the beneficiary of pensioner receiving service pension benefits (other than the minor child or children) is more than five years younger than the pensioner, there shall be deducted from the pension 1/12 of two percent per month for each month that he or she is more than five years younger than the pensioner; provided, however, that the reduction of 1/12 of two percent per month shall not apply if the beneficiary is 55 years or more of age at the time he or she becomes eligible for benefits. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-5) 
Sec. 154-406. - Designation of beneficiary. 
Any member, male or female, may designate any time his spouse or child, or children, under the age of 18 years, as beneficiary of his pension benefits, the amount of such benefits being hereinbefore specified, provided that the additional contributions for beneficiaries required by this division are made for the period of time that a member has a beneficiary. When a member shall fail to designate a beneficiary for any period of time that he was able to do so, he shall in the event that he shall later designate a beneficiary, pay such sum as he would have paid had he designated a beneficiary originally, together with six percent interest. Such sum shall be payable in such installments bearing such interest as may be determined by the board of trustees. Designation of a beneficiary shall be compulsory as to each member of the fund having a spouse or child, or children, under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-6) 
Sec. 154-407. - Death while in active service. 
Whenever any member participating in the provisions of this division shall die while in active service and having not less than ten years of active service prior to his or her death, his widow, or her widower, provided he or she has been designated as beneficiary and has been married to him or her for at least one year prior to his or her death, shall be entitled to receive a pension during his or her life until his or her remarriage representing three-quarters of the amount that the member of the pension fund would have been entitled to receive had he or she not died but had become as of the date of his or her death totally and permanently disabled within the provisions of this division from accident, injuries, or illness outside of official duties and not from his or her own indiscretion. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-7) 
Sec. 154-408. - Death in line of duty. 
When any member of the pension fund created by this division shall die as the result of injuries incurred in the line of duty, the compensation to which he or she would have otherwise been entitled from Fulton County shall be continued for one year and paid from pension funds to his spouse or minor children (natural or legally adopted) if no spouse. Any compensation received by the member or his beneficiary from Fulton County due to the injury, shall be deducted from the one year's compensation herein provided for. At the expiration of the one-year period referred to above, the pension benefits for the beneficiaries shall be computed by the same formula as set forth in section 154-403. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-8) 
Sec. 154-409. - Cost of living adjustment. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Adjusted pensioner index means the pensioner base index adjusted, on a cumulative basis, for all percentage adjustments made in benefits prior to the current annual adjustment date. The adjusted pensioner index and the pensioner base index shall be applicable to any beneficiary becoming entitled to the benefits under this division in the same manner as they would have been applicable to the pensioner had such pensioner continued in life. 
Annual adjustment date means January 1 of each year. 
Current average cost-of-living index means the average of the monthly Consumer Price Index for the 12-month period from November 1 through October 31, prior to the annual adjustment date, as determined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor for all items and major groups, United States city average. 
Pensioner base index means the average of the Consumer Price Index for the 12-month period ending two months prior to the date of retirement for any participant who retires under the provisions of this division. In the event the base year used in computing the monthly Consumer Price Index should be changed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the board of trustees shall, with the advice of an independent actuary, adjust the pensioner base index of each retired pensioner and of each pensioner or beneficiary, with benefit payments commencing during the first year in which such change was made, so as to effect the original intent of this section in an equitable manner. 
(b)  Adjustment. The board of trustees shall ascertain the current average cost-of-living index as of January 1 each year, and the benefits being paid under this division shall be adjusted as of the annual adjustment date as follows: 
(1)  If the current average cost-of-living index is more than 100 percent of the adjusted pensioner index, the benefits shall be increased by a percentage equal to the difference between the 100 percent and the percentage representing the current average cost-of-living index divided by such person's adjusted pensioner index. 
(2)  If the current average cost-of-living index is less than 100 percent of the adjusted pensioner index, such person's basic benefits shall be reduced by a percentage equal to the difference between 100 percent and the percentage representing the current average cost-of-living index divided by his adjusted pensioner index. 
(c)  Exception. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, no increase or decrease in the amount of the monthly retirement benefit due to changes in the current average cost-of-living index, effective at any annual adjustment date, shall be in excess of three percent of the amount of the monthly retirement benefit payable immediately prior to such date. Neither shall the provisions of this section be applied so as to reduce the amount of the benefits of a pensioner or beneficiary of an amount less than that to which such pensioner or beneficiary would be entitled to receive under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-9) 
Sec. 154-410. - Determination of death or disability. 
The board of trustees shall have the authority to determine the permanent and total disability of any member of the fund and to determine whether such disability or death has occurred in the line of duty. The board of trustees may adopt appropriate regulations to carry out the purposes of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-10) 
Sec. 154-411. - Refunds of contributions. 
Any member of the pension fund created by this division who leaves the employ of Fulton County prior to receiving any benefits under this division, shall have refunded to him an amount equal to the amount which he has paid into the fund. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-11) 
Sec. 154-412. - Rights of pensioners. 
The rights herein created shall not be construed as rights under a contract, but shall be subject to future change or revision, and no member or beneficiary herein provided for shall be deemed to have any vested right to any annuities or benefits provided herein; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall operate to deprive any member of the fund from the right to postpone the drawing of benefits in the same manner as provided by law for members of the general employees' pension fund. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-12) 
Sec. 154-413. - Attachment of benefits. 
None of the funds herein mentioned shall be subject to the process of garnishment, attachment, or other legal process, nor shall any of the funds to be paid or disbursed under the provisions of this division be assignable, but shall be paid in cash to the beneficiary thereto if requested by him or her. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-13) 
Sec. 154-414. - Deductions from employees. 
There shall be deducted from the total salary of any member of the pension fund the sum of seven percent of his total salary in the event he does not provide for payment of a pension to a beneficiary, as provided for by this division, or the sum of eight percent of his total salary in the event that he does provide for the continuation of the pension to his beneficiary. There shall also be paid a matching amount from the general funds of Fulton County. Notwithstanding any agreement of any member to the contrary, the amounts authorized by this section shall be the maximum amount required from any member for any creditable service unless the member shall be liable to pay either interest or the employer's matching share. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-14) 
Sec. 154-415. - Appropriations to maintain fund. 
Should the fund at any time be insufficient to meet and pay the pensions authorized under this division, Fulton County shall appropriate from current funds sufficient amount to make up the difference. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-15) 
Sec. 154-416. - Prior service with City of Atlanta; effect. 
No person participating in the pension fund created by this division claiming credit for prior service for time spent with the City of Atlanta shall be entitled to retire as a matter of right on a standard service pension until he or she shall have actually been in the employ of Fulton County for a period of five years. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-16) 
Sec. 154-417. - General employees' pension fund; applicability. 
Except where in express conflict with the provisions of this division, the provisions of the law creating the employees' pension fund (1939 Ga. Laws, page 571, as amended) are hereby incorporated herein by reference. It is the intent of this section to provide that the general employees' pension fund and the public safety employees' pension fund shall (as nearly as practicable) be operated under the same provisions of law and rules and regulations. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-17) 
Sec. 154-418. - Previous service with other employers. 
Any participant in the pension fund established by this division who was employed by the State of Georgia or was a member of the General Assembly of Georgia or was employed by a municipality located, in whole or in part, in Fulton County, or who was employed by the Fulton County Board of Education or the Atlanta-Fulton County Recreation Authority, or who was an active member of the United States armed forces may claim credit for such service rendered prior to his employment with Fulton County, a year of such service counting for purposes of this resolution the year of service in Fulton County upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  No credit shall be given for part-time or temporary service. 
(2)  When such participant has served five years with Fulton County, he shall be eligible to receive credit for any periods of prior service authorized under this section, four years for military service, and not to exceed ten years when combined with any other prior service, other than military, claimed hereunder. 
(3)  Application must be made for prior service credit within six months after first becoming eligible for claiming such service. Any participant who does not claim prior service under this section within said period of six months shall pay into the pension fund interest on the total amount due the fund from six months following the date such person first became eligible to claim such service. Interest charged shall be the average rate of return determined by the board of trustees. 
(4)  To obtain prior service credit, such participant shall pay into the pension fund in addition to all of the sums required by this division, eight percent of the current salary of such participant times the period of time claimed (which shall include payment for beneficiary coverage). The provisions of this subsection (4) shall be applicable only to those individuals employed or reemployed following June 21, 1989. 
(5)  No years of credit allowed under this section shall be used to obtain pension benefits in any other pension system supported, in whole or in part, with public funds. 
(6)  It shall be the responsibility of the officer or employee making application for such credit to furnish to the board of trustees proof for the years of service and the monthly rate of compensation in such manner as the board may by rule prescribe. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-18; Ord. of 6-21-89, § 1) 
Sec. 154-419. - Payment in installments. 
Any payments due to the pension fund created by this division and the terms of this section of this division, may be paid in equal monthly installments not to exceed 60. Such installments shall bear interest at a rate equal to the average return on pension fund investments for the fiscal year preceding the date in which the election to pay in installments is made. Such average rate of return shall be determined annually by the board of trustees of the pension board created hereby. The amounts shall be deducted from any compensation due the participant or from pension payments. The board of trustees shall require an assignment of a life insurance policy in an amount at least equal to the amount due to the pension fund. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-19) 
Sec. 154-420. - Election to participate. 
In the event that any individual who was a member of this fund on February 1, 1982, shall fail to file an election to participate in the amendments to this division adopted by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners on February 3, 1982, by reason of the death or disability of such individuals, an election to participate in said amendment may be filed on behalf of such participant by the individual who is, or would be, the beneficiary of such individual under the terms of this division. Such election shall be effective, provided that it shall be filed with the secretary of the pension fund on or before August 1, 1982, and shall be accompanied with an agreement to make the increased contributions occasioned by said amendment adopted on February 3, 1982. Upon the filing of such election, said individual or his beneficiary shall be entitled to all of the benefits of the aforementioned amendment. 
(Code 1983, § 24-4-20) 
Secs. 154-421—154-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PREJUDICIAL ACTS POLICY AND PROCEDURE 

Sec. 154-461. - Purpose of article. 
This article is designed to assist employees in identifying acts motivated by prejudicial and biased behavior toward an individual because of race, color, religion, citizenship, national origin, gender, age, disability, ethnic background or sexual orientation. 
(100-38, 7-10-96) 
Sec. 154-462. - County government policy towards prejudicial acts. 
It is the policy of Fulton County government to safeguard the rights of all employees as set forth by federal and state laws and Fulton County Personnel Regulations irrespective of their race, color, religion, ethnic background, citizenship, national origin, gender, age, disability and sexual orientation. Any acts or threats of violence, property, damage, harassment, intimidation or other acts designed to infringe upon these rights are viewed very seriously by Fulton County and will be given high priority. Fulton County government will use every necessary resource rapidly and decisively to identify the perpetrators and take immediate steps to prevent further acts. 
(100-38, 7-10-96) 
Sec. 154-463. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Color means a person being of one of the following skin colors: black, brown, red, yellow or white. 
Ethnic group means a group of persons of the same race or national origin who share common or similar traits, languages, customs and traditions including but not limited to black, white, Asian, Arab, Hispanic, Native American or other racial/ethnic/national groups. 
Prejudice means a negative or hostile attitude toward a person or group formed without just or sufficient knowledge and based on negative stereotypes. 
Prejudicial acts means any action designed to frighten, harm, injure, intimidate or harass an individual, in whole or in part, because of a bias motivation against the actual or perceived race, color, religion, gender, age, disability, ethnic background or sexual orientation of the victim. 
Prejudicial incident means any act, whether consisting of conduct, speech or expression, to which prejudicial motive is evident as a contributing factor, without regard for whether the act constitutes mistreatment or abuse of employees, coworkers or citizens. 
Prejudicial motive means hatred, hostility or negative attitudes toward, or prejudice against, any group or individual on account of citizenship, race, religion, ethnicity/national origin, gender, age, disability or sexual orientation which is a contributing factor, in whole or in part, in the commission of a bias act. A bias motive can be inferred from the presence of one or more bias indicators. A bias motive may also be inferred from an intent to interfere with, disrupt or deprive another person of his or her civil or constitutional rights by threats, intimidation, harassment or coercion. The specific forms of prejudicial acts covered by the harassment policy. 
Race means a group of persons who possess common physical characteristics (e.g., color of skin, eyes and/or hair, facial features, etc.) ethically transmitted by descent and heredity that distinguish them as a distinct division of humankind (e.g., Asians, blacks, whites, etc.). 
Religious group means any group of persons who share the same religious beliefs regarding the origin and purpose of the universe and the existence or nonexistence of a supreme being, including but not limited to Catholics, Jews, Protestants, Islamic, Moslem, other religions and atheists. 
Sexual orientation means a sexual attraction toward, and responsiveness to, members of one's own sex or members of the opposite sex, e.g., gays, lesbians, heterosexuals, etc. 
(100-38, 7-10-96) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 101-2. 
Sec. 154-464. - Examples of prejudicial acts. 
The following criteria and examples can assist in determining whether a particular behavior should be classified as a prejudicial act. These criteria are not all-inclusive, and each case must be examined on its own facts and circumstances. Common sense judgment should also be applied in making the determination whether an action should be classified as a prejudicial act. 
(1)  Comments, insults, derogatory language, ethnic jokes, teasing, written statements, gestures. Prejudicial and bias-related comments, written statements or gestures. 
(2)  Drawings, markings, symbols and graffiti. 
a.  Prejudicial-related drawings, markings, symbols or graffiti left at the scene of the incident, i.e., burning crosses, nooses, white hoods, Nazi swastikas, literature or pictures depicting the human anatomy. 
b.  Prejudicial-indicators need not establish that the predominant purpose of an employee's actions was motivated by prejudice, hatred or bias. It is sufficient for classification of an incident as a bias act that an individual was acting out of prejudice, hatred or bias, together with other motives, or that a bias motive was a contributing factor, in whole or in part, in the commission of said act. 
c.  Racial, religious, ethnic/national origin, gender, age, disability or sexual orientation of the individual allegedly committing the act differs from that of the individual to whom the acts were directed. 
d.  The individual to whom the act was directed was engaged in activities promoting the targeted group. 
e.  Incident coincided with a holiday or date of particular significance to the targeted group. 
f.  Although not a member of the targeted group, the employee is a member of an advocacy group that supports the targeted group, or the employee was in the company of a member of the targeted group. 
(3)  Previous existence of prejudicial acts crime/incidents. 
a.  Complainant is an employee at a location where previous bias crimes had been committed against members of the targeted group. 
b.  Several incidents occurred in the same area, and the employee is a member of the targeted group. 
c.  Employee has received previous harassing mail or phone calls or has been the victim of verbal abuse based on his or her affiliation with a targeted group. 
(4)  Employee/witness perception. The employee or witnesses perceive that the incident was motivated by bias and prejudice. 
(5)  Motive of offender. 
a.  Individual allegedly committing the act was previously involved in a similar incident or is a member of, or associates with members of, an organized hate group. 
b.  The employee was in the company of, or married to, a member of a targeted group. 
c.  The employee was perceived by the offender as violating or breaking from traditional conventions or working in nontraditional employment. 
(100-38, 7-10-96) 
Sec. 154-465. - Supervisor's responsibilities. 
Upon receiving a complaint, the supervisor will confer the initial complainant and take measures to ensure that all necessary preliminary actions have been taken and inform management (i.e., department head or deputy director) of the prejudicial act. The supervisor will request the assistance of appropriate personnel necessary to provide immediate assistance to the complainant, such as: 
(1)  Expressing official position that said actions violate county policy and that measures will be taken to apprehend the perpetrators. 
(2)  Allow the employee a period in which to ventilate his or her immediate concerns and express their feelings. 
(3)  Conduct a standard preliminary investigation to include preliminary interviews of the employee and any witnesses to the incident. Ensure that all relevant facts are documented regarding an incident. 
(4)  Notifying other appropriate personnel in the chain of command and the contract compliance and EEO department depending on the nature and seriousness of the offense, and its potential inflammatory and related impact on the department and Fulton County. 
(100-38, 7-10-96) 
Sec. 154-466. - Investigating complaints of prejudicial acts. 
(a)  The department of contract compliance and equal employment opportunity (EEO) will have responsibility for investigating complaints, prejudicial acts or incidents. Such complaints will have priority and will be handled in a timely manner. 
(b)  Any employee who believes that he or she has been subjected to a prejudicial act or incident should file a written complaint with the department of contract compliance and EEO. This complaint should include a description of the behavior complained of, the date(s) of the behavior, the identity of the person committing the alleged prejudicial acts, a brief description of the circumstances and facts surrounding the events of prejudicial act and the name of any person who may have knowledge of facts or circumstances surrounding the complaint. 
(c)  After receiving the complaint, the department of contract compliance and EEO will review the complaint and discuss the allegations with the complainant. Thereafter, the department of contract compliance and EEO will confer privately with the person alleged to have committed the prejudicial act. The department of contract compliance and EEO will invite and require the alleged violator or offender, and will also interview all supervisory personnel, to respond to the complaint in writing. The department of contract compliance and EEO will investigate the facts contained in the complaint, including reviewing all documentary information and interviewing persons who may have knowledge of the complaint, and consulting with legal counsel, if necessary. The investigation will be confidential and all documents received in connection therewith will be considered confidential and privileged to the extent allowed by law. The department of contract compliance and EEO will make a recommendation to the county manager and the department head, regarding whether the complainant has been a victim of a prejudicial act, and any corrective action recommendations. The department of contract compliance and EEO will also advise the complainant of the results of the investigation, as well as other alternatives for redress. 
(d)  All complaints shall be filed as soon as possible but no later than 30 days after the occurrence of the alleged prejudicial act or incident. Nothing in this article shall be construed to require a complainant to file a written complaint with the department of contract compliance and EEO prior to or in lieu of seeking redress with other agencies or the courts. 
(100-38, 7-10-96) 
Sec. 154-467. - Disciplinary action. 
All disciplinary action for violation of this article shall be governed by the guidelines set forth in the Personnel Regulations of Fulton County. Appeals of disciplinary actions by permanent classified employees shall be made to the personnel board or to the grievance review committee in accordance with the provisions of the Personnel Regulations of Fulton County. Department heads and nonclassified employees may seek redress for any disciplinary action through the grievance review committee. Officials appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County may seek redress for any disciplinary action before the board. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit any person from seeking redress with any federal or state agency, or the courts. 
(100-38, 7-10-96) 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment 15-0667, Exh. A(Res.), adopted Aug. 5, 2015, repealed Art. V, §§ 154-468—154-481, which pertained to benefits to unmarried individuals in certified committed relationships and derived from a resolution adopted July 2, 2003, and Res. No. 13-0665, adopted Aug. 21, 2013. 

Secs. 154-468—154-481. - Reserved. 
Chapter 158 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; ordinances pertaining to planning, ch. 58; planning system for mapping and surveying landmarks, § 102-3; resolutions pertaining to buildings and building regulations, ch. 106; resolutions pertaining to community development, ch. 118; subdivision regulations, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise zoning powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 158-1. - Conflicts of interest in zoning matters and lobbyist disclosure. 
(a)  The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County hereby directs the county attorney to prepare a form to be sent to each member of the board of commissioners by the director of development services for each rezoning application which form shall include a clear description of each property to be presented for rezoning, the names of all individuals who have an ownership interest in the property, the names of all business entities which have an ownership in the property, and a space where each commissioner may indicate whether he/she has a property or financial interest in the property submitted for rezoning. 
(b)  The director of development services shall prepare a form, approved by the county attorney, which shall accompany each zoning application whereby the rezoning applicant, his/her attorney, or other person acting on the applicant's behalf or any opponent to a rezoning shall disclose any campaign contribution made to members of the board of commissioners in accordance with applicable law; and the director of development services shall further make available such forms at all public hearings on rezoning to members of the public who oppose such rezonings, and all such disclosure forms shall be placed on file with the clerk to the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Members of the public shall be advised, through public notice of rezoning and announcements at each public hearing on rezoning matters, of the applicable disclosure requirements. 
(d)  All persons appearing before the board of commissioners, who promote or oppose any application for rezoning, shall be required to provide to the clerk to the board of commissioners verification of registration as a lobbyist with the state ethics commission, in accordance with applicable law. 
(94-RC-598, 12-21-94) 
Cross reference— Zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference— Conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67-A-1 et seq. 
Sec. 158-2. - Representatives of homeowners' associations and neighborhood coalitions; authority to speak and act on behalf of organization. 
(a)  The board of commissioners hereby adopts as its policy that representatives of homeowners' associations and other neighborhood coalitions offering comments, opinions, or opposition to any proposed application for proposed rezoning on behalf of such association or coalition must present a written, notarized document evidencing their authority to speak on behalf of the association or coalition, and further that any written private agreement between such homeowners' association or neighborhood coalitions and the applicant shall be signed by the president or other officer of the association, and shall show on its face that the person so signing has the authority to make the representation and/or offer the private agreement on behalf of the association or coalition. 
(b)  Representatives of homeowners' associations and other neighborhood coalitions may leave on file in the office of the clerk to the commission and development services department such notarized statement required above in subsection (a) of this section, which statement shall be valid for purposes herein for the period for which such person is the designated authorized representative. 
(c)  The clerk to the commission shall prepare a form, approved by the county attorney, which may be used by a representative subject to this policy, which form shall be available in the office of the clerk to the commission, development services department, and other appropriate county offices. 
(d)  This policy shall apply to representatives appearing before the Fulton County Board of Commissioners, Fulton County Planning Commission, and Fulton County Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(94-RM-781, 12-7-94) 
Sec. 158-3. - Public hearings for public projects. 
The board of commissioners hereby establishes as its policy that prior to the acquisition of land or other initiative related to the construction of a public project in Fulton County, public hearings, including one public hearing before the board of commissioners, shall be conducted so as to receive public comment, concern and information pertaining to the impact of the proposed project on the surrounding community. The county manager is hereby directed to develop a written procedure to be presented to the board of commissioners within 30 days to implement this policy. 
Editor's note— While the above section is derived from a resolution of the board of commissioners, specific information as to adoption date was not available as of the publication date of this Code. 
Secs. 158-4—158-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 

Sec. 158-36. - Creation. 
There is hereby created a Development Advisory Committee of Fulton County, Georgia, to serve at the pleasure of the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County and for such duration as said board may desire. The members and alternate members of said committee shall be selected by the organizations invited to participate. 
(95-0205, § a, 2-15-95) 
Sec. 158-37. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the development advisory committee shall be: 
(1)  To advise the board of commissioners and the departments of development services, inspections and zoning enforcement, and public works on issues and matters of concern with regard to land development activities and regulations. 
(2)  To advise the departments of development services, inspections and zoning enforcement, and public works in the development of recommendations concerning the interpretation and implementation of land development regulations. 
(3)  To review and propose changes to existing and proposed land development regulations and amendments and advise the above-referenced departments and the board of commissioners on their impact and effectiveness. 
(4)  To carry out such studies or investigations regarding the land development regulatory process or requirements as the board of commissioners may request from time to time. 
(5)  The development advisory committee shall keep informed of new and innovative techniques, materials, methodology, and designs which would create or encourage overall quality development in Fulton County. 
(6)  The development services department, inspections and zoning enforcement, public works department, and/or any other county department maintaining regulations pertaining to land development shall submit all regulations or amendments thereto to the development advisory committee for review and comment. It shall be the responsibility of the director of such department to provide written recommendations, including that of the development advisory committee, at a public hearing, where action by the board of commissioners is required to adopt or amend an ordinance. 
(95-0205, § b, 2-15-95) 
Sec. 158-38. - Membership. 
The development advisory committee shall be comprised of 17 representatives selected by the following organizations: 

 
(95-0205, § c, 2-15-95) 
Sec. 158-39. - Operations. 
The members of the development advisory committee will elect, from among the membership, such officers as it may desire and for such term as it may desire. It may adopt such bylaws or operating procedures as deemed desirable by the majority of the membership. Meetings shall be scheduled at least quarterly and more often as deemed appropriate by the majority of the membership and as dictated by the workload. Meetings of the development advisory committee shall be open to all parties. While the committee shall invite any person to participate or involve any person in its discussions and deliberations, all matters requiring formal decisions shall be decided only by a vote of the representatives of the member organizations or designated alternate representatives. 
(95-0205, § d, 2-15-95) 
Sec. 158-40. - Limitation on membership. 
No employee of the Fulton County government may be a member of the development advisory committee. 
(95-0205, § e, 2-15-95) 
Sec. 158-41. - Compensation/operational costs. 
The members of the development advisory committee shall serve without compensation or reimbursement of any kind. Administrative support for committee meetings shall be coordinated or provided by the development services department. Member appointments and operational costs, including clerical assistance related to the production of ordinances, meeting notes, notification of members, and reproduction of exhibits, but not including typing special studies, letters, memoranda, or the like being generated by the committee members, shall be borne by Fulton County. 
(95-0205, § f, 2-15-95) 
Secs. 158-42—158-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMPREHENSIVE STRATEGIC PLAN 

Sec. 158-76. - Generally. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section that the comprehensive strategic planning process shall afford residents of each of the planning areas the opportunity to customize their county facilities and services to reflect the goals of their communities and neighborhoods. The comprehensive strategic plan (CSP) shall identify needs based on community-generated goals and standards, an inventory of existing public facilities and services, and an assessment of future facility and service needs. 
(b)  Effect. Upon adoption, the CSP shall be an official policy guide, and, as a public record, its primary purpose shall be to inform the public and to assist the county management, county departments, and the planning commission and board of commissioners in the performance of their duties. 
(c)  Adoption and duration. The CSP may be adopted, added to, and changed from time to time, by a majority of the Fulton County Board of Commissioners. Such amendment or adoption shall be in accordance with the provisions of 1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 634), pages 1317—1391 and the planning enabling resolution of the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, Georgia, adopted March 20, 1974. 
(d)  Duties of director. As a participant in Fulton County's planning, programming, and budgeting system (PPBS), the department of planning and economic development's director shall cause to be developed a comprehensive strategic plan (CSP) for services and facilities that shall be submitted to the board of commissioners for a public hearing and approval, and updated from time to time. 
(e)  Components. The department, in preparing the CSP, shall assess demographics and forecast demographic changes as they relate to county services, facilities, goals, objectives, and policies, together with a six-year work program encompassing time and priority schedules, cost estimates for accomplishment of proposed projects, and identification of the entity responsible for implementation. The CSP shall include departmental strategic plans including all programs and services provided by the county within functional program areas, and these strategic plans shall be linked directly to operating and capital budgets. The CSP shall include current and proposed land use maps and maps to show existing and proposed streets, railroad and transit lines, airports, parks, playgrounds, forests, reservations, wetlands, open spaces, special districts, revitalization areas, preservation areas, redevelopment areas, locations of utilities, and other planning features. The land use plan map should take into account the community's preferences for general locations of land uses that are consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies developed in the plan and adopted planning standards. 
(94-RC-508, § 28-2-6, 10-19-94) 
Sec. 158-77. - Program analysis and evaluation. 
As part of Fulton County's planning, programming, and budgeting system (PPBS), the programs identified in the comprehensive strategic plan (CSP) for providing facilities and services shall be linked directly to the annual operating and capital budgets. The success of that link shall be monitored through the department's program analysis and evaluation division. The program analysis and evaluation division shall assess the efficiency and effectiveness of Fulton County's departmental and interdepartmental programs, and shall serve as an advocate for program implementation. The division shall assist the county's nine functional groups with their budget presentations and shall evaluate all requested program changes for continuity with the county's strategic goals. The division shall also assist departments in preparing their six-year strategic plans, validating program performance indicators, implementing a county-wide program performance reporting system, and coordinating and preparing the county's capital improvement program and annual capital budget. 
(94-RC-508, § 28-2-7, 10-19-94) 
Chapter 162 - ROADS AND BRIDGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Moving of buildings, § 14-176 et seq.; impact fees, § 58-161 et seq.; ordinances pertaining to roads and bridges, ch. 62; ordinances pertaining to traffic and vehicles, ch. 78; resolutions pertaining to traffic and vehicles, ch. 174. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Roads and bridges, ch. 42. 
State Law reference— State, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 162-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-0957, adopted Aug. 15, 2001, repealed § 162-1 in its entirety. Formerly said section pertained to commission on road improvements as related to roads and bridges. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 162-2—162-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY POLE RELOCATION FOR ROAD IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 162-36. - Information to be supplied to utility company. 
In all cases where the improvement of any county road shall require the relocation of utility poles, the director of public works shall advise the utility company affected and shall furnish any information thereon as may be necessary to fully acquaint the utility company with the proposed improvement, and furnish the utility company plans showing the limits of the right-of-way and the location of each pole to be moved. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-51) 
Sec. 162-37. - Joint inspection by engineers. 
After the utility company has been given the information prescribed in section 162-36, it shall designate one of its engineers to serve with the county engineer in making a joint inspection of the improvement, at which time a decision shall be made between the engineers concerning which poles are to be moved and which, if any, are located on existing right-of-way. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-52) 
Sec. 162-38. - Charges to Fulton County. 
The utility company shall immediately issue orders for the relocation of all poles affected, but shall charge Fulton County only with the cost of relocating poles which exist outside the limits of the original county right-of-way, and protected by recorded easements in the name of the utility company. In locations where the county right-of-way or road easement is not clearly defined, the right-of-way shall be recognized as extending to points on either side of the roadway three feet beyond the top of the bank or foot of the slope, whichever the case may be, and the relocation of the poles within these limits shall not be paid for by Fulton County. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-53) 
Sec. 162-39. - Deductions for depreciation and salvage. 
Fulton County will reimburse the utility company for the cost of removing all poles not exempt under the provisions in section 162-38 after deducting as a credit all depreciation and salvage in accordance with the schedule of same. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-54) 
Sec. 162-40. - Invoices for payment. 
Fulton County will recognize invoices for payment when submitted by the utility company on any county road project in accordance with the terms of this article, and approved by the director of public works. 
(Code 1983, § 28-2-55) 
Chapter 166 - SOCIAL SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 166-1—166-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES FOR THE ELDERLY AUTHORITY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 
State Law reference— Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-110 et seq. 

Sec. 166-31. - Need established. 
There is hereby determined and declared to be a pressing, existing and future need for a residential care facilities for the elderly authority, as more fully described in this article, to function in Fulton County for the purpose of providing an adequate supply of residential care facilities for the elderly in said county, thereby promoting the health and welfare of the people of said county. 
(Res. of 12-3-80) 
Sec. 166-32. - Creation. 
There is hereby activated the public body corporate and politic known as the Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly Authority of Fulton County (hereinafter referred to as the "authority"), which authority was created upon the adoption and approval of the Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly Authority Law (O.C.G.A. § 37-7-110 et seq.) and particularly O.C.G.A. § 31-7-114. 
(Res. of 12-3-80; 94-RM-376, § 1, 7-6-94) 
Sec. 166-33. - Compensation of director. 
No person shall receive any compensation for serving as a director, but a director may be reimbursed for his actual expenses incurred in the performance of his duties. 
(Res. of 12-3-80) 
Sec. 166-34. - Vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies on the said authority shall be filled by appointments by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County. 
(b)  In the event that a director at any time ceases to be a taxpayer residing in Fulton County, his eligibility to serve as a director shall cease, and his term of office shall end. 
(c)  In the event any vacancy shall occur in the board of directors of the authority for any reason, the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County shall appoint a person to serve as member of the board of directors of the authority to fill such vacancy. 
(Res. of 12-3-80; Res. of 1-18-89; 94-RM-376, § 3, 7-6-94) 
Sec. 166-35. - Organization of board of directors of authority; exercise of powers, duties, and responsibilities. 
The board of directors hereinbefore elected shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly Authority Law (O.C.G.A. § 37-7-110 et seq.) as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Res. of 12-3-80) 
Sec. 166-36. - Activation and perpetual existence. 
The authority shall be deemed to be duly created and activated and shall have perpetual existence. 
(Res. of 12-3-80) 
Secs. 166-37—166-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AGING SERVICES COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 

Sec. 166-71. - Generally. 
There is created the Fulton County Aging Services Council, in order to address the needs of aging citizens in Fulton County, and that this body assess, evaluate, plan, fund, and advocate for the welfare of senior citizens of the county. This body shall convene a coalition of state, city, and county officials within the county, as well as other groups and agencies, to establish a mechanism to plan, coordinate, and obtain funding for expanding the delivery of social services to the elderly. This body shall serve as the official body for all aged related matters including, but not limited to, reviewing and responding to senior citizens, complaints, devising and recommending shortterm and longterm county programs, and monitoring and evaluating the administration of aging programs. The council will establish annual goals to be addressed by six task forces. These task forces shall be a health task force, a housing task force, a recreation/enrichment task force, a nutrition task force, a social service task force, and a transportation task force. The composition of this council will be made up of the following entities: 
(1)  Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC) 
(2)  City of Atlanta 
(3)  State office of aging 
(4)  United Way 
(5)  Private Industry Council (PIC) 
(6)  ACTION 
(7)  Department of Family and Children Services (DFACS) 
(8)  Fulton County Board of Health 
(9)  Parks and recreation 
(10)  Public library 
(11)  Grady Hospital 
(12)  Housing authority 
(13)  Planning and economic development 
(14)  Fulton County Extension Service 
(15)  Downtown Atlanta Senior Services (DASS) 
(16)  Alpharetta Senior Center 
(17)  Quality Living Services 
(18)  Rico senior citizens 
(19)  North Atlanta Senior Citizens (NASC) 
(20)  American Association of Retired Persons 
(21)  Area Councils of Aging 
(22)  Seven senior consumers, as appointed by county commissioners 
(23)  Atlanta Housing Authority (AHA) 
(24)  Economic Opportunity Atlanta (EOA) 
(25)  MARTA Special Services 
(26)  Senior Citizens Services 
(27)  Wesley Centers 
(28)  Atlanta Jewish Community Center 
(29)  Atlanta Legal Aid Society 
(30)  Catholic Social Services 
(31)  Atlanta Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders 
(32)  Latin American Association 
(33)  Intergenerational Resource Center 
(34)  Christian City. 
(Res. of 10-26-88; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
Sec. 166-72. - Executive council. 
The Fulton County Aging Council will be composed of an executive council as follows: 
(1)  Six adults (two each elected from the North, South and Central Area Councils on Aging). 
(2)  Six task force chairpersons. 
(3)  One elected county official. 
(Res. of 10-26-88) 
Sec. 166-73. - Staffing and operation. 
The staffing and operation of the Fulton County Aging Services Council shall be provided for by the Fulton County Council on Aging. 
(Res. of 10-26-88) 
Chapter 170 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverage excise taxes, § 6-36 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18; ordinances pertaining to taxation, ch. 74; finance, § 102-251 et seq. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Taxation, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 170-1. - Intent to impose hotel/motel tax. 
The Fulton County Board of Commissioners hereby expresses its intention to impose the hotel/motel tax authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(5) to the full extent and at the rate of seven percent as permitted thereunder, for purposes of construction of the domed stadium by the George L. Smith II Georgia World Congress Center Authority. The imposition of this tax shall become effective August 1, 1989. 
(Res. of 6-7-89(1); Res. of 8-16-89(2)) 
Sec. 170-2. - Properties excluded from transfer of tax lien. 
O.C.G.A. § 48-3-19, as amended in the 1997 legislative session by Senate Bill 270, allows that certain properties be removed from eligibility for having their tax liens transferred to third parties. If a property is among a list of properties recommended by the tax commissioner and approved by the board of commissioners as eligible for exclusion from transfer, a third party may not pay an execution issued for ad valorem property taxes on that property and thereby become the transferee of such execution. 
On June 18, 1997, the board of commissioners held a public hearing on the issue of excluding specific properties from transfer of execution. After the hearing, the tax commissioner presented a list of specific homestead properties of the elderly and/or disabled with limited income and other specific properties to the board of commissioners recommending their exclusion from transfer of tax execution. 
All properties listed and approved by the board of commissioners are excluded from transfer and protected. The tax commissioner cannot prohibit the transfer of tax liens on properties which were omitted from the listing. These specific properties that meet the criteria below for exclusion from transfer are coded in the OASIS system on the PSUM screen in the levy/sale field as "E" as follows: 
(1)  Widows year support; 
(2)  Bankruptcy; 
(3)  Land bank authority; 
(4)  In litigation (suit, condemnation, or deceased) 
(5)  Exempt properties with sanitary assessment only coded as: 
a.  EO - Housing authority; 
b.  E1 - Public property; 
c.  E2 - Religious; 
d.  E3 - Charitable; 
e.  E4 - Cemetery; 
f.  E5 - Nonprofit hospital; 
g.  E6 - Educational institution; 
h.  E9 - Other. 
(1)  Specific homestead property coded as H02 through H28. 
Any taxpayer who would qualify for H02 through H28 homestead but did not apply, will be eligible for a payment plan on delinquent taxes on the taxpayer's primary residence. 
Each year the tax commissioner will review the excluded property list; properties that no longer qualify will be removed and newly qualified properties will be added. The now recommended list will be presented to the board of commissioners. 
(Res. No. 97-0792, 6-18-97) 
Editor's note— Resolution No. 97-0792, adopted June 18, 1997, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, its inclusion as § 170-2 was at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 170-3—170-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 170-31. - Release of tax deeds. 
(a)  Where the deed was recorded prior to the acquisition of the property by the present owner, the county will insist upon payment in full. 
(b)  Where the deed is for taxes for a period within seven years from the date the present owner acquired the property, and the tax was assessed against the holder of a record title, the county will insist upon payment of the full amount. 
(c)  Where the deed was more than seven years old when the present owner acquired the property and the deed was not recorded prior to said acquisition, the county will execute a release without consideration. 
(d)  All other cases will be decided upon the facts in each case. 
(Code 1983, § 26-2-2) 
Sec. 170-32. - Adjustments; automobile tag sales and automobile ad valorem tax. 
All municipalities authorize and empower the Tax Commissioner of Fulton County to make adjustments, if any error arises, in the sale of automobile license tags and the collection of ad valorem taxes on automobiles when such errors arise in the calculation or in the ownership or assessment of automobiles, and to refund to the applicant and taxpayer such sums, if any, as they may be due. 
(Code 1983, § 26-2-3) 
Sec. 170-33. - Freeport exemptions. 
(a)  All the following types of tangible personal property are exempted from ad valorem taxation, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, including all such taxes levied for educational purposes and for state purposes, within the county: 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the State of Georgia. The exemption provided for herein shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing, or production operations in this state. 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within the State of Georgia in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for herein shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date the property is produced or manufactured. 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which, on January 1, are stored in a warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside the State of Georgia and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into the State of Georgia from outside this state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside this state. The exemption provided for herein shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date the property is stored in this state. All property that is claimed to be exempt under the provisions of this subsection shall be designated as being in transit upon the official books and records of the warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, where this property is being stored. All official books and records shall contain a full, true, and accurate inventory of all such property, including the date of the receipt of the property, the date of the withdrawal of the property, the point of origin of the property, and the point of final destination of the same, if known. The official books and records of any warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, pertaining to any in transit property, shall be at all times open to the inspection of all taxing authorities of this state and of any political subdivision of this state. 
(4)  As used in this section, the following words, terms and phrases are defined as follows: 
a.  Finished goods shall mean goods, wares, and merchandise of every character and kind, but shall not include unrecovered, unextracted, or unsevered natural resources, or raw materials, or goods in the process of manufacture or production, or the stock-in-trade of a retailer. 
b.  Raw materials shall mean any material whether crude or processed that can be converted by manufacture, processing, or combination into a new and useful product, but shall not include unrecovered, unextracted, or unsevered natural resources. 
(b)  All types of tangible personal property as stated in subsection (a) of this section shall be exempted at 100 percent of the value of such property. 
(c)  Taxpayers desiring to make application for this exemption must do so on forms provided for this purpose by the taxing authorities of Fulton County and must supply any additional information that may be requested which is necessary to determine the qualification for and amount of said exemption. 
(Code 1983, §§ 26-2-11—26-2-13) 
State Law reference— Freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 
Secs. 170-34—170-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF TAX ASSESSORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 

Sec. 170-61. - Operation authorized. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 45-5-290, the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County hereby authorizes, effective January 1, 1994, the operation of the county board of tax assessors, to be known as the Fulton County Board of Tax Assessors, for the purpose of filling the duties and functions of tax assessors with respect to the assessment and fixing of value of all property located within the boundaries of Fulton County for all state, county, city, school and other tax purposes, including the giving of notices of assessments as provided by law and performing any and all other duties, as necessary and appropriate, relating to the assessment of taxable property, as well as the appeals with respect to such assessments and the equalization of assessments, all in the manner prescribed under Georgia law. 
(93-RC-632, § 1, 12-1-93) 
Sec. 170-62. - Membership. 
(a)  Effective June 29, 2006 or upon the resignation or removal of all current members of the board of tax assessors (whichever first occurs), the Fulton County Board of Tax Assessors shall be a five-member board, whose members shall be appointed by the full Board of Commissioners of Fulton County upon nomination by any member of the board of commissioners. Of the five members, at least one shall be a resident of the City of Atlanta, at least one shall be a resident of that portion of Fulton County that lies north of the municipal limits of the City of Atlanta, and at least one shall be a resident of that portion of Fulton County that lies south of the municipal limits of the City of Atlanta. Each such member of the board of tax assessors shall meet all eligibility and other professional and other statutory requirements and qualifications provided under Georgia law and shall, upon appointment, take an oath and shall be otherwise appointed as provided by Georgia law. 
(b)  In addition to state requirements, each member shall, at the time of appointment, have at least the following qualifications: 
(1)  At least one year of experience in appraisal-related work which is defined as follows: 
a.  The appraisal of real estate or personal property for any purpose for either a governmental or a private agency; or 
b.  Employment in any capacity by county or municipal government involving tax appraisals, assessments, or collections in the office of tax assessor, tax collector, or tax receiver; or 
c.  Employment by private industry involved in the preparation or filing of local government tax returns by regulations of the Georgia Department of Revenue, or 
d.  Either by appointment or within 180 days of appointment 40 hours of approved appraisal courses; and 
e.  At least five years of experience in a position of employment involving the supervision or management of three or more subordinate employees. 
(2)  Further, each prospective member must provide, to the board of commissioners, at the time of nomination, a resume and, a sworn affidavit that he/she has paid all property taxes and state and federal income taxes then due and owing. The clerk to the commission shall verify the nominations to ensure that nominees meet the required qualifications and that all required documentation has been received. No vote shall be taken by the board of commissioners on a nominee's appointment if the aforementioned resume and affidavit have not been provided. Any person who has an outstanding tax lien issued against him/her (or against property that he/she personally owns) shall be ineligible to serve as a member of the board of tax assessors. If notice from a taxing authority of lien issuance, as required by state and federal law, is received by a member of the board of tax assessors after he/she is appointed, he/she shall have 90 calendar days after receipt of the notice to pay, satisfy, or settle the same of record. If the member fails to pay, satisfy, or settle the tax lien within 90 calendar days of notice, the failure may constitute grounds for removal of the member from the board of tax assessors by the board of commissioners. Said removal shall be for cause for failure to meet the qualifications imposed upon the member by law consistent with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-295(b). No member of the board of tax assessors shall participate in the consideration of or vote upon any matter coming before the board of tax assessors in which such member has, for remuneration, expressed a professional opinion as to the value or use of the property concerned, or for which a member has a direct or indirect ownership interest in the property. 
(c)  Appointments under this section shall first be effective for terms beginning July 1, 2006 (or, in the event of earlier resignation or removal of all current members of the board of tax assessors, beginning on the date of appointment by the board of commissioners). The initial appointees shall serve the following initial terms, which terms (and all subsequent terms) shall expire on June 30 of the last year of the term prescribed under this subparagraph and subparagraph (d) below: 

 
(d)  At the expiration of the initial terms prescribed above, the subsequent terms of office of all members of the board of tax assessors shall be four years. Members of the board of tax assessors may be reappointed to successive terms. 
(e)  Any person appointed to replace a member who for any reason ceases to be a member of the board of tax assessors prior to the end of his or her term shall be appointed to serve the unexpired portion of such term, and such person shall be eligible for appointment to further terms. 
(93-RC-632, § 2, 12-1-93; Res. No. 06-0256, 2-15-06; Res. No. 06-0686, 6-21-06; Ord. No. 17-0176, 2-15-17; Ord. No. 18-0487, 8-15-18) 
Sec. 170-63. - Duties and responsibilities. 
Effective January 1, 1994, the Fulton County Board of Tax Assessors shall assume general responsibility in accordance and not inconsistent with Georgia law with respect to all assessments, appeals and equalization with respect to taxable property within Fulton County, including all activities necessarily relating to the completion of the 1993 Tax Digest, and the assumption of all responsibilities undertaken by Fulton County with respect to the contractual agreements relating to the assumption and transfer of employees of the City of Atlanta utilized by the joint board, and the transfer of certain assets used in connection therewith. The Fulton County Board of Tax Assessors shall further assume responsibility with respect to the assessment of properties on behalf of the City of Atlanta relating to taxable property within the City of Atlanta and DeKalb County, Georgia, as provided in that certain proposed agreements by and between the City of Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia. 
(93-RC-632, § 3, 12-1-93) 
Sec. 170-64. - Officers, rules and procedures. 
The members of the Fulton County Board of Tax Assessors shall elect officers and adopt rules and procedures and receive compensation for their services as provided under Georgia law. 
(93-RC-632, § 4, 12-1-93) 
Sec. 170-65. - Offices, staff, finances. 
The Fulton County Board of Commissioners shall provide adequate office space at the Government Center, and employ sufficient staff and otherwise finance the operations of the Fulton County Board of Tax Assessors in the manner prescribed by Georgia law and in accordance with the budgetary laws of Fulton County. 
(93-RC-632, § 5, 12-1-93) 
Chapter 172 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; ordinances pertaining to telecommunications; ch. 76. 
State Law reference— Regulation of cable television systems by counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 172-1—172-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON CABLE TV SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., § 102-601 et seq. 

Sec. 172-31. - Established; composition; membership; functions. 
An advisory committee on cable TV service is hereby established. This advisory committee shall be composed of seven residents and the Clerk of Commissioners of Fulton County. Each member of the board of commissioners shall be entitled to select a member who shall serve on the committee for a one-year term. The committee shall be authorized to make recommendations to the board of commissioners as to matters of ongoing concern affecting the quality and extent of cable TV service in Fulton County, and shall further be authorized to review and make recommendations to the board of commissioners regarding citizens' complaints. 
(90-RM-148, 3-21-90) 
Sec. 172-32. - Additional members added; purpose. 
The board of commissioners hereby adds two additional members to the cable TV advisory committee, bringing the total membership to nine members. The additional two members shall be appointed by the board of commissioners to serve until the tasks of the cable TV advisory committee have been completed. 
(95-0471, 4-19-95) 
Sec. 172-33. - Quarterly meetings; reports; selection of officers; adoption of rules. 
The advisory committee shall meet quarterly, commencing April 1, 1990, and/or more frequently if the members of the advisory committee so determine. The advisory committee shall submit written reports to the board of commissioners after each meeting. The advisory committee shall be authorized to select officers from its members, and otherwise adopt rules for the conduct of its business. 
(90-RM-148, 3-21-90) 
Sec. 172-34. - Liaison between committee and board of commissioners. 
The county manager shall designate one of his staff to serve as a liaison between the advisory committee and the board of commissioners. 
(90-RM-148, 3-21-90) 
Secs. 172-35—172-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TOWERS AND ANTENNAS ON COUNTY PROPERTY 

Sec. 172-61. - Incorporation of recitals. 
The recitals set forth in the introductory language of Resolution Number 96-115 are true and correct and are incorporated in this article as if set forth herein. 
(96-1115, § 1, 10-16-96) 
Sec. 172-62. - Leasing county-owned property for telecommunications towers. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to establish general requirements for the leasing of real property owned by Fulton County for the siting of telecommunications towers and antennas. The board of commissioners finds that leasing county-owned property may: 
(1)  Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
(2)  Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites; 
(3)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where any potential adverse impact on the community is minimal; and 
(4)  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunication services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently. 
(b)  Subject to approval by the board of commissioners, a lease agreement entered into with a telecommunications provider shall generally make provision for the following: 
(1)  The telecommunications provider shall construct, own and maintain the tower at its own expense. The tower shall be a monopole design or an alternative tower structure, such as a manmade tree, clock tower, bell steeple, lightpole or similar alternative-design mounting structure that camouflages or conceals the presence of antennas or towers. 
(2)  The lease agreement shall, in a manner consistent with the applicable provisions of article XIX of the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County, provide for setbacks, specified fencing, or vegetative or other buffering, or any combination of the three, if Fulton County determines it necessary to make the tower structure less obtrusive to surrounding properties. 
(3)  Should Fulton County determine that the tower site is desirable for co-location of antennas of third party telecommunications providers, the lease agreement shall provide that any tower constructed by the telecommunications provider shall have space for multiple antennas. 
(4)  The telecommunications provider shall pay a customary rent which shall be recommended by Fulton County staff for all but the most unusual county-owned tower sites. The rent payable by the telecommunications provider shall be increased when either an additional use, or an additional antennas belonging to a third party provider, is added to the tower. 
(5)  Prior to execution of any lease agreement, the telecommunications provider shall submit to the Fulton County Data Processing Department a letter of intent to lease the applicable premises and a proposed preliminary site plan for the premises. County staff shall thereafter determine the terms and conditions of any lease agreement which it will recommend to the board of commissioners, and the telecommunications provider shall have 45 days after mailing to it of notification of such terms and conditions in order to accept or reject them. The telecommunications provider shall, within 60 days of execution of the lease agreement, provide to Fulton County a proposed site plan and a boundary survey of the leased premises, plus a survey of any parent tract which is five acres or less in size, if determined necessary by Fulton County staff. Fulton County shall have 30 days after receipt of the site plan and surveys to approve or reject the site plan and surveys. 
(6)  The telecommunications provider shall agree in advance to necessary changes to ingress and egress (at no cost to Fulton County) which may be later reasonably required by Fulton County. If a change in ingress and egress is necessary, Fulton County, where reasonably possible, will avoid the relocation of underground utilities which have been installed by the telecommunications provider. The telecommunications provider shall be guaranteed appropriate ingress and egress for the life of the lease agreement. 
(7)  The lease agreement shall provide for removal of the tower and accessory structures by the telecommunications provider at the close of the lease or in the case of abandonment of the tower. The agreement shall further require that the lessee secure an environmental audit at the close of the final lease term, share the results with Fulton County, and remediate any hazardous waste or toxic substance contamination caused by the telecommunications provider or its assignees, subtenants or licensees. Fulton County may require a performance bond or other security for the purpose of securing the performance of the terms and conditions of the lease agreement. 
(8)  The lease agreement shall not prevent the sale of the subject property by Fulton County, provided that any such sale shall be subject to the lease agreement. 
(9)  Prior to preparation of the lease agreement, Fulton County staff shall ensure that the proposed use of county property for a telecommunications tower will not conflict with any utilization of the property by Fulton County. 
(10)  Prior to preparation of the lease agreement, the need of county departments for space on the proposed tower shall be evaluated by Fulton County. 
(11)  The lease agreement shall provide for indemnification of Fulton County, including indemnification for damages or claims resulting from the lessee's use or production of hazardous or toxic materials on the premises, in a form satisfactory to the county attorney. 
(12)  The lease agreement shall require the lessee to comply with all applicable federal, state and local ordinances, regulations and statutes, and shall provide that Fulton County may review and approve all construction plans and specifications prior to construction of the tower. All such construction plans and specifications shall be sealed and countersigned by a registered professional engineer. 
(13)  The lease agreement shall require insurance, including, but not limited to, coverage for public liability and property damage, in a form and amount satisfactory to Fulton County. 
(14)  Fulton County shall have the right to approve the assignment of the lease agreement to any third party, and shall further have the right to require a performance bond or other security from any such third party for the purpose of securing the performance of the terms and conditions of the lease agreement, including removal of the tower and related facilities and structures at the conclusion of the lease. At a minimum, Fulton County shall reserve the right to approve any additional use or antenna proposed to be located on the telecommunications tower, and the third party owner of any additional antenna shall provide for indemnification of Fulton County, including indemnification for damages or claims resulting from the antenna owner's use or production of hazardous or toxic materials on the premises, in a form satisfactory to the county attorney. If the tower is designed to accommodate multiple antennas, the lessee shall be required to notify Fulton County within 20 days of any third-party offer made to the lessee for co-location of an antenna upon the tower. 
(15)  Duly-notice public hearings shall be held by the planning commission and the board of commissioners prior to approval of any tower lease agreement. The planning commission shall review the proposed lease for compliance with paragraph (b) of this section relating to setbacks, fencing, and buffering, and shall report its recommendation to the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Notice of the public hearings shall be given at least 15 days prior to the date of the planning commission hearing and shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation. The development services department shall post a sign in a conspicuous location on each public street frontage of the subject property, and shall give notice by regular mail to all property owners within 300 feet of the boundaries of the property who appear on the tax records of Fulton County. The published notice shall contain the times, places, and purpose of the planning commission and board of commissioners hearings and the location of the property. Notice shall not be considered inadequate if the signs are removed or mail not delivered. 
(96-1115, § 2, 10-16-96; Res. of 5-7-97, § 2) 
Sec. 172-63. - Leasing county-owned buildings and structures for location of telecommunications antennas. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to establish general requirements for the leasing of space on buildings and structures owned by Fulton County for the siting of telecommunications antennas. The board of commissioners finds that leasing space on county-owned buildings and structures for installation of telecommunications antennas may: 
(1)  Encourage the location of antennas in such a way as to minimize the total number of telecommunications towers throughout the community; 
(2)  Encourage users of antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; and 
(3)  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunication services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently. 
(b)  Subject to approval by the board of commissioners, a lease agreement entered into with a telecommunications provider for installation of a telecommunications antenna on a county-owned building or structure shall generally make provision for the following: 
(1)  The telecommunications provider shall pay a customary rent which shall be recommended by Fulton County staff for all but the most unusual county-owned buildings or structures. 
(2)  The telecommunications provider shall be guaranteed appropriate access to the antenna for the life of the lease agreement, but the provider shall agree in advance to necessary changes in access (at no cost to Fulton County) which may be later reasonably required by Fulton County. 
(3)  The lease agreement shall provide for removal of the antenna and accessory structures by the telecommunications provider at the close of the lease or in the case of abandonment of the antenna. 
(4)  The lease agreement shall not prevent the sale of the building or structure by Fulton County, provided that any such sale shall be subject to the lease agreement. 
(5)  The lease agreement shall provide that Fulton County may reasonably require relocation of the antenna to another location upon the building or structure, or relocation to a different county-owned building or structure. 
(6)  Prior to preparation of the lease agreement, Fulton County staff shall ensure that the proposed installation of a telecommunications antenna will not conflict with any utilization of the building or structure by Fulton County. 
(7)  The lease agreement shall provide for indemnification of Fulton County in a form satisfactorily to the county attorney. 
(8)  The lease agreement shall require the lessee to comply with all applicable federal, state, and local ordinances, regulations and statutes, and shall provide that Fulton County may review and approve any plans and specifications prior to installation of the antenna. 
(9)  The lease agreement shall require insurance, including, but not limited to, coverage for public liability and property damage, in a form and amount satisfactory to Fulton County. 
(10)  If determined by the county attorney to be more advantageous to Fulton County, the agreement shall instead be in the form of a license or easement, provided that the foregoing guidelines are adhered to. 
(11)  A duly-noticed public hearing shall be held by the board of commissioners prior to approval of any lease agreement for installation of a telecommunications antenna on a county-owned building or structure. 
(c)  Notice of the public hearing shall be given at least 15 days prior to the date of the board of commissioners hearing and shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation. The development services department shall post a sign in a conspicuous location on each public street frontage of the subject property, and shall give notice by regular mail to all property owners within 300 feet of the boundaries of the property who appear on the tax records of Fulton County. The published notice shall contain the time, place, and purpose of the board of commissioners hearing and the location of the property. Notice shall not be considered inadequate if the signs are removed or mail not delivered. 
(96-1115, 10-16-96); Res. of 5-7-97, § 3) 
Sec. 172-64. - Assistance to telecommunications providers whose zoning applications are recommended for denial. 
The department of planning and economic development, the department of development services, and the telecommunications division of the department of information technology shall provide technical and other alternate site location assistance to any telecommunications provider whose zoning application for approval of siting of a telecommunications tower is recommended for denial by the department of development services. 
It is the intent of the board of commissioners that such staff assistance in location of an appropriate telecommunications tower site be provided to the applicant prior to any final hearing before the board of commissioners of the telecommunications tower application. 
(Res. No. 97-1602, 12-17-97) 
Chapter 174 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Moving of buildings, § 14-176 et seq.; ordinances pertaining to roads and bridges, ch. 62; ordinances pertaining to traffic and vehicles, ch. 78; vehicles for hire, ch. 86; resolutions pertaining to roads and bridges, ch. 162. 
State Law reference— Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

Sec. 174-1. - Handicapped parking enforcement officer; appointment; application; training; powers and duties; limitations. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-228, the Chief of Police of Fulton County, or his designee, shall have the authority to appoint any person who is a citizen of the United States, is of good moral character, has not previously been convicted of a felony, and is a handicapped person as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-221(5) to enforce the provisions of the handicapped parking laws within unincorporated Fulton County. 
(b)  Each person appointed pursuant to this section shall complete an application, satisfactorily complete a course of training on handicapped parking enforcement, and take and subscribe an oath of office as prescribed by the chief of police, or his designee. 
(c)  The application required by subsection (b) of this section shall show the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the immediate members of the family of the applicant, the applicant's marital status, and shall have attached thereto a photograph of the applicant, together with sufficient fingerprints to definitely identify the applicant. The chief of police, or his designee, is specifically authorized to require additional information from the applicant. Upon receipt of the application required by subsection (b) of this section, the chief of police, or his designee, shall cause a complete and thorough investigation to be made of the applicant to determine his moral, physical, and mental qualifications. 
(d)  Any person appointed and sworn shall have the power to serve citations for violations or failure to comply with handicapped parking laws of the unincorporated areas of Fulton County, in the same manner as any law enforcement officer of the state or any county or municipality of the state subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  No person so appointed shall be deemed a peace officer, nor an employee of the state, county, or municipality, nor receive any compensation therefrom. 
(2)  No appointed person shall be required to complete training as a peace officer. 
(3)  No appointed person shall have the power or duty to enforce other traffic or criminal laws. 
(4)  No person shall possess and carry firearms and other weapons for the purpose of enforcing handicapped parking laws; provided, however, that a person so licensed to carry a handgun will not be in violation of this section. 
(5)  No authorized person shall be entitled to any indemnification from the state, county, or municipality for any injury or property damage sustained as a result of enforcement activities. Each authorized person shall specifically acknowledge that such person has no rights to any claim of injury or property damage resulting from handicap enforcement activities. 
(6)  No government, agency, department, or officer of the state, county, or municipality shall be liable or accountable for any act or omission of any person appointed to issue parking citations. Each authorized person shall specifically hold harmless Fulton County, its employees, and agents from liability for any such act or omission by such authorized person. 
(Res. of 12-7-88, §§ 1—4) 
Sec. 174-2. - No idling of county vehicles. 
No county employee or contractor shall stop or stand any county-owned or -leased motor vehicle and idle for more than 15 minutes. This limitation shall not apply under the following conditions: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles, construction and maintenance vehicles where the engines must run to perform the needed work; 
(2)  The vehicle is forced to remain motionless because of traffic conditions; 
(3)  If the ambient temperature is less than 32 degrees Fahrenheit, in which case idling shall be limited to a maximum of 25 minutes; or 
(4)  The vehicle's primary source of energy during idling is natural gas (CNG) or electricity. 
(Res. No. 11-0255, 3-16-11) 
Chapter 178 - UTILITIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; technical codes, § 14-36 et seq.; ordinances pertaining to environment, ch. 26; solid waste, ch. 70; ordinances pertaining to utilities, ch. 82; private inspection of water and sewer lines, § 106-6. 
Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts reference— Utilities, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); authority to provide for the development storage and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7). 

Sec. 178-1. - Pretreatment capacity and service provided to requesting industries on reimbursable basis. 
The public works department shall have the authority to provide pretreatment capacity and service to requesting industries so long as this capacity and service is provided on a 100 percent reimbursable basis. 
(96-0266, 2-21-96) 
APPENDIX A - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are the county's subdivision regulations, Agenda Item No. 03-0536, adopted July 2, 2003, effective August 4, 2003, inclusive of all amendments through Amd. No. 15-0643, adopted November 4, 2015. For a complete derivation of the subdivision regulations prior to the amendments of November 4, 2015, see the Code Comparative Table. Amendments subsequent to November 4, 2015 are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicated that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statute and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Laws has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; ordinances pertaining to planning, ch. 58; subdivision regulations generally, § 58-116; impact fees, § 58-161 et seq.; resolutions pertaining to buildings and building regulations, ch. 106; resolutions pertaining to planning, ch. 158; zoning ordinance, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE AND PURPOSE 

1.1. - Title. 
The title of these regulations shall be known as "The Subdivision Regulations of Fulton County, Georgia." 
1.2. - Purpose. 
These rules and regulations are intended to serve the following purposes, among others: 
A.  To protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of Fulton County. 
B.  To encourage economically sound and stable land developments. 
C.  To assure the adequate provision of roads, access, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments in conformance with public improvement standards and regulations of Fulton County, Georgia. 
D.  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access, connectivity to other developments or facilities, and efficient circulation (both vehicular and pedestrian) in new land developments. 
E.  To assure the provision of needed open space and building sites in new land developments through dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, environmental, green space, bikeways and pedestrian trails, and other public purposes. 
F.  To assure equitable handling of all requests for the subdivision of land by providing uniform procedures and standards for the subdivider. 
ARTICLE II. - AUTHORITY AND APPLICATION 
2.1.  The subdivision rules and regulations are adopted under the authority of Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV and Article IX, Section II, Paragraph I of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
2.2.  Any subdivider of land within unincorporated Fulton County shall submit to the director of the department a minor or final plat. Minor and final plats must be properly filed and conform to all requirements set forth in these regulations. (Amended 9-2-15) 
2.3.  No person, firm, corporation, owner, agent or subdivider shall sell, transfer or agree to sell any subdivided land without the minor or final plat of that subdivision having been confirmed by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County. 
2.4.  No subdivider shall proceed with any construction work on the proposed subdivision, including clearing, grading or grubbing, before obtaining the appropriate approvals and permits. 
2.5.  No land shall be dedicated, opened, extended or accepted as a public street or for any other public purpose before obtaining final approval from the director and confirmation by the board of commissioners. The approval shall be entered in writing on the final plat by the director. Any subdivider of property for public purpose (other than roads) shall be transferred by deed. 
2.6.  No building permit shall be issued within the unincorporated area of Fulton County unless legal access is provided to a public street or a private street approved under the terms of these rules and regulations. 
2.7.  In residential subdivisions, building permits shall not be issued for any approved minor plat or final plat until after the approval of the director and the board of commissioners' confirmation. (Amended 9-2-15) 
2.8.  The divisions of property by court order, including but not limited to judgments of foreclosure or consolidation and disbursement of existing lots by deed or other recorded instruments, shall not be considered a subdivision for purposes of, and shall not obviate the necessity for compliance with, these regulations. 
2.9.  The subdivider shall be allowed one building permit for a model home for each 15 lots located in the proposed subdivision, provided the subdivider provides an agreement to install improvements form and a cash surety equal to 125 percent of the cost for the remaining infrastructure improvements, based on written estimates by the design professional for the project. Notwithstanding the permitted rate for model homes, the maximum number of building permits for model homes to be allowed in any one subdivision shall not exceed ten. 
The following shall apply for lots where model homes are allowed: 
A.  The lots shall be located within 300 feet of an active fire hydrant; 
B.  Main sewer and water lines for these lots shall be installed by the developer and be subject to review and approval by Fulton County, installation of these lines shall take place prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy; and 
C.  The lots shall have a minimum of 20-foot-wide fire access road extending from a paved public street to within 100 feet of the proposed structure. 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS 

3.1. - Purpose. 
Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, tenth edition. 
3.2. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have the meaning herein indicated. 
Alley or service drive. A minor, permanent vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting a street. 
Amenity. The common areas, structures, buildings, improvements, and facilities that are owned or maintained by the homeowners association in a common interest within a subdivision. Amenities include, but are not limited to, recreation facilities, parking areas, driveways, private roads, common landscapes, drainage structures, and other common property. (Added 6-20-07) 
Bike paths. These paths serve to separate bicycle riders from vehicle and pedestrian traffic. Bike paths can meander through wooded areas, traverse the edge of open areas, and may (in many instances) parallel existing roadways or walks. 
Block. A parcel of land or lots entirely surrounded by public or private roads, other than alleys. 
Board of commissioners. The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, Georgia. 
Buildable area. That portion of a lot where buildings and specified structures may be located after all minimum yards, buffers, landscape strips, and other setbacks have been met. 
Building setback line. A graphic representation of the required minimum horizontal distance between a building and the related front, side, or rear property lines which establish the minimum space to be provided between the building and property line(s). 
Crosswalk. A right-of-way dedicated to public use, four feet or more in width, that crosses a street and furnishes a specific area for pedestrian movements at an intersection. 
Cul-de-sac. A street having only one connection to another street and being permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
Cul-de-sac, temporary. A street having one end open to traffic and being temporarily terminated by a vehicular turn-around. This temporary termination is to provide connectivity to future developments. 
Department. Department of planning and community services or future name as adopted by the board of commissioners. (Added 9-2-15) 
Developer. Any person or legal entity undertaking development. 
Director. Director of the department. (Added 9-2-15) 
Driveway, access or shared. A paved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles, and allowing access from a street to a building, other structure or facility. 
Driveway, single-family residential, access or shared (private drive). A paved or unpaved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles which allows access from a street to a building, other structure, or facility for no more than three single-family residential lots. 
Easement. A grant by the property owner for use by the grantee of a portion of land for specified purposes. 
Board of health. The Fulton County Board of Health or future name as adopted by the board of commissioners or authorized representative thereof. (Amended 5-16-18) 
Homeowner's association. A corporation formed for the purpose of exercising the powers of the members of any common interest community or subdivision. (Added 6-20-07) 
Land disturbance permit. An official authorization issued by the department, allowing defoliation or alteration of a site or the commencement of any construction activities, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Lot. The basic lawful unit of land, identifiable by a single deed established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. In determining the area and dimension of a lot, no part of right-of-way of a road, crosswalk or required buffer per zoning condition or the zoning resolution may be included. (Amended 9-2-15) 
Lot, corner. A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot, double/multiple frontage. A lot other than a corner lot abutting two or more streets that may or may not intersect at that lot. 
Lot, minimum lot size. The smallest permissible lot area established by the zoning resolution or conditions of zoning. 
Open space. Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. (Added 9-2-15) 
Pavement. (1) A created surface, such as brick, stone, concrete, or asphalt, placed on the land to facilitate passage, gravel shall not be considered pavement; (2) that part of a street having an improved surface. (Added 9-2-15) 
Plat. A map indicating the subdivision or re-subdivision of land, intended to be filed for recording. 
Plat, final. A finished drawing of a subdivision that provides a complete and accurate depiction of all legal and engineering information required by the subdivision regulations. Certification for recording and ratification of the director's approval by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners is required. 
Plat, minor. A finished drawing of a single family residential subdivision of no more than three lots that, at the time of subdivision, does not necessarily, but may involve a land disturbance permit, new roads, the extension of a utility or other municipal facility and depicts all legal and engineering information required by these subdivision regulations. (Amended 9-2-15) 
Public works department. The Fulton Public Works Department or future name as adopted by the board of commissioners or authorized representative thereof. (Added 9-2-15) 
Right-of-Way Dedication and Reservation Plan. An element of the Fulton County Comprehensive Transportation Plan maintained by the department of public works which includes guidelines and/or procedures for the dedication and reservation of rights-of-way along public roadways. (Amended 9-2-15) 
Standard details. Illustrative minimum standards for land development activities authorized under the land development regulations of the county. These standards shall not supersede more restrictive prudent design requirements or good engineering practices as applied to specific situations on a case-by-case basis. All construction shall meet or exceed the Fulton County minimum standards established by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
Street classifications. The classification of streets based on functions, from high-traffic arterial roads to low traffic residential streets. The following are definitions intended to distinguish between different street classifications. All roadways are classified per the Georgia Department of Transportation: 
A.  Freeway. A multi-lane roadway that has full access control and separation of directional traffic. Freeways accommodate large volumes of high speed traffic and provide efficient movement of vehicular traffic for interstate and major through travel. 
B.  Arterial. A functional classification for a street or highway that provides the highest level of service at the greatest speed for the longest uninterrupted distance, with some degree of access control. 
C.  Principal arterial. A roadway that has partial or no access control, and is primarily used for fast or large volumes of traffic. Emphasis is placed on mobility rather than access to adjacent land. 
D.  Minor arterial. A roadway that has partial or no access control and is primarily used for inter-connectivity of principal arterials and placing more emphasis on access to adjacent land over mobility. 
E.  Collector. A roadway that has partial or no access control and has more emphasis on access to adjacent land over mobility than arterials. The primary purpose is to distribute trips to and from the arterial system and allow access to the local roads. 
F.  Local. Any roadway that has no access control, and places strong emphasis on access to adjacent land over mobility while service to through traffic is discouraged. 
G.  Full access control. A street or highway to which owner or occupants abutting land have complete right of access. 
H.  No access control. A street or highway to which owner or occupants abutting land have no right of access. 
I.  Partial/limited access control. A street or highway to which owner or occupants abutting land have little or no right of access. 
J.  Frontage street. A road that typically runs parallel to a partial access controlled roadway, a full access controlled facility, or a railroad. Frontage roads provide public access to the adjacent parcels, help control access to the major facility, and/or maintain circulation of traffic on each side of the major facility. 
Street, residential. The following definitions are intended to distinguish between different categories of streets internal to residential subdivisions: 
A.  Major subdivision street. A local road internal to a subdivision which serves 50 or more housing units. These units do not have to be directly served by the major subdivision street. Major subdivision streets are roads that serve as collectors for the subdivision traffic. Any residential street which accesses a collector or arterial road shall be considered a major subdivision street for the first 300 feet regardless of housing unit service. 
B.  Minor subdivision street. A local road internal to a subdivision which serves fewer than 50 housing units and does not access a collector or arterial road. 
C.  Housing unit service. The number of housing units served by a street or collection of streets shall be the aggregate number of housing units provided, or potentially to be provided, with driveway access directly from the street(s) plus the number of units utilizing or potentially utilizing the street(s) for through traffic movements. Such calculations shall be made beginning and ending at the same street intersection. 
Stub-out road. A road having one end open to traffic and being temporarily terminated at the other. Stub-outs generally do not have a temporary vehicular turn-around. This temporary termination is to provide connectivity to future developments and may be constructed without curb and gutter provided such stub-out street meets the standards of the Fulton County Fire Department. 
Subdivider. Any property owner, person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, agent of property owner, or any other group or combination acting as a unit dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as herein defined 
Subdivision, residential and non-residential. Any division of a lot, tract or parcel, regardless of its existing or future use, into two or more lots, tracts or parcels. The term "subdivision" may mean the act or process of dividing property, except that, where appropriate to the context, the term "subdivision" may be used in reference to the aggregate of all lots held in common ownership at the time of subdivision. 
Traffic Mitigation Action Plan. A plan that studies and addresses the number of trips a subdivision will produce when such development results in the reduction of the level of service on any roadway currently functioning at "D" or worse in accordance with the County Transportation Standards. This plan shall include, but is not limited to, roadway improvements and other proposals such as providing transit access, transit use incentives, car/van pooling, bicycle path construction, off-site and internal sidewalk construction, and lunch trip reduction. Such plan shall mitigate the traffic impact in a manner that will show no negative impact on roads with level of service of "D" or worse. 
Trails, pedestrian or others. Extended and usually continuous strips of land established independently of other routes of travel and dedicated, through ownership or easement, to recreational travel including hiking, horseback riding, etc. 
Utility accommodations/guidelines and procedures. A county program maintained by the department of public works which includes installing, maintaining, repairing, operating, or using a pole line, buried cable, pipeline, or miscellaneous utility facility, and performing miscellaneous operations authorized by a utility permit. 
Utility permit. An official authorization issued by the department of public works, allowing alteration of land within the right-of-way for the commencement of any construction activities pertaining to utility installation or relocation. 
Zoning resolution. The Zoning Resolution of Fulton County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIREMENTS 

4.1. - Subdividing or recombining property. 
All proposals to subdivide combine or recombine parcels of land under the provision of these regulations shall be in compliance with the Fulton County Standard Procedures and Guidelines for Subdividing Property. 
4.1.1.  All final plats, replats and minor plats shall have the consent of the owners of all affected lots shown on said plat. Replats or new plats showing modifications to common areas shall require the consent of owners of all lots shown in the original final plat. 
4.1.2.  Proposals for the subdivision, combination or recombination of lawful previously platted lots or parcels, or portions thereof, shall be in compliance with the Fulton County Zoning Resolution, as amended. 
4.1.3.  If construction activity contemplated results in the disturbance of an area of 5,000 square feet or more, a land disturbance permit must be approved along with any building permit prior to construction. 
4.1.4.  Where a proposed lot fronts an existing public street, the subdivider shall improve the street along the lot's frontage to the applicable standards of these regulations and any standard details as determined by the director. 
4.1.5.  All slope, drainage and utility easements, as well as necessary right-of-way widths (as determined by the director) on an existing public street, paved or unpaved, shall be provided by the subdivider at no cost to Fulton County. 
4.1.6.  Each proposed lot shall comply with the requirements of the Fulton County Board of Health, whose certification of approval shall accompany the submission of the final plat to the director. 
4.1.7.  A minor plat proposal, as defined in Article III of these regulations, may be exempt from traffic and drainage studies and tree surveys, when an analysis is submitted and concludes that the development would have no negative impact on traffic or drainage. 
4.1.8.  Each lot created under the provisions of a minor plat shall not subsequently be re-subdivided pursuant to the provisions of a minor plat. 
4.1.9.  Standalone commercial and industrial parcels which do not have a legally recorded plat pursuant to these regulations and are subject to either: a zoning action; the land disturbance permit process; or a proposed change in the building footprint, shall be required to plat the parcel according to these regulations prior to the certificate of completion of a land disturbance permit or the issuance of a building permit. (Added 9-2-15) 
4.1.10.  For the division of land, after initial development of the property, the following standards shall also apply: 
A.  A proposed lot fronting an existing public street shall contain the necessary frontage required by the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. 
B.  The subdivider shall submit documentation of the necessary easements providing for access to a public street for proposed lots that front only on an existing, documented, paved private street or driveway. 
C.  All slope, drainage and utility easements, as well as necessary street rights-of-way (as determined by the director) shall be provided by the subdivider at no cost to Fulton County. 
(Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
4.2. - Process. 
4.2.1.  Land disturbance permit. (Amended 9-2-15) 
A.  An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued, except that the director is authorized to grant a maximum of two extensions of time not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
B.  Prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit, an indemnity agreement form must be filed by the subdivider subsequent to the subdivision of the property protecting Fulton County against the event that a developer should cease business activities. Said agreement shall cover infrastructure damage, repair and/or maintenance claims and liability arising out of drainage problems. The director, or his/her designee, is hereby authorized to execute such agreements on the behalf of the county. 
4.2.2.  Final plat. (Amended 9-2-15) 
A.  Whenever the provisions of these rules and regulations have been complied with, the subdivider may submit to the director an application for final plat pursuant to these regulations. All required infrastructure shall be completed and approved, or performance bonds for a portion of such improvements shall be filed in accordance with section 4.2.3.C. of this regulation. 
B.  The final plat shall be submitted and drawn to the specifications of the Georgia Plat Act and Standards of Fulton County. 
C.  Prior to approval or recording of a final plat, the following must be provided by the subdivider, or the designee thereof: 
1.  A Fulton County approved cash assurance in an amount equal to 125 percent of the cost of infrastructure improvements not yet in compliance. Said cash bond shall be maintained until the improvements have been approved by the county; 
2.  A Fulton County approved maintenance bond to ensure the viability of infrastructure improvements. Said maintenance bond shall be in effect for a period of 36 months from the date of issuance. At any time within three months of the expiration of said maintenance bond, or any extended maintenance bond, less than 75 percent of the total buildable lots as indicated on the final plat have been issued a certificate of occupancy, the director may require an extension of said maintenance bond for up to 12 months; (Amended 9-2-15) 
3.  An electronic format acceptable to the public works department containing data about the sanitary sewer and water systems where available; 
4.  A signed release of the project by the development inspector; and 
5.  A recorded deed to Fulton County for any dedicated space. 
D.  Having been certified by the director as compliant to these and other applicable regulations, the final plat shall be recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
E.  The final plat shall be considered approved at the time of the certification by the director. Upon receipt of the recorded plat by the department, the final plat shall be presented for confirmation to the board of commissioners at the next regularly scheduled meeting. In residential and non-residential subdivisions, building permits shall not be issued for any approved minor or final plat until the approval of the director and the receipt by the department of the final recorded plat for subsequent confirmation by the board of commissioners is complete. (Amended 9-2-15) 
F.  For a subdivision proposed or represented to have amenities, the plat for the initial phase of the development shall identify an area encompassing 25 percent of the proposed buildable lots with installed and approved infrastructure sufficient to fully support the houses or residential units proposed for construction in said area. Said area shall be clearly delineated on the plat as "not approved for construction or building permits". Only after Fulton County has issued the applicable certificate of occupancy for those areas or amenities requiring such a certificate and has otherwise approved those areas or amenities not requiring a certificate of occupancy, shall the final plat for said area be approved. For large multi-phased projects, the director shall have the discretion to shift the requirement to a later phase that upon completion achieves no more than 50 percent of the planned fully built out project. (Added 6-20-07) 
G.  Should the director not approve any subdivision plat, the basis for the denial shall be stated in writing to the applicant. The subdivider may file an appeal in accordance with Article XI of these regulations. 
4.2.3.  Homeowner's associations. (Added 6-20-07) 
A.  Where a subdivision includes an amenities package consisting of subdivision common areas, buildings, and/or structures for which the homeowner's association will assume maintenance and responsibility and/or where a homeowner's association shall be established to govern all community maintenance of property outside of all dwelling units including recreation facilities, parking, driveways, private roads, landscape materials, drainage structures, and other common property within a subdivision the following requirements, in addition to any other requirements established by this regulation or the Fulton County Zoning Ordinance, shall be met. 
B.  A prerequisite to transfer of the homeowner's association responsibilities to the resident membership shall require that not more than 60 days prior to the date of transfer of management control for the homeowner's association from the developer to the resident members of the subdivision, the homeowner's association shall request, and Fulton County shall perform, an inspection of the infrastructure, common areas and amenities to be maintained by the homeowner's association. The inspection shall identify those areas that do not meet Fulton County Standards. Prior to requesting the inspection, the homeowner's association shall have completed their own inspection(s) of the infrastructure, common areas and amenities and a subdivision common area checklist and certification, on a form provided by the department, that shall require the execution of the common area checklist and certification by the developer and design professionals certifying the sufficiency of these facilities. A copy of the checklist and certification shall be submitted to Fulton County with the request for inspection. Fulton County shall provide a report of inspection to the homeowner's association within three weeks of receiving the request. The developer shall correct and bear the cost of any substandard conditions identified by Fulton County prior to the transfer of management responsibilities from the homeowner's association to the resident membership. The certification shall be recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court prior to transfer of management responsibilities of the homeowner's association to the resident membership. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF THE LAND (Amended 9-2-15) 

5.1. - Suitability of the land. 
5.1.1.  Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, erosion, and deemed unsuitable for development in accordance with Fulton County standards shall not be platted for any use that may continue such conditions or increase danger to health, safety, life, or property unless steps are taken to eliminate the above-mentioned hazards. 
5.2. - Access. 
5.2.1.  Unless otherwise herein noted, every subdivision shall be served by publicly dedicated streets or private streets in accordance with the following: 
A.  The proposed streets shall meet Fulton County standards and regulations. 
B.  No road intended to be private is to be extended to serve property outside that development unless approved by the department. 
C.  In residential subdivisions, the private roads shall be maintained by a mandatory homeowners' association and documents of incorporation shall be submitted to the director for review and approval prior to the recording of the final plat. 
D.  The subdivider shall provide all necessary easements for ingress and egress for police, fire, emergency vehicles and all operating utilities. 
E.  The final plat of any subdivision that contains private streets shall clearly state that such streets are private streets. 
5.2.2.  When land is subdivided, created parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
5.2.3.  No subdivision shall be designed so as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land without current street access. 
5.2.4.  Lots may share access as stipulated herein. Lot frontage and access do not necessarily have to be along or front the same public street, if approved by the director. 
5.2.5.  The director shall have the right to encourage design of the subdivision in a manner that will: 
A.  Enhance traffic circulation and other community needs; 
B.  Encourage pedestrian traffic to schools, parks, existing and planned greenspace corridors, and neighborhood shopping centers; 
C.  Reduce impacts on streams and lakes; 
D.  Reduce unwanted noise, lights on neighboring lots; and 
E.  Discourage vehicular speeding on local streets. 
5.3. - Zoning and other regulations. 
5.3.1.  No subdivision shall be created or recorded that does not comply with the standards of the Fulton County Zoning Resolution and/or the approved conditions of zoning for the property. 
5.3.2.  Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions noted herein and those contained in zoning regulations, building codes, or other official regulations or resolutions, the most restrictive shall apply unless set forth in the conditions of zoning. 
5.3.3.  All proposed subdivisions shall comply with the County Stormwater Management Design Manual. 
5.4. - Modification. 
5.4.1.  Modifications of the provisions set forth in these regulations may be approved by the director when granting of such modification will not adversely affect the general public or nullify the intent of these regulations. 
5.4.2.  Should the director deny a request to modify in accordance with Section 5.4.1, the applicant may appeal the director's decision in accordance with Article XI of these regulations. 
ARTICLE VI. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE (Added 5-21-04; amended 8-5-15) 

6.1. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this ordinance to ensure preservation of open space within residential developments; provide flexibility to allow for creativity in developments; minimize the environmental and visual impacts of new development on critical natural resources and historically and culturally significant sites and structures; provide an interconnected network of permanent open space; encourage a more efficient form of development that consumes less open land and conforms to existing topography and natural features; reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation; enhance the community character; permit clustering of houses and structures which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility lines; encourage street design that controls traffic speeds and creates street inter-connectivity; and promote construction of convenient and accessible walking trails and bike paths both within a subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
6.2. - Applicability of regulations. 
The conservation subdivision option is available for single family detached residential developments in the following districts: AG-1, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-4A, R-5 and R-5A in unincorporated Fulton County south of the City of Atlanta (South Fulton). Compliance with all applicable Fulton County ordinances, regulations, or resolutions is required; however, when in conflict, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail. 
6.3. - Open space requirement. 
Each conservation subdivision shall provide a minimum of 40 percent of its total acreage as open space as defined in Article III. The open space shall be recorded on the final plat. Interconnectivity of all open space within a conservation subdivision shall be required. 
6.3.1.  Open space networks configuration. The minimum standards for open space networks are as follows: 
A.  The minimum width of any open space area is 25 feet. 
B.  All paths shall be a minimum of 20 feet from any property line except where interparcel access may be provided. 
C.  All open space networks shall provide connectivity to any common areas within the development and to any adjacent public places/rights-of-way. 
D.  Paths located in primary conservation areas shall be constructed of pervious materials. 
E.  Where path networks cross internal subdivision streets or public streets, access points shall be directly across from each other or as approved by the director. 
F.  Crossings and access points shall be clearly identified to pedestrians and motorists and may include traffic control devices, bridges and tunnels as approved by the director. 
6.4. - Open space and conservation areas. 
Open space shall be designated as either primary conservation areas or secondary conservation areas and shall be configured to create or maintain a network of open space. 
6.4.1.  Primary conservation areas. Primary conservation areas form the core of the open space to be protected. Active recreation areas are prohibited in primary conservation areas unless approved by the director. Primary conservation areas, as defined by this ordinance, include the following: 
A.  Cemeteries; 
B.  Habitats for endangered or threatened species as defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources; 
C.  Wetlands identified by the National Wetlands Inventory maps prepared by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the County Soil Survey prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Natural Resources Conservation Service, or a certified wetlands delineation using data from the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers; 
D.  Alluvial soils identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and 100-year floodplain; 
E.  Lakes (natural and man made), rivers, streams, existing ponds, stormwater management ponds/facilities designed in accordance with the Fulton County Subdivision Regulations, creeks, including but not limited to blue line tributaries and state waters; 
F.  Riparian zones equal to any required stream buffers and improvement setbacks; 
G.  Existing slopes greater than 25 percent on average with a site area greater than 5,000 square feet identified as part of a site analysis conducted by a registered engineer, land surveyor or landscape architect and calculated using topographic maps from the Fulton County GIS system or from a topographic survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor. 
6.4.2.  Value of primary conservation areas. Because primary conservation areas are either protected or sensitive environmental areas, only 50 percent of the acreage of a primary conservation area may be counted as open space. 
6.4.3.  Secondary conservation areas. Secondary conservation areas consist of undeveloped (unconstrained) but buildable land and protected (constrained) lands. Secondary conservation areas, as defined by this ordinance, include the following: 
A.  Farmlands (fields, pastures, meadows); 
B.  Woodlands and buffers except riparian buffers; 
C.  Historic and/or archaeological sites as identified by the Fulton County Historic Resources Survey; 
D.  Passive recreation areas, public and private, to include pedestrian, bicycle and equestrian trails, picnic areas, community commons or greens, and similar areas; 
E.  Active recreation areas and facilities, public and private, to include parks as identified by the Parks and Recreation Master Plan, playing fields, and playgrounds. Recreation areas with impervious surfaces (e.g., tennis courts, basketball courts and pools) and golf courses shall be excluded. 
6.4.4.  Value of secondary conservation areas. With the exception of active recreation areas and facilities, 100 percent of secondary conservation areas may be counted as open space. Because active recreation areas are cleared and graded and therefore reduce natural resources and wildlife habitats, only 50 percent of active recreation areas and facilities may be counted as open space. 
6.5. - Open space protection. 
The required open space areas shall be protected in perpetuity from further development or unauthorized use by a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant (per O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60(c)). Fulton County reserves the right to enforce all restrictive covenants and conservation easements. 
6.5.1.  Requirements for conservation easements. The conservation easement(s) shall: 
A.  Clearly delineate primary and secondary conservation areas; 
B.  Describe the features of the subject property that should be permanently protected in accordance with the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; 
C.  List the parties, that is, the owner(s) of the property, the holder of the easement and Fulton County as a third party beneficiary with rights to enforce the easement if Fulton County is not the holder; 
D.  Specify how the easement may be transferred as in the case of a homeowners association dissolving; 
E.  Clearly identify the boundaries of the property by survey and a metes and bounds legal description; 
F.  Clearly list restrictions; 
G.  Provide for inspections of the property by the owner, the holder of the easement and Fulton County; 
H.  Provide for maintenance of the property; 
I.  Be shown on the final plat and duly recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit; and 
J.  Provide for amendments only with the express written permission of the property owner(s), the holder of the easement and Fulton County. Amendments to the easement shall be filed with the director and shall be recorded in Superior Court. 
6.5.2.  Requirements for permanent restrictive covenants. The permanent restrictive covenant(s) shall: 
A.  Clearly delineate primary and secondary conservation areas; 
B.  Describe the features of the subject property that should be permanently protected; 
C.  Clearly identify the boundaries of the property by survey and a metes and bounds legal description; 
D.  Clearly list restrictions; 
E.  Provide for inspections of the property by Fulton County; 
F.  Provide for maintenance of the property; 
G.  Be shown on the final plat and duly recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit; and 
H.  Provide for amendments only with the express written permission of the property owner(s) and Fulton County. Amendments to the covenant shall be filed with the director and shall be recorded in Superior Court. 
6.6. - Maintenance of open space. 
Open space may be maintained and/or improved through reforestation, pasture management, buffer replantings, stream bank protection and wetlands management or by other means as approved by the director. 
6.7. - Ownership of open space. 
All open space shall be permanently protected and held in fee simple interest by a qualified conservation organization as defined in the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. 44-10-1 et seq., or a homeowners association established in accordance with the Georgia Property Owners Association Act, O.C.G.A. 44-3-220 et seq., or a land trust, or Fulton County. If accepted by the county, the property must be in accordance with the provisions herein. 
6.7.1.  Ownership of open space by a homeowners association. Open space that is owned by a homeowners association is subject to the following: 
A.  Prior to the approval of the final plat, the developer of a conservation subdivision shall submit to the director a description of the homeowners association, including by-laws, and methods for maintaining the open space. 
B.  Membership of each lot owner in the conservation subdivision shall be mandatory. 
C.  The homeowners association shall be responsible for maintenance, insurance, and taxes on the open space. 
D.  The homeowners association shall not be dissolved before providing the appropriate documentation to transfer conservation easements. 
E.  Any transfer of conservation easements is subject to the approval of the director. 
6.8. - Conservation subdivision density. 
The maximum number of lots shall be based upon 80 percent of the net buildable area's density allowed by zoning, with net buildable area defined as the total acreage minus primary conservation areas. Density bonuses are allowed in accordance with section 6.9. 
6.9. - Conservation subdivision density bonuses. 
The number of lots in a conservation subdivision may exceed the number of lots as specified in section 6.9 with one or more of the following bonus options: 
A.  A density increase is permitted when more than 40 percent of the total acreage of the project is designated as permanent, protected open space. For each additional whole acre, greater than 40 percent, additional lots or units may be developed as follows: 

 
B.  In lieu of providing additional open space over 40 percent in the development, the applicant may purchase, in fee simple, additional land in unincorporated Fulton County within one mile of the development comprised of primary and/or secondary conservation areas. The density increase within the development shall be based on the same criteria as in section 6.9.A. As with conservation areas within a development, protected open space, purchased in fee simple outside a development, shall also be protected in perpetuity from further development or unauthorized use by a conservation easement held by Fulton County or other conservation organization, land trust, or homeowners association. 
C.  Dedication of land for a public use, excluding roads and utility easements, shall entitle an owner to an additional unit per acre of dedicated land as detailed in section 6.9.A. Prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit, dedications of land for public use shall be approved by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners or the Fulton County Board of Education if for school purposes, based upon recommendations of existing and future recreation and park plans, comprehensive plans, school board plans and the county's Capital Improvements Program. 
D.  At no time shall the number of lots exceed 95 percent of the net buildable area's density allowed by zoning. 
6.10. - Lot requirements. 
The minimum lot size in any project shall be 4,000 square feet. The total number of lots may not exceed the number of lots that could otherwise be developed under the existing zoning except with the allowable density bonuses described herein. 
6.11. - Minimum lot frontage. 
The minimum lot frontage on a right-of-way shall be 20 feet. 
6.12. - Setbacks and building separation requirements. 
Setbacks and building separations are subject to the provisions of the Standard Building Code. 
6.13. - Buffer requirements. 
A minimum 50-foot wide natural buffer, undisturbed except for approved access and utility crossings and replantings where sparsely vegetated, plus a ten-foot improvement setback, shall be provided along all property lines adjacent to AG-1 zoned properties, residentially zoned or used properties, and existing roads, or as may be approved by the director. 
6.14. - Street standards. 
Conservation subdivision streets shall be designed based on the following standards: 
A.  Streets should follow existing contours with a minimum of cut and fill and shall be designed for interparcel access. 
B.  The maximum length for an interior block is 600 linear feet with the total perimeter length not to exceed 1,680 linear feet. The total area of an interior block shall not exceed 3.30 acres. 
C.  All newly created lots should derive access from internal subdivision streets. 
6.15. - Zoning modification requirements. 
Proposed conservation subdivisions for properties where zoning is conditional shall require an approved modification to the site plan and other conditions pertinent to use, number of lots and density, as applicable, prior to the approval of a final plat. 
6.16. - Tax assessment of open space. 
Once a legal instrument for permanent protection has been placed upon the open space, the Fulton County Tax Assessor shall reassess the value of the open space. 
ARTICLE VII. - CEDAR GROVE AGRICULTURAL SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE (Added 12-5-07) 

7.1. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this ordinance to ensure preservation of open space within residential developments; provide flexibility to allow for creativity in developments; minimize the environmental and visual impacts of new development on critical natural resources and historically and culturally significant sites and structures; provide an interconnected network of permanent open space; encourage a more efficient form of development that consumes less open land and conforms to existing topography and natural features; reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation; enhance the community character; permit clustering of houses and structures which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility lines; encourage street design that controls traffic speeds and creates street inter-connectivity; and promote construction of convenient and accessible walking trails and bike paths both within a subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
7.2. - Applicability of regulations. 
The following subdivision requirements are for residential developments in all zoning districts in that portion of unincorporated Fulton County bordered to the west by the Chattahoochee River, to the south by Coweta County, and to the east by the Cascade Palmetto Highway (SR 154) except for villages, hamlets and minor subdivisions. Compliance with all applicable Fulton County ordinances, regulations, or resolutions is required; however, when in conflict, the most restrictive provisions shall prevail. 
7.3. - Open space requirement. 
Each subdivision shall provide a minimum of 40 percent of its total acreage as open space as defined in Article III. The open space shall be recorded on the final plat. Interconnectivity of all open space within a subdivision shall be required. (Amended 9-2-15) 
7.3.1.  Open space networks configuration. The minimum standards for open space networks are as follows: 
A.  The minimum width of any open space area is 25 feet. 
B.  All paths shall be a minimum of 20 feet from any property line except where interparcel access may be provided. 
C.  All open space networks shall provide connectivity to any common areas within the development and to any adjacent public places, paths or rights-of-way. 
D.  Paths located in primary conservation areas should be constructed of pervious materials. 
E.  Where path networks cross internal subdivision streets or public streets, access points should be directly across from each other. 
F.  Crossings and access points shall be clearly identified to pedestrians and motorists and may include traffic control devices, bridges and tunnels. 
7.4. - Open space and conservation areas. 
Open space shall be designated as either primary conservation areas or secondary conservation areas and shall be configured to create or maintain a network of open space. 
7.4.1.  Primary conservation areas. Primary conservation areas form the core of the open space to be protected. Active recreation areas are prohibited in primary conservation areas. Primary conservation areas, as defined by this ordinance, include the following: 
A.  Cemeteries; 
B.  Habitats for endangered or threatened species as defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources; 
C.  Wetlands identified by the National Wetlands Inventory maps prepared by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the County Soil Survey prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Natural Resources Conservation Service, or a certified wetlands delineation using data from the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers; 
D.  Alluvial soils identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and 100-year floodplain; 
E.  Lakes (natural and man-made), rivers, streams, existing ponds, stormwater management ponds/facilities designed in accordance with the Fulton County Subdivision Regulations, creeks, including but not limited to blue line tributaries and state waters; 
F.  Riparian zones equal to any required stream buffers and improvement setbacks; 
G.  Existing slopes greater than 25 percent on average with a site area greater than 5,000 square feet identified as part of a site analysis conducted by a registered engineer, land surveyor or landscape architect and calculated using topographic maps from the Fulton County GIS system or from a topographic survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor. 
7.4.2.  Value of primary conservation areas. Because primary conservation areas are either protected or sensitive environmental areas, only 50 percent of the acreage of a primary conservation area may be counted as open space. 
7.4.3.  Secondary conservation areas. Secondary conservation areas consist of undeveloped (unconstrained) but buildable land and protected (constrained) lands. Secondary conservation areas, as defined by this ordinance, include the following: 
A.  Farmlands (fields, pastures, meadows); 
B.  Woodlands and buffers except riparian buffers; 
C.  Historic and/or archaeological sites as identified by the Fulton County Historic Resources Survey; 
D.  Passive recreation areas, public and private, to include pedestrian, bicycle and equestrian trails, picnic areas, community commons or greens, and similar areas; 
E.  Existing active recreation areas and facilities, public and private, to include parks as identified by the Parks and Recreation Master Plan, playing fields, and playgrounds. Recreation areas with impervious surfaces (e.g., tennis courts, basketball courts and pools) and golf courses shall be excluded. 
F.  Alternative wastewater treatment facilities as approved by the department. 
7.4.4.  Value of secondary conservation areas. With the exception of new active recreation areas and facilities, 100 percent of secondary conservation areas may be counted as open space. Because new active recreation areas may be cleared and graded and therefore reduce natural resources and wildlife habitats, only 50 percent of new active recreation areas and facilities may be counted as open space. 
7.5. - Open space protection. 
The required open space areas shall be protected in perpetuity from further development or unauthorized use by a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant (per O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60(c)). Fulton County reserves the right to enforce all restrictive covenants and conservation easements. 
7.5.1.  Requirements for conservation easements. The conservation easement(s) shall: 
A.  Clearly delineate primary and secondary conservation areas; 
B.  Describe the features of the subject property that should be permanently protected in accordance with the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; 
C.  List the parties, that is, the owner(s) of the property, the holder of the easement and Fulton County as a third party beneficiary with rights to enforce the easement if Fulton County is not the holder; 
D.  Specify how the easement may be transferred as in the case of the dissolution of a homeowners association; 
E.  Clearly identify the boundaries of the property by survey and a metes and bounds legal description; 
F.  Clearly list restrictions; 
G.  Provide for inspections of the property by the owner, the holder of the easement and Fulton County; 
H.  Provide for maintenance of the property; 
I.  Be shown on the final plat and duly recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court, prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit; and 
J.  Provide for amendments only with the express written permission of the property owner(s), the holder of the easement and Fulton County. Amendments to the easement shall be filed and shall be recorded in Superior Court. 
7.5.2.  Requirements for permanent restrictive covenants. The permanent restrictive covenant(s) shall: 
A.  Clearly delineate primary and secondary conservation areas; 
B.  Describe the features of the subject property that should be permanently protected; 
C.  Clearly identify the boundaries of the property by survey and a metes and bounds legal description; 
D.  Clearly list restrictions; 
E.  Provide for inspections of the property by Fulton County; 
F.  Provide for maintenance of the property; 
G.  Be shown on the final plat and duly recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court, and prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit; and 
H.  Provide for amendments only with the express written permission of the property owner(s) and Fulton County. Amendments to the covenant shall be filed with the director and shall be recorded in Superior Court. 
7.6. - Maintenance of open space. 
Open space may be maintained and/or improved through reforestation, pasture management, buffer replantings, stream bank protection and wetlands management or by other acceptable means. 
7.7. - Ownership of open space. 
A.  All open space shall be permanently protected and held in fee simple interest by a qualified conservation organization as defined in the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq., or a homeowners association established in accordance with the Georgia Property Owners Association Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220 et seq., or a land trust, or Fulton County. If accepted by the county, the property must be in accordance with the provisions herein. 
B.  Individual lots of five or more acres may provide open space on individual lots through a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant. Primary and secondary conservation area calculations shall not apply. 
7.7.1.  Ownership of open space by a homeowners association. Open space that is owned by a homeowners association is subject to the following: 
A.  Prior to the approval of the final plat, the developer of a subdivision shall submit a description of the homeowners association, including by-laws, and methods for maintaining the open space. 
B.  Membership of each lot owner in the subdivision shall be mandatory. 
C.  The homeowners association shall be responsible for maintenance, insurance, and taxes on the open space. 
D.  The homeowners association shall not be dissolved before providing the appropriate documentation to transfer conservation easements and restrictive covenants. 
E.  Any transfer of conservation easements and restrictive covenants is subject to the approval of the director. 
7.8. - Density. 
The maximum number of lots shall be based upon the density allowed by zoning for the area defined as the total acreage minus primary conservation areas. When 60 percent or more of the total acreage is protected in perpetuity as open space, density may be calculated based upon the total acreage of the property. 
7.9. - Lot requirements. 
The minimum lot size in any single family detached residential subdivision shall be 4,000 square feet. 
7.10. - Minimum lot frontage. 
The minimum lot frontage on a right-of-way shall be 20 feet. 
7.11. - Setbacks and building separation requirements. 
Setbacks and building separations are subject to the provisions of the Standard Building Code. 
7.12. - Street standards. 
Subdivision streets shall be designed based on the following standards: 
A.  Streets should follow existing contours with a minimum of cut and fill and shall be designed for interparcel access. 
B.  All newly created lots should derive access from internal subdivision streets. 
C.  All subdivisions shall provide street interconnectivity with adjacent properties where possible. 
7.13. - Zoning modification requirements. 
Proposed subdivisions for properties where zoning is conditional shall require an approved modification to the site plan and other conditions pertinent to use, lot size, number of lots and density, as applicable, prior to the approval of a final plat. 
7.14. - Tax assessment of open space. 
Once a legal instrument for permanent protection has been placed upon the open space, the Fulton County Tax Assessor shall reassess the value of the open space. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

8.1. - [Design standards observed in all plats.] 
All applicable design standards as set forth in this article and the standard details shall be observed in all plats as approved by the director. 
8.2. - Streets. 
All streets, public or private, shall be constructed to the construction standards of the Fulton County Department of Public Works. 
8.2.1.  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall consider their relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, and appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. (Amended 9-2-15) 
8.2.2.  Streets serving residential subdivisions shall be arranged and designed such that their use for through traffic will be discouraged. 
8.2.3.  Where a subdivision contains a dead-end street or stub-street other than a cul-de-sac, the subdivider shall provide a temporary cul-de-sac within the right-of-way. Where a temporary cul-de-sac is required, the subdivider shall be responsible for maintaining and for the construction of the final street connection or turn-around as required. 
8.2.4.  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed street classified as a collector street or higher, the director may require frontage streets. Double frontage lots may be required to have screening and no access easements along lot lines fronting on arterials or collector streets. Deep lots with rear service drives, or other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties, may be required to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
8.2.5.  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, or a full or partial access control facility right-of-way, the director may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of the right-of-way. 
8.2.6.  Street right-of-way widths for major streets shall be dedicated as specified in the County Comprehensive Transportation Plan and the Right-of-Way Dedication and Reservation Plan. Other street right-of-way widths shall be not less than as specified under Section 8.5. 
8.2.7.  Where a subdivision abuts an existing street, the subdivider shall dedicate additional right-of-way on the existing streets to meet the requirements as set forth in the Right-of-Way Dedication and Reservation Plan. 
8.2.8.  New road grades should be as follows: 
A.  Collector: Eight percent maximum. 
B.  Major subdivision street: 12 percent maximum. 
C.  Minor subdivision street: 14 percent maximum; grades exceeding 12 percent shall not exceed a length of 250 feet. 
8.2.9.  Interparcel access shall be provided to adjacent properties upon determination by the director that such access is in the best interest of the public health, safety, or welfare. In residential subdivisions, where private streets are proposed, the director may require a public street for interparcel connection purposes; the director may also require a shared access. 
8.2.10.  Alignment. 
A.  Minimum vertical. All local roads with 25 mph designs shall be connected by vertical crest curves of a minimum length not less than 12 times the algebraic difference between the rates of grade, expressed in feet per hundred. All local roads with a 25 mph design speed shall be connected by vertical sag curves of minimum length not less than 26 times the algebraic difference between the rates of grade, expressed in feet per hundred. In any case, the sight distance shall meet the minimum requirements of this article. 
1.  In proposed approaches of new streets to intersections with existing streets, there shall be a suitable leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding three percent and for a distance of not less than 50 feet as measured from the back of the curb of the intersecting street. 
2.  In approaches to intersections internal to residential subdivisions, there shall be a suitable leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding five percent and for a distance of not less than 50 feet as measured from the center point of the intersection. 
B.  Minimum horizontal—Radii of centerline curvature. 
1.  Major subdivision street designed for 35 mph: 200 feet. 
2.  Other major subdivision streets: 100 feet. 
3.  Minor subdivision streets: 100 feet. 
C.  Tangents. Between reverse curves, there shall be not less than the following minimum tangents: 
1.  Major subdivision streets designed for 35 mph: 100 feet. 
2.  Other major subdivision streets: 50 feet. 
3.  Minor subdivision streets (where there is no super-elevation): 50 feet. 
D.  Intersection visibility requirements. Roadways and their intersections shall be designed such that proper sight distance is maintained. Minimum sight distance shall be determined by the operating speed of the road as determined by the department of public works. Intersection sight distance shall be no less than the following: 
280 feet for 25 mph 
335 feet for 30 mph 
390 feet for 35 mph 
445 feet for 40 mph 
500 feet for 45 mph 
610 feet for 55 mph 
1.  Minimum horizontal visibility shall be measured on centerline. 
2.  When a proposed curb cut intersects an existing roadway, the minimum visibility shall be provided as follows: 
a.  When measuring in the horizontal plane, intersection sight distance is determined with the following assumptions. The driver's eye location is to be assumed at the center line of the exiting lane of the proposed curb cut behind the stop bar. The object location is to be assumed at the centerline of the closest oncoming lane for each direction. 
b.  When measuring in the vertical plane, intersection sight distance is determined with an assumed height of driver's eye and an assumed height of object of 3.5 feet. 
c.  When measuring in either plane, the line of sight must remain in the proposed dedicated right-of-way, unless sufficient easements, maintenance agreements, indemnifications agreements are provided, or additional right-of-way is dedicated. 
E.  Stopping sight distance visibility requirements. Roadways and their intersections shall be designed such that proper stopping sight distance is maintained. Minimum sight distance shall be determined by the design speed of the proposed road as determined by the department of public works. 
Stopping sight distance along a roadway shall be no less than the following: 
155 feet for 25 mph 
200 feet for 30 mph 
250 feet for 35 mph 
1.  Minimum vertical visibility for stopping sight distance along the roadway shall be determined by measuring between two points of which the height of the driver's eye shall be assumed at 3.5 feet to an assumed object which is 2.0 feet in height. The line of sight must remain within the proposed dedicated right-of-way, unless sufficient easements, maintenance agreements, and indemnification agreements are provided, or additional right-of-way is dedicated. 
2.  Minimum horizontal visibility for stopping sight distance shall be measured on centerline. 
8.2.11.  Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle less than 80 degrees. Detailed designs of intersections shall be required to include all striping and pedestrian crosswalks. 
Pedestrian crossing signs and signals may be required 
8.2.12.  The curb line radius at street intersections shall parallel the right-of-way radius. 
8.2.13.  Right-of-way radius. The right-of-way radius at street intersections shall be at least 20 feet, and where the angle of intersection is less than 90 degrees, the department of public works may require a greater radius. 
8.2.14.  The centerline offsets on streets internal to a residential subdivision shall not be less than 200 feet. The centerline offsets for all other streets and curb cuts providing access to developments shall not be less than 300 feet, except greater centerline offsets may be required by the director. 
8.2.15.  Cul-de-sac streets shall be designed so that the maximum desirable length shall be 600 feet. 
8.3. - Blocks. 
8.3.1.  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
A.  Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
B.  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions unless a planned unit development is contemplated; 
C.  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; and 
D.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
8.3.2.  Residential blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots, except where fronting on streets classified as a collector street or higher or prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property. The director may require and/or approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
8.4. - Lots. 
8.4.1.  The size, shape, arrangement, orientation of every lot shall be subject to approval of the director for the type of development and use contemplated. Proposed internal lot lines (not on the street side) shall not be curved. 
8.4.2.  Every lot shall conform to the dimension, area, and size requirements of the zoning resolution and/or conditions of zoning. 
A.  On any development, prior to obtaining a building permit, the person requesting the permit or the landowner must file a current survey of the property sealed by a registered land surveyor/engineer providing such information as shall be required by the department. (Added 9-2-15) 
B.  Prior to pouring footings/slab, it shall be the responsibility of the builder or developer to accurately and clearly flag all pin corner boundaries and building setback lines prior to any footings inspection. (Added 9-2-15) 
C.  Should the builder or developer place any footing/slab within five feet of an applicable building setback line or setback as conditioned by a condition of zoning, the builder or developer shall provide a footing (foundation) survey sealed by a registered land surveyor showing the footing location and the outer perimeter of the proposed structure. Prior to the footings/slab inspection and pouring of the footings/slab, it shall be the responsibility of the registered land surveyor to accurately and clearly flag the footing/slab location and the outer perimeter of the proposed structure. (Added 9-2-15) 
D.  The failure to provide such a footing/slab survey shall be a primary consideration by the board of zoning appeals in whether or not to grant any future variance request. (Added 9-2-15) 
8.4.3.  Lots not served by a public sewer or community sanitary sewage system and/or public water shall meet the dimension and area requirements of the board of health. 
8.4.4.  Double frontage lots shall be prohibited, except as approved by the director provided that such lots are essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography, orientation, and property size. A planted screen may be required along lot lines abutting a traffic artery or other use that would have potential negative impact. 
8.4.5.  The creation of remnant lots that are below minimum standards shall be prohibited unless such lots are designated as common area on the final plat and maintained by the homeowners' association or some other entity approved by Fulton County. 
8.4.6.  Each lot shall have direct access to an abutting, existing public street or to a street contained within the proposed subdivision. A connection through an approved private drive may be permitted by the director. 
8.4.7.  The subdividing of land adjacent to or surrounding an existing or proposed lake where lots abutting the lake shall be drawn to the centerlines of the lake or identified as a common area, maintained by the homeowner's association. 
8.4.8.  Any lot located on a gravel road shall contain a minimum of three acres and meet all required development standards of the applicable zoning district. (Added 9-2-15) 
8.4.9.  No portion of any residentially zoned lot shall be allowed to be part of a buffer or landscape strip required by conditions of zoning; the Fulton County Zoning Resolution or the Fulton County Tree Preservation Ordinance. (Added 9-2-15) 
(Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
8.5. - Subdivision streets. 
8.5.1.  The minimum requirements for major subdivision streets shall be as follows: 
A.  Right-of-way: 50 feet. 
B.  Pavement width: 24 feet back of curb to back of curb. 
C.  Cul-de-sac: 
R.O.W.: 50-foot radius to back of curb. (Amended 9-2-15) 
D.  Sidewalks: In accordance with section 9.2.4. 
E.  Street trees: If required by the director, installed on both sides at a spacing approved by the county arborist. 
8.5.2.  The minimum requirements for minor subdivision streets shall be as follows: 
A.  Right-of-way: 44 feet. 
B.  Pavement width: 22 feet back of curb to back of curb. 
C.  Cul-de-sac: 
R.O.W.: 42-foot radius to back of curb. (Amended 9-2-15) 
D.  Sidewalks: In accordance with section 9.2.4. 
E.  Street trees: If required by the director, installed on both sides at a spacing approved by the county arborist. For streets other than mentioned in sections 8.5.1 and 8.5.2, the director shall determine the required cross section. 
8.5.3.  All residential subdivision streets shall be designed for a maximum of 25 mph. The director may require that subdivision streets that will not provide direct residential access be designed for up to 35 mph. 
8.5.4.  Where streets are longer than 600 feet, traffic calming devices may be required. Said traffic calming efforts may include green space, islands, residential roundabouts, and/or other traffic calming devices as approved by the director. (Amended 9-2-15) 
8.6. - Gated communities. 
8.6.1.  Gates installed in subdivisions with more than one lot shall comply with the following: 
A.  Plan approval and a permit shall be obtained prior to installing any gates. The permit fee shall be calculated in accordance with applicable building permit fees. Gates shall not prohibit public access to dedicated areas as defined within the regulations. 
B.  No gate shall be installed within the county's right-of-way. 
C.  The gate shall not create a dead end street without first installing a cul-de-sac conforming to the county's standards on a dead end street exceeding 250 feet in length. 
D.  Gates shall provide for stacking distance, turnaround and emergency vehicle access as required by the county. 
E.  Gate permits may be denied based on traffic conditions, interconnectivity needs, and when not in compliance with adopted guidelines. 
8.7. - Traffic control signs for new subdivisions. (Added 8-18-04) 
8.7.1.  The following signs shall be installed in all new subdivisions as applicable: 
A.  Stop signs (R1-1): The STOP sign shall be installed on the right side of the approach to which it applies. Stop lines, when used to supplement a stop sign, should be located at the point where the road user should stop. Where there is a marked crosswalk at the intersection, the stop sign should be installed in advance of the crosswalk line nearest to the approaching traffic. 
Stop signs should be installed in a manner that minimizes the numbers of vehicles having to stop. In most cases, the street carrying the lowest volume of traffic should be stopped. A stop sign should not be installed on the major street unless justified by a traffic engineering study as recommended by the MUTCD. If two streets with relatively equal volumes and/or characteristics intersect, typically the direction that conflicts the most with established pedestrian crossing activity or school walking routes or the direction that has the longest distance of uninterrupted flow approaching the intersection should be stopped. 
No all-way stops may be installed in a new subdivision without the permission of the director of the department of public works. 
B.  Yield signs (R1-2): These should be installed when there are right turns at an intersection that are channelized apart from the through and/or left turn movements with a striped or raised island. In addition, yield signs should be installed on each approach of a roundabout. 
C.  Right lane must turn right signs (R3-7R): One of these signs should be installed 25 feet from the back of the deceleration lane of the development, if applicable. 
D.  Speed limit signs (R2-1): These should indicate a 25 mph speed limit for streets internal to residential subdivisions, unless it is a local collector road for the development, and then it should be no higher than 35 mph. Only one speed limit sign shall be installed at each project entrance. 
E.  Street names signs (D3): Corner mounted street name signs must be installed at every intersection and must conform to Fulton County Ordinance 01-0582 and standards designated by the department of public works. Overhead street name signs shall be installed where a subdivision street intersects at any traffic signal instead of corner mounted signs. 
F.  Roundabout signs: Roundabouts must be signed and marked per Fulton County standards. This includes yield signs for every approach, as well as an advance roundabout sign as established by the department of public works. The pavement marking shall include yield lines and channelization islands for each approach. 
G.  Other signs: Additional signs may be required as appropriate by the department of public works. 
H.  A sign and marking plan shall be submitted for approval prior to the installation of any signs. (Added 9-2-15) 
I.  Retro reflective sheeting use on all roadway signs must meet current county standards. (Added 9-2-15) 
J.  Signpost and anchors must meet current county standards. (Added 9-2-15) 
K.  Street name signs shall be single faced and installed in accordance with county standards. No caps and crosses are allowed. (Added 9-2-15) 
L.  Custom signpost and sign frames are allowed; however a custom sign permit must be obtained from the department of public works prior to installation. (Added 9-2-15) 
ARTICLE IX. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

9.1. - Public utilities. 
Every subdivider shall be required to install or have installed the appropriate public utility and improvements referred to in this article as found in the following documents: 
A.  Department of Public Works - Standard Plans. 
B.  Fulton County Comprehensive Storm Drainage Design and Criteria Manual. 
C.  Sewer Regulations of Fulton County. 
D.  Fulton County Tree Preservation Ordinance. 
E.  Utility Accommodation - Guidelines and Procedures. 
9.2. - Streets. 
9.2.1.  Street grading. 
A.  All street rights-of-way shall be cleared and graded to standards of the public works department. 
B.  Finished grades shall be at levels approved in accordance with the standard plans. 
C.  When property adjacent to the street is not owned by the subdivider, he/she shall obtain the necessary easements of sloping banks before submitting for a land disturbance permit (LDP). 
9.2.2.  Street paving/striping. 
A.  All street paving widths shall be in conformance with standards set forth in Article VIII. 
B.  Street pavement shall be installed according to standards adopted by the board of commissioners. 
C.  Striping shall be installed according to standards adopted by the board of commissioners. 
D.  On all roads adjacent to a development, the adjacent lane of the road must be widened to provide 12-foot lanes. The road must be repaved throughout the subdivision frontage and along the roadway improvements, whichever is greater. The road must either be resurfaced from edge to edge, or it must be milled and repaved to the centerline. 
No more than one inch vertical drop may be allowed at the pavement/gutter joint and a maximum of six inches of exposed curb must be retained. 
E.  No striping should be provided on subdivision streets designed for 25 mph, except for stop bars and 50 feet of double yellow centerlines, to be located at each entrance to the subdivision. 
9.2.3.  Curbs and gutters. 
A.  Curbs and gutters shall be installed on all streets except noted herein. Installations shall be in accordance with standards adopted by the board of commissioners. 
B.  Curbs and gutters shall be of a straight or standard construction on one or both sides where sidewalks are required or as approved by the director. 
C.  Curbs and gutters may be waived by the director if the sidewalk along the same portion of the roadway is set back a minimum of 12 feet from the edge of pavement and drainage is adequately addressed. Set backs greater than 12 feet may be required by the director. 
9.2.4.  Sidewalks. (Amended 9-2-15) 
A.  Introduction. 
1.  Purpose. The objective is to provide facilities that ensure safe pedestrian movement in Fulton County. 
2.  Intent. Sidewalks are intended to provide a safe pedestrian connection between the subdivision/development and nearby destinations. Pedestrians consist of children walking to and from school and neighborhood activities, as well as adults walking to and from neighborhood shopping and transit stops. In addition to the need for sidewalks for circulation and safety, sidewalks can be important elements in the recreational system of this community. They can also serve as walking and hiking trails. 
B.  Single family, two family and townhouse residential zoned development (R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-4A, R-5, R-5A, R-6, CUP, NUP, TR zoning districts and inactive zoning districts SUB A, SUB B, and SUB C). 
1.  Single family residential subdivisions shall be required to place a sidewalk along both sides of all internal publicly dedicated streets. 
2.  Single family residential subdivisions shall be required to place a sidewalk along the development's frontage on external publicly dedicated streets. 
C.  AG-1 (Agricultural) zoned residential development. 
1.  Single family residential subdivisions shall be required to place a sidewalk along one side of all internal publicly dedicated streets. 
2.  Single family residential subdivisions shall be required to place a sidewalk along the development's frontage on external publicly dedicated streets or as may be approved by the director. 
3.  Non-residential development shall provide sidewalks as may be approved by the director. 
D.  Multi-family zoned development (A and A-L zoning districts and inactive zoning districts A-1 and A-O). Provide sidewalks along all external publicly dedicated streets for which the overall development has frontage. 
E.  Non-residential zoned development (O-I, C-1 and C-2 zoning districts). Provide sidewalks along all external publicly dedicated streets for which the overall development has frontage. 
F.  MIX (mixed use) zoned development. 
1.  For entirely residential components of the mixed use development, provide sidewalks in a location and width consistent with the proposed residential use as required by subsection B. 
2.  Where residential is located above non-residential uses or where the proposed development is entirely non-residential, sidewalks shall be required along both sides of all publicly dedicated roads where the mixed use or non-residential components are developed or as may be approved by the director. 
G.  Industrial zoned developments (M-1A, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts). 
1.  For developments with publicly dedicated internal streets, a sidewalk shall be provided along one side of the street. 
2.  For developments with frontage on an external publicly dedicated street(s), a sidewalk shall be required along the entire frontage. 
H.  General specifications. 
1.  Sidewalks shall be provided by the subdivider at no cost to the county. 
2.  Sidewalks for residential development shall have a minimum width of five feet wide as indicated by a note on the minor or final plat. 
3.  Sidewalks along publicly dedicated streets shall be located within the public right-of-way and shall be set off the street curb by a minimum two-foot wide landscape strip. 
4.  For non-residential developments, sidewalks shall be a minimum of six (6) feet wide. 
5.  Where sidewalks are required, they must be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
6.  Prior to the recording of the final plat, 125 percent of the cost of the internal sidewalks for any residential subdivision must be performance bonded. This bond will be released when all sidewalks required pursuant to the development have been constructed and approved. All required sidewalks must be provided for any residential subdivision within two years of the recording of the final plat, otherwise, the bond is forfeited and the county will use the funds to complete the sidewalk construction. 
[I.]  Exception. 
1.  When a developer requests to install (within a development) sidewalks that are not required by the subdivision regulations and at no cost to the county, the director may approve a reduction in width to a width of no less than four feet. 
2.  For developments located adjacent to streets identified on the South Fulton Trail Net Plan, the director may consider the location of the multi-purpose trail in lieu of any required sidewalk. 
9.2.5.  Street trees. 
A.  Street trees and other shrubbery that may be retained or planted shall not obstruct sight distances and shall be subject to the approval of the director. 
B.  Street trees that may be required by the director along the street(s) shall be of species approved as street trees in the Fulton County Tree Preservation Ordinance. 
9.2.6.  Sign installation policy for new developments. Each applicant of a land disturbance permit will be responsible for the installation of the street and traffic control signs in the new subdivisions. 
The signs must be installed per the most recent edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) with relation to the installation height, size, distance from curb, etc. In general, signs should be installed at least seven feet from the shoulder to the bottom of the sign, and at least two feet from the face of curb to the closest edge of the sign, or as required by the MUTCD or otherwise designated by the department of public works. The sign size, materials, and mounting equipment should conform to standards adopted by the department of public works. 
The identification of the number and location of signs shall be performed by the department as part of the land disturbance permit process. The minimum sign installation shall conform to the standards set forth in Article VIII, Design Standards, section 8.7. 
The sign inspection shall be done by the department. The signs should be performance bonded at the same time as the pavement, at a cost of $100.00 per sign or as established by the director of the department. The bond or a portion thereof will be forfeited if the county at the time of final inspection has to replace a defective or non-conforming sign. 
9.3. - Water supply. 
9.3.1.  Where a public water supply is within 300 feet, the subdivider shall install or have installed a system of water mains and connect to such supply. The installation of mains and connections to each lot shall be installed prior to the paving of the street, if possible. (Amended 9-2-15) 
9.3.2.  Where a public water supply is not available, each lot in a subdivision shall be furnished with a water supply system approved by the health department. 
9.3.3.  A separate water service connection shall be provided for each residential unit. Meters shall be located as specified by the utility company. 
9.3.4.  Fire hydrants shall be located and set in accordance with City of Atlanta Water Works Specifications. In addition, the fire hydrant shall be serviced by the following: 
A.  Not less than an eight-inch diameter main if the system is looped. 
B.  Not less than an eight-inch diameter main if the system is not looped or the fire hydrant is installed on a dead end main exceeding 300 feet in length. 
C.  In no case shall dead end main(s) exceed 600 feet in length for main sizes less than ten inches. 
9.3.5.  When required by the public works department, a reuse water irrigation distribution system to each lot shall be installed. This system shall consist of an eight-inch diameter ductile iron pipe identified as "non-potable water," painted purple in accordance with standard pipe identification schedules, and installed on the south or east shoulder of the right-of-way limit. All pipes and appurtenances must be in accordance with the Fulton County Water Reuse Standards. Each property owner requesting an irrigation meter shall connect to the reuse water main, if activated. 
9.3.6.  If a subdivision is re-platted and the originally platted lots configuration is changed after the water service lines have been installed, the water system shall be modified to properly serve each lot in accordance with Fulton County water specifications. 
(Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
9.4. - Sanitary sewer management. 
9.4.1.  When public sanitary sewers are within 300 feet of the subdivision, the subdivider shall provide sanitary sewer services to each lot within the bounds of the subdivision. All street sewers serving lots in the subdivision shall be installed by the subdivider. A formula may be developed by the department of public works to provide for a sharing of the costs of sewer facilities needed to serve the subdivision and other subdivisions in the same drainage basin. 
9.4.2.  When, in the written opinion of the board of health and the department of public works, public sanitary sewer is not accessible, an alternate method of sewage disposal for each lot or a community sewerage disposal system may be used when in compliance with the standards of the board of health and Fulton County Sewer Regulations. 
9.4.3.  When the operation of a temporary sanitary sewer system requires land to be set aside for a disposal plant, the property owner shall give the county title to the property for as long as the plant is in operation. The title may carry a reversionary clause returning the property to the owner when the site is no longer necessary for the operation of the plant. 
9.4.4.  In a drainage basin which at time of plat application is scheduled for a public sewerage system, all subdivisions shall be provided with a temporary community sewerage disposal system as approved by the department of public works and the board of health. The system shall include permanent sewerage outfall lines plus a temporary treatment plant to be installed by the subdivider. 
Whenever the installation of a sanitary sewer is required, as provided by these rules and regulations, no new street shall be paved without the sewer being first installed in accordance with the requirements of the sewer specifications of the Fulton County Department of Public Works and the board of health and Fulton County Sewer Regulations. 
If a subdivision is re-platted and the originally platted lots configuration is changed after the sewer service lines have been installed, the sewer system shall be modified to properly serve each lot in accordance with Fulton County sewer specifications. 
(Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
9.5. - Stormwater provisions. 
9.5.1.  Stormwater management. 
A.  Engineering and construction on any land within the county shall be carried out in a manner as to maintain water quality and rate of run-off to protect neighboring persons and property from damage or loss resulting from excessive stormwater runoff, pollution, soil erosion, or deposition upon private property or public streets of water-transported silt and debris. 
1.  Plans shall be submitted for review by the department. These plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer or landscape architect, currently registered to practice in the State of Georgia, with stamp affixed. 
2.  The plans shall be accompanied by profiles of natural and proposed drainage ways, including storm pipes, cross-sections, drainage swales and downstream analysis. 
9.5.2.  Design for stormwater management. (Amended 9-2-15) 
A.  Grading and design plans for the land disturbance permit must include erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plans and hydrology study as required by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission Checklist, effective January 1 of the year submitted. The design criteria must follow: 
1.  The current authorization to discharge under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit GAR 100001, 100002 or 100003. 
2.  The current authorization to discharge under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit No. GAS 00117, Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). 
3.  The current Manual of Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (Green Book). 
4.  The current Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (Blue Book). 
5.  The current Fulton County Stormwater Management Design Manual. 
B.  In order to ensure full compliance with the approved construction plans, final plat approval will be withheld until as-built drawings, prepared by a professional engineer or landscape architect currently registered in Georgia, have been submitted and approved by the department in accordance with section 4.2.3. No occupancy permit shall be issued until released by the department. 
C.  The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the storm drainage facilities during grading, construction, and for a 36-month period following final plat approval. Maintenance will be construed to include preserving the enclosing walls or impounding embankment of the detention basin and permanent sedimentation ponds and security fences, in good conditions; ensuring structural soundness, functional adequacy, and freedom from sediment of all drainage structures; and rectifying any unforeseen erosion problems. 
9.5.3.  Detention/retention design. 
A.  General provisions. 
1.  Installation of properly functioning detention facilities, including outflow control devices, shall be the responsibility of the owner. If any control devices are damaged or destroyed during grading or construction, all processes shall cease until such devices are restored to their functioning capability. The owner, through application for grading or construction permits, accepts the responsibility of maintenance of the control devices. 
2.  When serving more than three lots, detention ponds, retention ponds, and water quality features (including all required access easements, landscape strips, and fences) shall be located on a separate parcel where no home can be constructed. This parcel shall be owned and maintained by the homeowners' association or the owners of the lots being served by this pond. The parcel shall have a minimum of 20 feet wide continuous access to a public or private road in a manner that allows access and maintenance of this parcel. In addition, this parcel will not be required to meet the normal lot standard. 
B.  Layout design standards. The ponds layout shall provide for the following minimums: (Amended 9-2-15) 
1.  A 20-foot graded access easement from the right-of-way to the pond; 
2.  A 20-foot landscape strip for screening purposes or as may be approved by the director; 
3.  A ten-foot access easement for maintenance or as may be approved by the director; and 
4.  A 6-foot high security fence with gate and lock. 
C.  Alternative design standards. Applicants are encouraged to carry out innovative detention/retention layout that is intended to make such facilities an attractive amenity or focal point to the subdivision. 
The director may approve the following alternative design standards in lieu of those in sections 9.5.3.A. and 9.5.3.B. 
1.  Such alternative design should provide for attractive layout and means for detaining/ retaining/moving water. 
2.  The design should follow the natural land forms around the perimeter of the basin. The basin should be shaped to emulate a naturally formed depression. 
3.  Redistributing soils from basin construction to create natural landforms around the perimeter of the basin is encouraged. These forms should be located strategically to filter views or redirect and soften the views from residential areas. 
4.  Side slopes of basins must not exceed one-foot vertical for every four-foot horizontal. Where possible, side slopes should be varied to imitate natural conditions. Associated natural landforms should have side slopes no greater than one-foot vertical for every three-foot horizontal to accommodate lawn maintenance equipment. Varied slopes will be encouraged. 
5.  The applicant should consider the use of plant materials that naturally grow in the area. Trees and shrubs should be grouped in informal patterns to emulate the natural environment. The intent is to soften the views of these basins. 
9.5.4.  Storm drain system stenciling/identification. 
A.  All residential subdivision and commercial entity storm drainage structures or facilities (catch basins, storm sewer inlets, culverts, impoundment facilities, man holes, and other facilities that convey stormwater run-offs) shall be properly identified. Each drainage structure shall be identified with the use of durable and reusable Mylar stencils (stencils will not be provided by the county) that measure 20 inches × 30 inches with two-inch lettering and an environmentally formulated, water base, but soluble striping paint (color: blue). The message on the stencil shall read: 
"DUMP NO WASTE"  (picture of a trout)  "DRAINS TO STREAM" 
9.5.5.  Sanitary and storm sewer easement. 
A.  All permanent easements shall be 20 feet in width. When access for maintenance purposes is required, the maximum longitudinal slope along the easement shall be 30 percent at grade in steepest direction. 
B.  No fill shall be placed on a sanitary or storm sewer easement without approval by the director of public works. All sanitary manholes must extend to the ground surface. All easements terminating on a parcel shall extend to the property line. 
C.  No retaining wall, building, pole, sign or other vertical structure shall be constructed in sanitary and storm sewer easements, including vehicular access easements around structures, without approval from the director. No fence shall be placed across sanitary or storm sewer easements without gates to which the department of public works has full access. No planting shall take place in a sanitary or storm sewer easement that will impede vehicular access along the easement or endanger the pipeline. No surface water shall be impounded on a sanitary sewer easement. No other pipeline or utility shall be placed in a sanitary or storm sewer easement without approval by the director of public works. 
D.  Each lot or parcel of land in a subdivision shall have a separate sewer connection terminating at the easement limit or right-of-way limit with a vertical clean-out pipe. No connection of the public sewer system shall be made except at a sewer connection approved by the director of public works. 
E.  No surface water, ground water, storm drain, gutter, downspout, or other conveyance of surface water or ground water shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer. 
9.6. - Plans and construction. 
9.6.1.  No sanitary sewer shall be accepted by the county without an as-built drawing showing the horizontal and vertical alignment of the sewer system, the locations of all manholes, sewer connections, piping materials, required easement limits and junctions, and property lines. This should be provided in the form of plans, profiles, and plats; when possible, an electronic copy of the required data (compatible with the Fulton County Geographical Information System) should be submitted. 
9.6.2.  No storm sewer shall be accepted by the county without an as-built drawing showing the horizontal and vertical alignment of the sewer system; the locations of all manholes, junctions, detention ponds, retention ponds, and sewer system outfalls discharging into ditches or creeks; sewer connections, piping materials, required easement limits; and property lines. This information shall be provided in the form of plans, profiles, details, sections and plats and when possible in an electronic form compatible with the Fulton County Geographical Information System and the applicable department of public works data base. 
9.6.3.  In the case of single family residential subdivisions, by written application, the owner may request that Fulton County assume partial maintenance responsibility of drainage facilities, effective after the expiration of the initial maintenance 15 months. Within 60 days after receipt of such application, the director shall respond in writing to the owner/applicant. Such response shall set forth additional terms and conditions for acceptance. However, maintenance by Fulton County shall be limited to ensuring the functional adequacy of such drainage structures. Maintenance responsibility shall remain partially with the homeowners' association unless and until, and only to the extent that, the homeowners' association is expressly relieved of such responsibility pursuant to and in accordance with a written instrument signed by the director. Appropriate easements shall be executed and recorded pursuant to this paragraph. For all other types of development, responsibility for maintenance of storm sewer system and detention ponds, including but not limited to, periodic silt removal to maintain functional integrity, will remain the responsibility of the owner. Maintenance responsibility shall constitute an obligation running with the land and shall be binding upon the owner's executors, administrators, heirs, successors, and successors-in-title. 
The owner/developer shall provide stabilization, including vegetation, and installation of security fences for safety purposes at detention facilities, as prescribed, prior to approval of the final plat by the director. 
9.6.4.  Any single-family detached home which involves less than 10,000 square feet of cleared area or all impervious surface areas combined and is in excess of 2,000 feet from the Chattahoochee River, shall be exempted from the provisions of a hydrology study. In no such case, however, shall grading involve over 25 percent of the total land area. Sites within 2,000 feet of the Chattahoochee River shall be developed in accordance with the Atlanta Regional Commission's vulnerability analysis, as determined by the director. 
9.6.5.  All engineering and construction, regardless of whether such engineering or construction is being accomplished on public land or on public easements, shall meet the minimum requirements of these regulations. 
9.7. - Monuments and iron pipes. 
Permanent monuments shall be accurately set and established to tie with the county GIS monuments or as required by the director. 
The monuments shall consist of two two-inch iron pipes, 16 inches in length, or T bars, 24 inches in length, or other approved materials. The monuments shall be set so that the top of pipe shall be six inches above the ground level, unless otherwise approved by the department of public works. 
The accurate location, material, and size of all existing monuments shall be shown, on the final plat, as well as the future location of monuments to be placed after street improvements have been completed. 
Iron pipes at least one-half inch by 16 inches shall be used and shall be set two inches above the finished grade. 
9.8. - Underground utilities. 
9.8.1.  All existing and proposed utilities, including all electrical, telephone, television and other communication lines, both main and service connections, serving or having capacity of 69 KV or less, abutting or located within a requested land disturbance area shall be installed underground in a manner approved by the applicable utility provider and in compliance with Fulton County's right-of-way and erosion control regulations, if applicable. 
9.8.2.  Lots that abut existing easements or public rights-of-way where overhead electrical or telephone distribution supply lines and service connection have previously been installed may be supplied with electric and telephone service from those overhead lines, but the service connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed underground. Should a road widening or an extension of service, or other such conditions occur as a result of the subdivision and necessitate the replacement or relocation of such utilities, such replacement or relocation shall be underground. 
9.8.3.  Contractors or developers of subdivisions shall: 
A.  Submit drawings of the subdivision layout showing locations of underground electrical cable, transformers, and other related fixtures, in accordance with the standard plans. These drawings must be approved by the county before installation of the underground utility and before a building permit can be issued. 
B.  Pay all cost for poles, fixtures, or any related items of materials necessary for the installation to the utility company. 
C.  Submit proof of payment for complete installation. 
D.  Have an agreement with the appropriate power company for complete maintenance of all installations and provide proof of payment. 
9.8.4.  Street lights and pedestrian lighting. 
A.  Street lights and pedestrian lights shall be provided by the developers of all new subdivisions. 
At the time of and as a requirement of submission of a final plat, the developer shall: 
1.  Submit a drawing(s) of the subdivision's layout showing locations of street lights and required pedestrian lights. This drawing must be approved by the director prior to obtaining any building permit within the subdivision. The layout shall be shown on the land disturbance permit. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the county and by the utility company which shall be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities. 
Street light fixtures shall be mounted 30 feet above the ground and shall have appropriate arm length to place the light over the street. No arm shall be less than five feet long. Post top luminaries may be permitted when approved by Fulton County providing same are in compliance with the requirements of the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. Fixtures shall be located no more than 300 feet apart and at least one light shall be located at each street intersection within the subdivision. When a subdivision is located in a zoning overlay district, light standards shall comply with requirements of the overlay district. Pedestrian lights shall be installed as required by the overlay district or the specific zoning case. 
2.  Pay all costs for standards/poles, fixtures and any other related items or material necessary for installation. 
3.  Submit proof of payment for complete installation to the director. 
4.  Submit a copy of an executed agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all installations. 
B.  When street lighting is requested by existing residents, these residents shall: 
1.  Submit a petition to the Fulton County Department of Public Works from the residents affected showing a 90 percent support for the request. The affected residents shall be all residents whose properties are located, in whole or in part, within 150 feet of a proposed street light. 
2.  The request to the county for street lights shall include a sketch indicating the individual location of lights within the subdivision, along with the residential location of each signatory to the petition. 
3.  If standards/poles within the subdivision for the placement of these lights do not exist, or do not meet utility company requirements, it shall be the petitioner's responsibility to have these standards/poles placed prior to installation of the street lights, at their cost. Installation of poles within the county's right-of-way shall be subject to the approval of the public works director. The street light fixtures are to be installed at the expense of the petitioners. 
C.  When each of the applicable items in subsection [B.] above has been completed, Fulton County shall: 
1.  Assume maintenance responsibility and make the monthly payments to the utility company for electrical energy for each street light when at least 50 percent of the dwelling units in the subdivision have been occupied. 
2.  Pay only the current monthly negotiated amount for electrical energy for each street light. 
ARTICLE X. - FEES 

10.1. - Platting fees. 
Every application for a minor plat, final plat, or other plat submitted pursuant to these regulations shall be submitted to the director along with such fees as may be established by the board of commissioners. Failure to pay such fees as required shall cause the plat to be returned to the applicant without acceptance for review or consideration by Fulton County. (Amended 9-2-15) 
10.2. - Utility fees. 
Following the approval of a land disturbance permit and prior to authorization to begin construction, the developer shall pay the required inspection, water and sewer connections, curb cut, and street sign fees as may be established by the board of commissioners. (Amended 9-2-15) 
10.3. - Bond fees. 
Prior to approval of a final plat and as a prerequisite for acceptance of any such final plat, the developer shall provide such performance bonds, maintenance bonds, and/or cash assurances as required by these regulations and established by the board of commissioners. 
ARTICLE XI. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

11.1. - [Authority of director.] 
These subdivision regulations shall be administered and enforced by the director. 
11.2. - Plat denial and appeal. 
Should the director deny any such plat (minor or final), a written explanation shall be provided stating the basis for the denial. Within 30 days of the date of said written explanation, the owner of record and/or subdivider may file with the department a letter appealing the decision, which, together with a report from the director, shall be forwarded to the Fulton County Board of Zoning Appeals for consideration pursuant to Article XXII of the Fulton County Zoning Regulations. 
11.2.1.  Should an applicant disagree with the review comments of the director concluding factual or interpretive errors have been made, the following appeal procedure is intended to resolve the issues. 
A.  Submit to the director within 30 days of the comments at issue, a letter clearly defining the nature of the disagreement, the specific reference to the article of these regulations at issue, and the applicant's opinion. 
B.  The director shall submit the request to the technical staff review committee. The technical staff review committee shall be selected by the director and formed from appropriate departments' staff relative to the subject appeal. 
C.  The technical staff review committee shall provide comments and a written recommendation to the director within ten working days. 
D.  Should the director, after review of the applicant's statement and the recommendation of the technical staff review committee, conclude that these regulations would not be violated, the director shall modify his/her comments accordingly. 
E.  Should the director conclude that these regulations would be violated, the director shall provide the applicant with a written letter of denial and advise the applicant of the appeal process to the board of zoning appeals. 
F.  The board of zoning appeals shall, after receiving a report from the director, decide the issue. The decision shall constitute the final administrative appeal. 
11.3. - Appeals to all other standards. 
Should the director not approve a request to vary any article of these regulations within 30 days, the applicant may appeal in writing, stating the article to be varied and the reason the variance should be granted. 
11.3.1.  The applicant shall file a variance application to these regulations with the board of zoning appeals, which shall have the authority, after hearing from the applicant and the director, grant, modify and/or deny the variance. The board of zoning appeals shall base its decision on hardships as described in the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. 
ARTICLE XII. - VIOLATION AND PENALTY 

12.1. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this resolution, shall be deemed liable for civil penalties not less than $1,000.00 and not to exceed $2,500.00 and/or imprisonment for 60 days, or as amended by applicable statutes. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. The owner of any lands or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this resolution shall be placed, or shall exist, and any person who may assist in the separate offense, the State Court of Fulton County, or any court of competent jurisdiction, shall have jurisdiction of any offense charged under this paragraph. 
12.2. - Legal recourse. 
In any case in which any land is, or is proposed to be, used in violation of these regulations or any amendment thereto adopted by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, abatement or any appropriate action or actions, or proceeding to prevent, enjoin or abate such unlawful use. 
ARTICLE XIII. - CONFLICT 
13.1.  Where conflicts exist between these regulations and other county regulations and policies, either the most restrictive or the county's written interpretation shall prevail. 
ARTICLE XIV. - ADOPTION 
14.1.  These regulations shall be in full force and effective 30 days following adoption by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County. 
ARTICLE XV. - SEVERABILITY 
15.1.  If any article, sub-article, sentence, clause or phrase of these regulations is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or void, the validity of the remaining portions of these regulations shall not be affected, it being the intent of the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County in adopting these regulations that no portion hereof shall become inoperative or fail by reason of the unconstitutionality or invalidity of any article, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or provision of these regulations. 
APPENDIX B - ZONING RESOLUTION[1] 
A RESOLUTION to amend "A RESOLUTION DIVIDING THE UNINCORPORATED AREAS OF FULTON COUNTY, GEORGIA, INTO ZONES OR DISTRICTS, REGULATING AND RESTRICTING THE LOCATION OF TRADES AND INDUSTRIES, AND THE LOCATION, ERECTION, ALTERATION AND REPAIR OF BUILDINGS DESIGNED FOR SPECIFIC USES AND THE USE OF LANDS WITHIN EACH OF SAID ZONES OR DISTRICTS AND RELATING THERETO: ADOPTING A BASE MAP AND THIRTY-FIVE SECTIONAL MAPS DEFINING THE BOUNDARIES OF SAID ZONES OR DISTRICTS: REQUIRING USE AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS IN SAID ZONES OR DISTRICTS: ESTABLISHING A BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS AND FIXING THE POWERS AND DUTIES THEREOF: AND PROVIDING FOR THE ADJUSTMENT, ENFORCEMENT, AMENDMENT AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THIS RESOLUTION," adopted June 7, 1946 (Minute Book E-l, Pages 543-547), as amended from time to time and known as THE FULTON COUNTY ZONING RESOLUTION. 
BE IT RESOLVED BY THE COMMISSIONERS OF ROADS AND REVENUES OF FULTON COUNTY, GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the county's zoning resolution. The ordinance was originally adopted on March 11, 1955. In the preparation of this appendix, the county's compilation which reflected amendments through May 7, 1997, has been used. History notes for material adopted on or before May 7, 1997, were present in the county's compilation. Amendments adopted subsequent to May 7, 1997, are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Laws has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Ordinances pertaining to buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; ordinances pertaining to planning, ch. 58; impact fees, § 58-161 et seq.; zoning enabling legislation, § 58-76 et seq.; placement of rezoning action on agenda of board of commissioners, § 101-40; resolutions pertaining to buildings and building regulations, ch. 106; citizen deputy program, § 118-3; resolutions pertaining to planning, ch. 158; conflicts of interest in zoning matters and lobbyist disclosures, § 158-1; subdivision regulations, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - ADOPTION 
That the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County, Georgia, adopted June 7, 1946, as amended, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
ARTICLE II. - PURPOSE AND TITLE 
Section 1. This resolution is entered as part of a comprehensive plan designed for the purposes, among others, of lessening congestion on the roads and streets; securing safety from fire, flood, and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; promoting the health and general welfare; encouraging such distribution of population and such classification of land uses and utilization as will facilitate economic and adequate provisions for transportation, communications, roads, airports, water supply, drainage, sanitation, education, recreation and other public requirements. These regulations are made with reasonable consideration, among others, to the character of the districts and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions, protecting property against blight and depreciation, and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout Fulton County. 
Section 2. This resolution shall be known, referred to and recited, as the 1955 Zoning Resolution of Fulton County. 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. RM99-1566, adopted December 1, 1999, amended parts of art. III to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. Subsequently, an amendment of June 4, 2003, amended art. III to read as herein set out. 

3.1 - Scope. 
Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, tenth edition or later edition. (Amended 6-4-03) 
3.2 - Use and interpretation. 
The following shall apply to the use of all words in this Resolution: 
a.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. 
b.  Words used in the singular shall include the plural and vice versa. 
c.  The word shall is mandatory. 
d.  The word may is permissive. 
e.  The nouns zone, zoning district and district have the same meaning and refer to the Zoning Districts established by this Resolution. 
f.  The phrase used for shall include the phrases arranged for, designed for, intended for, maintained for and occupied for. 
3.3 - Definitions. 
3.3.1 A 
Accessory Site Feature. Mechanical, electrical and ancillary equipment, cooling towers, mechanical penthouses, heating and air conditioning units and/or pads, exterior ladders, storage tanks, processing equipment, service yards, storage yards, exterior work areas, loading docks, maintenance areas, dumpsters, recycling bins, and any other equipment, structure or storage area located on a roof, ground or building. (Added 6-4-03) 
Address Post. An upright post fixed securely in the ground bearing the physical address of the personal property as assigned per the Fulton County Uniform Addressing Ordinance. All address posts shall comply with the standards for location, installation and aesthetic as detailed in Article 34 of the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. (16-0363, pt. 1, 5-4-16) 
Adjoin. To have a common border with. Adjoin may also mean coterminous, contiguous, abutting and adjacent. 
Administrative Minor Variance. A variance to the minimum district yard requirements of not more than 1 foot, granted administratively by the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development. (Added 6-2-99) 
Administrative Modification. A change to an approved condition of zoning that constitutes only a technical change and does not involve significant public interest as determined by the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development. (Added 6-2-99) 
Administrative Variance. A request for relief from: 1) the standards contained in Article 34, Development Regulations, 2) a request to reduce the 10 foot improvement setback adjacent to buffers or 3) a request for 10 percent reduction of parking spaces as required in Article 18.2.4. (Added 6-2-99) 
Adult Bookstore (Added 6-5-96, Amended 6-4-03). An establishment or facility licensed to do business in Fulton County having a minimum of 25 percent of its stock in trade, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following materials: 
(i)  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, cds, dvds or other video reproductions, or slides or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined herein; or 
(ii)  Instruments, devices, novelties, toys or other paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities" as defined herein or otherwise emulate, simulate, or represent "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein. 
Adult Entertainment. Permitting, performing, or engaging in live acts: 
(1)  of touching, caressing, or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, and anus, vulva, or genitals, 
(2)  of displaying of any portion of the areola of the female breast, or any portion of his or her pubic hair, cleft of the buttocks, anus, vulva or genitals, 
(3)  of displaying of pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals, 
(4)  or acts which simulate sexual intercourse (homosexual or heterosexual), masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation. 
None of these definitions shall be construed to permit any act which is in violation of any county or state law. (Added 7-1-92) 
Adult Entertainment Establishment. Any establishment or facility licensed to do business in Fulton County where adult entertainment is regularly sponsored, allowed, encouraged, condoned, presented, sold, or offered to the public. This definition shall not include traditional or mainstream theater which means a theater, movie theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution or similar establishment or facility which regularly features live or other performances or showings which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities" in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. Performances and showings are regularly featured when they comprise 90 percent of all performances or showings. (Added 7-1-92, Amended 6-4-03) 
Alternative Antenna Support Structure. Clock towers, campaniles, free standing steeples, light structures and other alternative designed support structures that camouflage or conceal antennas as an architectural or natural feature. (Added 3/5/97, Amended 5/7/97, 7/7/99, 05/17/06) 
Amateur Radio Antenna. Radio communication facility that is an accessory structure to a single family residential dwelling operated for non-commercial purposes by a Federal Communication Commission licensed amateur radio operator. The term antenna shall include both the electronic system and any structures it is affixed to for primary support. (Added 07/07/93) 
Antenna. Any exterior apparatus designed for telephone radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. (Added 3/5/97) 
Apartment. A building which contains three or more dwelling units either attached to the side, above or below another unit. Apartment may also refer to a dwelling unit attached to a non-residential building. (See Dwelling, Multi-Family) (Amended 07/07/99) 
Appeal. A request for relief from a decision made by the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development, other department directors, the Board of Zoning Appeals, and/or the Board of Commissioners. (Added 06/02/99) 
Applicable Wall Area. The wall on which a wall sign is attached including all walls and windows that have the same street or pedestrian orientation. All open air spaces shall be excluded from the applicable wall area. (Added 09/01/99) 
Attic. An unheated storage area located immediately below the roof. 
Authorized Agent. Zoning Department will provide. 
Automotive Garage. See Garage, Automotive Repair. (Added 04/07/93) (Res. No. 11-0743, 9-7-11) 
Automotive Specialty Shop. A use which provides one or more specialized repair sales and/or maintenance functions such as the sale, replacement, installation or repair of tires, mufflers, batteries, brakes and master cylinders, shock absorbers, instruments (such as speedometers and tachometers), radios and sound systems or upholstery for passenger cars, vans, and light trucks only. No use authorized herein shall permit any private or commercial activity which involves auto/truck leasing, painting, repair or alteration of the auto body, nor shall any repair, replacement, modification, adjustment, or servicing of the power plant or drive-train or cooling system be permitted, except that minor tune-up involving the changing of spark plugs, points or condenser, including engine block oil changes, are permitted. (See Service Station 3.3.19) (Added 04/07/93) (Amended 02/07/01; Res. No. 11-0743, 9-7-11) 
3.3.2 B 
Babysitting. A service in which shelter, care, and supervision are provided for 4 or fewer children below the age of 12 on an irregular basis. 
Banner. Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is either with frame or without frame and hung or mounted to a pole, building or other background by one or more edges. Flags are not considered banners. (Added 09/01/99) 
Bar. A commercial establishment used primarily for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption; where food may be available for consumption on the premises as accessory to the primary use; where entertainment opportunities are not the primary use and occupy no more than 10% of the total gross square footage of the business. A bar shall not be considered a Nightclub, Private Club or Club. (Res. No. 11-0884, pt. 1, 10-5-11) 
Barbed Wire. Barbed wire, also known as barb wire, is a type of fencing wire constructed with sharp edges or points arranged at intervals along the strand(s). Barbed wire may be straight or concertina style (formed in coils). This type of fence material is commonly used for agricultural and security purposes. (Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11) 
Basement. A level below a floor of a building with a minimum of one-half (½) of the total wall area below grade. A basement is not a story. The term basement is synonymous with cellar. 
Beacon. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. (Added 09/01/99) 
Bed and Breakfast Inn. A residence in which the frequency and volume of visitors are incidental to the primary use as a private residence and where guest rooms are made available for visitors for fewer than 30 consecutive days. Breakfast is the only meal served and is included in the charge for the room. Use allowed in non-residential districts and permitted in AG-1 and TR with a Use Permit. (Added 06/01/94) 
Berm. A planted earthen mound. 
Billboard. A sign which advertises services, merchandise, entertainment or information which is not available at the property on which the sign is located. 
Board. Fulton County Board of Commissioners. (Added 09/01/04) 
Boarding House. A residential use other than a hotel or motel in which lodging may be provided to non-household members and which includes the provision of meals. (Amended 5/6/92) 
Brewpub. An accessory use to a permitted restaurant where distilled spirits, malt beverages or wines are licensed to sell and where beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed for consumption on the premise and solely in draft form (Added 2/7/96). 
Buffer, State Waters. An area along the course of any State waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. (Added 12/1/99) 
Buffer, Tributary. A protection area adjoining the tributaries of the Chattahoochee River. Tributary buffer specifications are contained in Part D of each prospective land use section of the Tree Ordinance. (Amended 12/1/99) 
Buffer, Zoning. A natural undisturbed portion of a lot, except for approved access and utility crossings, which is set aside to achieve a visual barrier between the use on the lot and adjacent lots and/or uses. A buffer is achieved with natural vegetation and must be replanted subject to the approval of the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development or his/her designated agent(s) when sparsely vegetated. Clearing of undergrowth from a buffer is prohibited except when accomplished under the supervision of the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development or his/her designated agent(s). (Added 12/1/99) 
Buildable Area. The portion of a parcel of land where a building may be located and which shall contain enough square footage to meet the minimum required by the zoning district. That portion which is not located in the minimum setbacks, utility corridors, driveways, slopes to build streets, tree save areas, landscape strips, specimen tree areas, state water buffers, tributary buffers, zoning buffers, wetlands, storm water and sanitary sewer easements.(Amended 12/1/99) 
Building. Any structure with a roof, designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 
Building Line. A building line is one which is no closer to a property line than the minimum yard (setback) requirements. 
Business. A use involving retailing, wholesaling, warehousing, outside storage, manufacturing or the delivery of services regardless of whether payment is involved. The term Business does not include uses which are customarily incidental (accessory) to another use. 
3.3.3 C 
Canopy. A roof-like cover, excluding carports, that either projects from the wall of a building or is freestanding. 
Car Wash, Principal. A primary or main use which provides space for cleaning vehicles. (Added 7/5/89) 
Car Wash, Accessory. A customarily incidental use of an attached or detached bay for cleaning vehicles. (Added 7/5/89) 
Cellar. See basement. 
Cemetery, Human. The use of property as a burial place for human remains. Such a property may contain a mausoleum. 
Cemetery, Pet. The use of property as a burial place for the remains of pets. Such a property may contain a mausoleum. 
Check Cashing Establishment. Any establishment licensed by the State of Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. sections 7-1-700 et seq. (Added 10-2-02) 
Church, Temple or Place of Worship. A facility in which persons regularly assemble for religious ceremonies. This shall include, on the same lot, accessory structures and uses such as minister's and caretaker's residences, and others uses identified under the provisions for Administrative and Use Permits. 
Clear Cutting. The removal of all vegetation from a property, whether by cutting or other means, excluding stream buffer requirements. (Added 12-1-99) 
Clinic. A use where medical examination and treatment is administered to persons on an outpatient basis. No patient shall be lodged on an overnight basis. 
Club. A non-profit entity organized for a social, educational or recreational use normally involving community centers, public swimming pools and/or public recreational courts, civic clubhouses, lodge halls, fraternal organizations, country clubs and similar facilities. A Club shall not be considered a Nightclub, Private Club or Bar. (See Article 19.3.2) (11-0884, pt. 1, 10-5-11) 
Cluster-style Mailbox. A style whereby mailboxes, meeting the specifications of the United States Postal Service (USPS) with the inscription plainly legible "U.S. MAIL" and "APPROVED BY THE POSTMASTER GENERAL" are assembled and grouped together on a single area of land so that they are regarded as one unit. Cluster-style mailboxes must be manufactured cluster-style mailboxes approved by both the County and the USPS. (15-0273, 4-1-15) 
Cluster-style Mailbox Kiosk. Cluster-style mailbox units built into a larger structure exhibiting the architectural style and building materials typical of the neighborhood/development. (15-0273, 4-1-15) 
Commercial Amusement /Indoor. A use where recreational activity such as movie theaters, arcades, billiards, game rooms, sporting activities and other recreational amusements are conducted within a building. (Added 7-7-99) 
Commercial Amusement/Outdoor. A use where recreational activity such as skating rinks, batting cages, miniature golf, drive-in theaters and other recreational activities or amusements that are conducted outside a building. (Added 7-7-99) 
Composting. A processing operation for the treatment of vegetative matter into humus-like material that can be recycled as a soil fertilizer amendment such as trees, leaves and plant material. Organic animal waste, food, municipal sludge, solid waste, and other non-farm or vegetative type wastes are not included. (Added 11-3-93) 
Condominium. A form of ownership as defined by State law in which common elements are jointly owned. A condominium is not a building type. 
Conservation Subdivision. A single family detached residential subdivision in which a minimum of 40 percent of the total land area is set aside as permanently protected open space as defined by Article VI of the Fulton County Subdivision Regulations. (Added 5-5-04) 
Construction Material. Building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and/or demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such materials include, but are not limited to, asbestos containing waste, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper, cardboard, inert waste landfill material, and other nonputrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. (Added 12-1-99) 
Convalescent Center/Nursing Home/Hospice. A state licensed use in which domiciliary care is provided to convalescing, chronically or terminally ill persons who are provided with food, shelter and care and not meeting the test of family. This use shall not include hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. (Amended 7-7-99) 
Convenient Location and Time. Suitable time and easily accessible place for applicants to meet with interested parties to discuss rezoning and/or use permit petitions. (Added 9-1-04) 
Convenience Store. A use offering a limited variety of groceries household goods, and personal care items, always in association with the dispensing of motor fuels as an accessory use, but in all cases excluding vehicle service, maintenance and repair. 
Country Inn. A facility, with the owner or innkeepers residing on the premises, where guest rooms are made available for visitors for fewer than 30 consecutive days. A Country Inn is distinguished from a Bed and Breakfast category in that it serves both breakfast and lunch or dinner.(Amended 7/7/99) 
Courtyard. An open air area, other than a yard, that is bounded by the walls of a building. Courtyards are used primarily for supplying pedestrian access, light, and air to the abutting building(s). Site furniture, lighting and landscaping are appropriate for courtyards. Vehicular access allowed for unloading and loading only. No vehicular parking or vehicular storage is allowed. (Added 3-3-04) 
Crematorium. A facility for the reduction of remains to ashes by incineration. 
Cul-de-sac. A street having only one connection to another street, and is terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
Curb Cut. A connection between a roadway and a property for vehicular access. Curb cut applies to access regardless of the existence of curbing. 
Cutoff. A luminaire light distribution where the emission does not exceed 2.5 percent of the lamp lumens at an angle of 90 degrees above nadir and does not exceed 10 percent at a vertical angle of 80 degrees above nadir. (Added 5-5-04) 
Cutoff Fixture. A luminaire light distribution where the candela per 1,000 lamp lumens does not numerically exceed 25 (2.5 percent) at or above a vertical angle of 90 degrees above nadir, and 100 (10 percent) at or above a vertical angle of 80 degrees above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire. (Added 2-1-06) 
3.3.4 D 
Day Care Facility. A use in which shelter, care, and supervision for (7) or more persons on a regular basis away from their residence for less than 24 hours a day. A Day Care Facility may provide basic educational instruction. The term shall include nursery school, kindergarten, early learning center, play school, pre-school, and Group Day Care Home. 
Day Care Home, Family. See Family Day Care Home. 
Day-Night Average Sound Level (DNL). The day-night average sound level (DNL) is the 24-hour average sound level, in decibels, obtained from the accumulation of all events with the addition of 10 decibels to sound levels in the night from 10 P.M. to 7 A.M. The weighing of nighttime events accounts for the usual increased interfering effects of noise during the night, when ambient levels are lower and people are trying to sleep. DNL is a weighted average measured in decibels (db). (Added 4-3-02) 
Deck. A structure abutting a dwelling with no roof or walls except for visual partitions and railings not to exceed 42" above finished floor which is constructed on piers or a foundation above-grade for use as an outdoor living area. (Added 3-3-04) 
Department. Department of Environment and Community Development. (Added 9-1-04) 
Development, Duplex. A development of duplexes. (Added 6-4-03) 
Development, Multi-family. A development of multifamily dwelling units on a single lot of record. (Amended 6-4-03) 
Development Permit Standards. Requirements established for each administrative and use permit such as setbacks, access, landscape and buffer areas, hours of operation etc. (Added 6-2-99) 
Development of Regional Impact (DRI) Study. A review by the Atlanta Regional Commission and the Georgia Regional Transportation Authority of large scale projects that are of sufficient size that they are likely to create impacts beyond the jurisdiction in which each project will be located. (Added 9-1-04) 
Development, Single-Family. A development of single family dwelling units, with each dwelling unit including accessory structures, on a separate lot of record. (Amended 6-4-03) 
Development Standards. Dimensional measurements as specified in zoning districts relating to such standards as yard setbacks, lot area, lot frontage, lot width, height and floor area. (Added 6-2-99) 
Development, Townhouse. A development of townhouse dwelling units. (Added 6-4-03) 
Director. Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development. (Added 9-1-04) 
Distribution Line. A pipeline other than a gathering or transmission line. (Added 8-4-99) 
District, Nonresidential. A term used to identify all districts except single-family dwelling districts, all apartment districts, R-6, TR, MHP and residential portions of a CUP — Includes AG-1. 
District, Residential. A term which applies to all single-family dwelling districts, all apartment districts, R-6, TR, MHP and residential portions of a CUP — Excludes AG-1. 
Drainage Facility. A facility which provides for the collection, removal and detention of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, water course or other means. 
Drive-in/up Restaurant. A restaurant designed for customers to park and place and receive food orders while remaining in their motor vehicles. (Added 9-1-04) 
Driveway. A vehicular access way. 
Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used for residential purposes for periods of more than 30 consecutive days. 
Dwelling, Duplex. A structure that contains two dwelling units. (Added 06/04/03) 
Dwelling, Multi-family. A structure containing three or more dwelling units not including townhouses, triplexes or quadruplexes. (Amended 06/04/03, 04/05/06) 
Dwelling, Quadruplex. Four attached dwellings in one building in which each unit shares one or two walls with an adjoining unit or units. (Added 04/05/06) 
Dwelling, Triplex. A building containing three dwelling units, each of which has direct access to the outside or to a common hall. (Added 04/05/06) 
Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms constructed with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities designed for and limited to use as living quarters for one family. (Amended 06/04/03) 
Dwelling Unit, Single Family. One dwelling unit that is not attached to any other dwelling unit by any means. (Added 06/04/03) 
Dwelling Unit, Townhouse. A dwelling unit in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common walls. (Added 06/04/03) 
3.3.5 E 
Environmentally Adverse Use. Any use or activity which poses a potential or immediate threat to the environment and/or is physically harmful or destructive to living beings. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the following uses are specifically declared to be environmentally adverse: 
(1)  All uses listed in Zoning Resolution Article 4.18, Section 4.18.3; 
(2)  All uses that will result in the discharge of any chemical listed in any of the following publications: 
a.  The Environmental Protection Agency's List of Hazardous Air Pollutants as included in the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, including any modifications or amendments thereto; 
b.  The Environmental Protection Agency's List of Toxic Pollutants prepared in accordance with the Clean Water Act as codified at 40 C.F.R. 401.15 of the Code of Federal Regulations, including any modifications or amendments thereto; or 
c.  The Environmental Protection Agency's List of Priority Pollutants prepared in accordance with the Clean Water Act as codified at 40 C.F.R. 423, Appendix A, of the Code of Federal Regulations, including any modifications or amendments thereto. 
(3)  All uses that will require the issuance of a permit by or will be otherwise subject to regulations promulgated by either the Environmental Protection Agency or the State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division. (Added 02/07/01; Amd. No. 13-0175, 7-17-13) 
Environmentally Stressed Community. Any existing residential development (single family dwelling, duplex dwelling, triplex dwelling, quadruplex dwelling, townhouse dwelling or multifamily dwelling), any portion of which is located within ½ mile of an existing pollution point as identified by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's Envirofacts website found at www.epa.gov/enviro/. (Added 09/01/04; Res. No. 13-0065, 8/21/13) 
Explosive. A chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term includes, but is not limited to, dynamite, black powder, pellet powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses, squibs, detonating cord, igniter cord, igniters, display fireworks, and gun powder. (Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11) 
3.3.6 F 
Family. Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or other duly authorized custodial relationship, or up to four unrelated persons, occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from persons occupying a rooming, boarding or lodging house, or a hotel. A group residence which falls under the definition of a family, but does not require a Use Permit for a Group Residence (Article 19.4.20, 19.4.20(1), and/or 19.4.20(2)), shall comply with applicable federal, state and local licensing requirements and shall not be located closer than a quarter mile to the nearest property line of another group residence. (Amended 7/7/99) (Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11) 
Family Day Care Home. A Home Occupation in which shelter, care, and supervision are provided for 6 or fewer persons on a regular basis. A Family Day Care Home may provide basic educational instruction. 
Farm. A parcel of land which is used for the raising of animals (including fish) on a commercial basis, such as ranching, dairy farming, piggeries, poultry farming and fish farming; a facility for the business of boarding or renting horses to the public; or a site used for the raising or harvesting of agricultural crops such as wheat, field forage and other plant crops intended for food or fiber. (Added 7/7/99) 
Fast Food Restaurant. See Restaurant, Fast Food. 
Flag Lot. A lot where frontage to a public street is provided via a narrow strip of land forming a pole or stem to the buildable portion of the lot (Added 2/7/96). 
Flood Lamp. A form of lighting designed to direct its output in a specific direction with a reflector formed from the glass envelope of the lamp itself. Such lamps are so designated by the manufacturers and are typically used in residential outdoor area lighting. (Added 02/01/06) 
Flood Light. A form of lighting designed to direct its output in a diffuse, more or less specific direction, with reflecting or refracting elements located external to the lamp. (Added 02/01/06) 
Flood Plain Management Terms. The following definitions apply to Sections of the Zoning Resolution on Flood Plain Management. 
(1)  As-built drawings. Plans which show the actual locations, elevations, and dimensions of the improvements as certified by a professional engineer or a licensed surveyor in the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Base Flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year - the 100-year flood. 
(3)  Base Flood Elevation (B.F.E.). The highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
(4)  Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, such as mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
(5)  Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The Federal Agency which administers the National Flood Insurance Program. This agency prepares, revises and distributes the maps and studies adopted under Article IV, Section 24. 
(6)  Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
(7)  Flood Elevation Study. An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations. 
(8)  Flood Boundary and Floodway Map. An official map of Fulton County on which FEMA has delineated the various flood boundaries, the floodway fringe, and the floodways. 
(9)  Flood Fringe. That area contained by the flood boundaries exclusive of the regulatory floodway. 
(10)  Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The official map of Fulton County on which FEMA has delineated the risk premium zones. 
(11)  Flood Insurance Study (FIS). A compilation of flood related data obtained from the flood studies for the unincorporated areas of Fulton County, Georgia, prepared by FEMA. 
(12)  Flood Plain. Lands subject to flooding, which have a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year; the 100-year flood plain is shown on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map. Also referred to as area of moderate Flood Hazard. 
(13)  Flood Prone Area. Areas shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as "Zone B" (zone where the contributing drainage area is less than one square mile) and which are determined by the Department of Public Works to be a hazard to adjacent properties or development in the event of the base flood. 
(14)  Flood Proofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
(15)  Floodway. See Regulatory Floodway. 
(16)  Freeboard. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of flood plain management. 
(17)  Functionally Dependent Use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
(18)  I.R.F. Elevation. See "Base Flood Elevation." 
(19)  Lowest Floor. The lowest minimum floor including basement and attached garage. 
(20)  Map. The Flood Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
(21)  Mean Sea Level. For purposes of Flood Plain Management, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929. 
(22)  Mobile Home. See Mobile Home under "M" headings in main text of Definitions. 
(23)  Mobile Home Park/Mobile Home Subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads and construction of streets) was completed on or after April 5, 1972. 
(24)  NGVD. National Geodetic Vertical Datum. 
(25)  New Structure. Any proposed structure which does (did) not have a valid building permit prior to the effective date of this (amendment) resolution. Note: This resolution was adopted on March 11, 1955. Records suggest that flood plain management provisions were first adopted on April 5, 1972. 
(26)  Regulatory Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
(27)  Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, or brook. 
(28)  Special Flood Hazard Area. Those lands subject to periodic flooding and shown on the "Flood Insurance Rate Map" as a numbered or unnumbered "A" zone. 
(29)  Start of Construction. The first placement of permanent construction of a structure, excluding a mobile home, on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footing or any work beyond excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways. Excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, and the erection of temporary forms are not permanent forms of construction. The installation of accessory buildings, such as garages and sheds, apart from the main structure also fail to qualify as permanent construction. 
(30)  Start of Construction. For any structure, except mobile home, which has no basement or poured footings, the "start of construction" includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its park or mobile home subdivision. For a mobile home, "start" means the date on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the construction of streets, either final site grading or the pouring of pads, and installation of utilities) is completed. 
(31)  State Coordinating Agency. The Flood Plain Management Coordinator of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(32)  Structure. All walled and roofed buildings, storage tanks and other structural improvements located principally above ground. 
(33)  Water Surface Elevation. The relationship between the projected heights and the NGVD reached by floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains. 
Floor Area, Gross. The sum of all floors of a structure as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls or the center of connected or common walls, including common public areas, such as lobbies, rest rooms and hallways, spaces devoted exclusively to permanent mechanical systems, permanent storage areas, stairwells, elevator shafts, but excluding internal parking and loading areas, attics, porches, balconies and other areas outside of the exterior walls of the building. Gross floor area is used to determine the building sizes for all but single-family dwellings and to determine required parking when floor area is the designated measure for a use. Commonly referred to as Floor Area. (Amended 7/5/89) 
Floor Area, Ground. The heated floor area of the first story of a building above a basement or, if no basement, the lowest story. 
Floor Area, Heated. The sum of all heated area of a dwelling or dwelling unit, as appropriate, measured to the inside surfaces of exterior walls, excluding porches, balconies, attics, basements (finished or unfinished), garages, patios and decks. 
Floor Area, Net. The sum of all floors of a structure as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls, excluding halls, stairways, elevator shafts, attached and detached garages, porches, balconies, attics with less than 7 feet of headroom, basements, patios and decks are excluded. 
Floor Area, Net Leasable. Gross floor area less the common public areas. 
Food Truck. A Food Truck is a mobile, fully self-contained unit with valid State of Georgia registration that sells only food and/or beverages (non-alcoholic) and that utilizes no outside cooking area. Mobile food vendors which stop for less than or equal to 30 minutes at a single location shall not be considered Food Trucks. (Res. No. 12-0356, pt. 1, 5-16-12) 
Foot-candle. A unit of measure for illuminance on a surface that is everywhere one foot from a point source of light of one candle, and equal to one lumen per square foot of area. (Added 02/01/06) 
Fuel Oil. A liquid petroleum product that is burned in a furnace for the generation of heat or used in an engine for the generation of power. The oil may be a distilled fraction of petroleum, a residuum from refinery operations, a crude petroleum, or a blend of two or more of these. (Added 08/04/99) 
Full Cutoff. A luminaire light distribution where zero candela intensity occurs at or above an angle of 90 degrees above nadir. Additionally, the candela per 1000 lamp lumens does not numerically exceed 100 (10 percent) at or above a vertical angle of 80 degrees above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire. (Added 02/01/06) 
Full Cutoff Fixture. An outdoor light fixture shielded or constructed in such a manner that it emits no light above the horizontal plane of the fixture. (Added 02/01/06) 
3.3.7 G 
Garage, Automotive Repair. A use primarily for the repair, replacement, modification, adjustment, or servicing of the power plant or drive-train or major components of automobiles and motorized vehicles. The repair of heavy trucks and equipment shall not be included in this use. The use may include paint and body shops. The outside storage of unlicensed and unregistered vehicles is prohibited as part of this use. (Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11; Res. No. 11-0743, 9-7-11) 
Garage, Truck and Heavy Equipment Repair. A use which may provide a full-range of repairs and services including major overhauls on trucks and heavy equipment. Includes paint and body shops. Allowed in M-l and M-2 (Heavy Industrial) Districts. (Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11) 
Garden Center. A business whose primary operation is the sale of seeds and organic and inorganic materials, which include but are not limited to trees, shrubs, flowers, and other plants for sale or transplanting, mulch, pine straw, and other organic products for landscaping purposes, and other limited retail accessory products for gardening and/or landscaping with an approved Use Permit for Landscaping Business, Plant Nursery, or Garden Center with Indoor Retail Component (Article 19.4.27). (Added 04/03/02) 
Gathering Line. A pipeline that transports fuel oil/liquid petroleum product from a current production facility to a transmission line or main. (Added 08/04/99) 
Glare. The sensation produced within the visual field by luminance that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted, causing annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. (Added 02/04/04; Revised 02/01/06) 
Golf Course. A use of land for playing the game of golf. The term shall not include miniature golf, but may include a Country Club and a driving range as an accessory use. 
Governmental Facility. A building or institution provided by the government to care for a specified need, such as a courthouse or county jail. (Added 7/1/92) 
Grade. The average elevation of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to all sides of any structure. 
Green space. Green space means permanently protected land and water, including agricultural and forestry land, that is in its undeveloped, natural state or that has been developed only to the extent consistent with, or is restored to be consistent with, one or more of the following goals: 
(1)  Water quality protection for rivers, streams, and lakes; 
(2)  Flood protection; 
(3)  Wetlands protection; 
(4)  Reduction of erosion through protection of steep slopes, areas with erodible soils, and stream banks; 
(5)  Protection of riparian buffers and other areas that serve as natural habitat and corridors for native plant and animal species; 
(6)  Scenic protection; 
(7)  Protection of archaeological and historic resources; 
(8)  Provision of recreation in the form of boating, hiking, camping, fishing, hunting, running, jogging, biking, walking, and similar outdoor activities; and 
(9)  Connection of existing or planned areas contributing to the goals set out in this paragraph. (Added 04/03/02) 
Group Residence/Shelter. A state licensed 24-hour residential facility functioning as a single housekeeping unit for the sheltered care of persons with special needs which, in addition to providing food and shelter, may also provide some combination of personal care, social or counseling services and transportation. Bedroom suites shall not include kitchen facilities. For purposes of this Resolution, group residence/shelter shall not include those facilities which exclusively care for children under the age of 17. A group residence shall comply with applicable federal, state and local licensing requirements and shall not be located closer than a quarter mile to the nearest property line of another group residence. (Amended 7/7/99, 11/03/04) (Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11) 
Group Residence for Children. A dwelling unit or facility in which full time residential care is provided for children under the age of 17 as a single housekeeping unit. A group residence must comply with applicable federal, state and local licensing requirements. A group residence may not serve the purpose of, or as an alternative to, incarceration. A group residence shall not be located closer than a quarter mile to the nearest property line of another group residence. (Added 11/03/04) (Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11) 
Guest House. A detached accessory dwelling unit located on the same lot with a single-family dwelling unit. A guest house may be only used by relatives, guest or employees that work on the property without payment for rent (Amended 2/7/96). 
3.3.8 H 
Hardship. The existence of extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the size, shape, or topography of a particular property, because of which the property cannot be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Resolution. (Added 06/02/99) 
Height. The vertical distance measured from the finished grade along all walls of a structure to the highest point of the coping or parapet of a flat roof or to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
Height, Sign. The elevation measured from grade level adjoining a sign to the highest point on the sign; except that when measuring a free-standing sign, any part of which is located below the centerline of an adjoining street, said sign shall be measured from the elevation of the centerline of the road to the highest point on the sign, (as shown in Illustration XXXIII-1). 
Historic Period Lighting. Commercial lighting with an architectural design from the late 19th and early 20th centuries. (Added 06/04/03) 
Home Occupation. An accessory use of a dwelling unit for business, operated by members of the resident family only. (See Article Section 4.12) (Amended 12/4/91) 
Home Schooling. The practice of teaching one's own children at home in accordance with Sections 20-2-690 and 20-2-690.1 of the Georgia Code. (Added 03/03/04) 
Hoop Stress. A causation of internal and external pressure loading on the pipe. (Added 08/04/99) 
Hospital. The provision of in-patient health care for people, including general medical and surgical services, psychiatric care and specialty medical facilities. Out-patient facilities are normally included. 
Hotel/Motel. A building in which lodging and/or boarding is provided for fewer than 30 days. The term may include a restaurant in conjunction therewith and may also mean tourist court, motor lodge and inn. 
Hotel, Apartment. A use which provides individual units which include cooking facilities, and which are used for temporary lodging to persons not related to the owner for fewer than 30 days. 
3.3.9 I 
IESNA. The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a non-profit professional organization of lighting specialists that has established recommended design standards for various lighting applications. (Added 05/05/04; Revised 02/01/06) 
Identification Monument. See Article 33, Signs. 
Illuminance. The quantity of light arriving at a surface divided by the area of the illuminated surface, measured in foot-candles. Horizontal illuminance applies to a horizontal surface, vertical illuminance applies to a vertical surface. Average illuminance is the level of illuminance over an entire illuminated target area. Maximum illuminance is the highest level of illuminance on any point within the entire area; minimum illuminance is the lowest level of illuminance on any point within the entire area. (Added 02/01/06) 
Illuminance Levels. Illuminance levels and foot candles noted in this ordinance mean the maintained illuminance levels; the illuminance levels occurring just prior to lamp replacement and luminaire cleaning. The average illuminance level applies to an entire illuminated target area. Minimum and maximum illuminance levels apply to small areas within the entire illuminated target area. Unless otherwise noted, illuminance levels refer to horizontal illuminance levels. (Added 02/01/06) 
Illumination. Direct illumination is illumination which is projected from within a sign, building, etc. Indirect illumination is illumination which is projected onto a sign, building, etc. 
Improvement Setback. An area adjacent to a zoning buffer in which no improvements and/or structures shall be constructed. No development activity such as tree removal, stump removal or grinding, land disturbance or grading is permitted without the approval of the Director of the Environment and Community Development Department. (Added 12/1/99) 
Institutional Use. Includes schools, colleges, vocational schools, hospitals, places of worship, asylums, museums, and other similar uses or facilities. (Added 7/1/92) 
3.3.10 J 
Junk Facility. See Salvage/Storage/Junk Facility. 
3.3.11 K 
Kennel. A use for the shelter of domestic animals where the shelter of these animals involves an exchange of revenue in which a business license is required. If the kennel is a non-business operation, its use may be certified by the Fulton County Animal Control Office. (Amended 04/06/94) 
3.3.12 L 
Lamp. The component of an outdoor luminaire that produces light. (Added 05/05/04) 
Land Disturbance Permit. A permit issued by the Department of Environment and Community Development that authorizes the commencement of alteration or development of a given tract of land or the commencement of any land disturbing activity.(Amended 12/1/99). 
Land Disturbing Activity. Any alteration of land which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediment into water or onto lands, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling. 
Landfill, Inert Waste Disposal. A disposal facility accepting only waste that will not or is not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern by placing an earth cover thereon. Such waste is limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rocks, bricks, yard trash, stumps, limbs and leaves. This definition excludes other types of industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed above. Refer to the rules concerning Solid Waste Management of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, as amended, for further definition. (Amended 7/7/99) 
Landfill, Solid Waste Disposal. A disposal facility accepting solid waste excluding hazardous waste disposed of by placing an earth cover thereon. Solid waste includes waste from domestic, agricultural, commercial and industrial sources. Refer to the rules concerning Solid Waste Management of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, as amended, for further definition. (Amended 7/7/99) 
Landscape Strip. An area required by this resolution or by conditions of zoning which is reserved for the installation and/or maintenance of plant materials. (Amended 12/1/99) 
Landscaping Business. A business whose primary operation is the sale and/or storage of organic and inorganic materials, plants, mulch, pine straw, and other limited related accessory products for the landscape industry and the storage and use of associated landscape vehicles with an approved Use Permit for Landscaping Business, Plant Nursery, or Garden Center with Indoor Retail Component (Article 19.4.27). (Added 04/03/02) 
Large Scale Retail/Service Commercial Structure. An individual retail/service commercial structure that is 75,000 square feet or greater. This size threshold refers to an individual establishment and its associated outdoor areas used for display and storage. (Added 04/05/06) 
Large Scale Retail/Service Commercial Development. A retail/service commercial development with at least one large scale retail structure but no more than four such structures whether freestanding or combined. (Added 04/05/06) 
Lawful Use. Any use of lots or structure which is not in violation of any existing federal, state or local law, statute, regulation or ordinance. (Added 7/1/92) 
Library. A place set apart to contain books and other literary material for reading, study, or reference, for use by members of a society or the general public. (Added 7/1/92) 
Light, Direct. Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of luminaire. (Added 02/04/04) 
Light, Fully-shielded. Outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that no light rays are emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal plane as certified by a photometric test report. (Added 02/04/04) 
Light, Indirect. Direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off of other surfaces. (Added 02/04/04) 
Loading Space. An area within the main building or on the same lot, which provides for the loading, or unloading of goods and equipment from delivery vehicles. 
Lodge and/or Retreat/Campground. A facility allowed with a Use Permit which provides space, food and/or lodging facilities for social, educational or recreational purposes. (Amended 3/6/91, 7/7/99) 
Lot. The basic lawful unit of land, identifiable by a single deed. A group of two or more contiguous lots owned by the same entity and used for a single use shall be considered a single lot. Lot, tract and parcel are synonymous. 
Lot, Corner. A Multiple Frontage Lot adjoining two streets at their intersection. 
Lot Frontage. The shortest property line adjoining a street or, for lots requiring no street frontage, oriented toward a street. A property line adjoining a stub street shall not be considered as frontage unless it is proposed for access or is the only street frontage. Front yard requirements shall be measured from this property line. In situations where a multiple frontage lot has equal distance on street frontages, the Director of Development Services shall determine the legal lot frontage. (Amended 11/03/93) 
Lot Line, Front. A lot line which extends the entire length of an abutting street from intersecting property line to intersecting property line. The front lot line of a corner lot abuts the street which adjoins the lot for the shortest distance. (Added 04/03/02) 
Lot Line, Rear. Generally, the rear lot line is the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For a pointed or irregular lot, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line, parallel to and the most distant from the front lot line, not less than twenty feet long, and wholly within the lot. True triangular lots do not have rear lot lines. Lots with more than one front lot line do not have rear lot lines. The Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development or his/her designee shall make the final determination of rear lot lines when in dispute or undefined by this definition. (Added 04/03/02) 
Lot line, side. A lot line which is not a rear or front lot line. (Added (04/03/02) 
Lot Line/Property Line. A line established through recordation of an approved plat, or a deed in the absence of a platting requirement, which separates a lot from other lots, or a lot from rights-of-way. 
Lot, Multiple Frontage. Lots adjoining more than one street. 
Lot, Nonconforming. See "Nonconforming Lot, Use or Structure". 
Lot-of-Record. A lot, whether lawful or unlawful, which appears on a deed and/or plat recorded in the official records of the Clerk of Superior Court. 
Lot, Unlawful. Any lot-of-record which, at the time of recordation in the official records of the Clerk of Superior Court, was not in compliance with zoning and subdivision laws in effect at that time. 
Lot Width, Minimum. The least dimension required along the building line specified for each district, parallel to the lot frontage and measured between side lot lines. 
Luminaire. This is a complete lighting system and includes a lamp or lamps and a fixture. (Added 02/04/04) 
Luminaire Height. The height of a luminaire shall be the vertical distance from the ground directly below the centerline of the luminaire to the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire. (Added 02/04/04) 
3.3.13 M 
Maintenance, Normal. The upkeep of a sign for the purpose of maintaining safety and appearance which may include painting, bulb replacement, panel replacement, letter replacement, repair of electrical components, and structural reinforcements to its original condition. (Added 09/01/99) 
Massing. Varying the massing of a building may be achieved by varying the surface planes of the building with porches, balconies, bay windows, and/or overhangs, and/or stepping-back the buildings from the second floor and above, and/or breaking up the roofline with different elements to create smaller compositions. (Added 10/01/03) 
Marquee. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building used for advertising or identification. (Added 09/01/99) 
Medical Related Lodging. A use which provides temporary lodging for family members of a hospitalized patient. (Added 12/4/91) 
Mineral Extraction. Severance and/or removal of sand, stone, gravel, top soil, and other mineral resources whenever such severance and/or removal is not conducted in conjunction with a permitted development activity. (Added 12/4/91) 
Mini-warehouse. A structure or group of structures containing separate spaces/stalls which are leased or rented on an individual basis for the storage of goods. 
Minor Variance. An application requesting deviation from the minimum yard requirements, not to exceed ten percent of the dimensional requirements. (Added 06/02/99) 
Mobile Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For flood plain management purposes, mobile home includes travel trailers and similar vehicles placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or more. For all other purposes including insurance purposes under FEMA sponsored programs, mobile home does not include travel trailers and similar vehicles. A mobile home is not a modular home. (Amended 04/05/06) 
Mobile Home Park. Use of property for two or more mobile homes for living purposes, and spaces or lots set aside and offered for use for mobile homes. Does not include mobile home sales lot. 
Model Home. A dwelling unit used for conducting business related to the sale of a development. 
Modification. An application requesting change to an approved condition of zoning or use permit, except for conditions that pertain to a change in use, increase in density, and/or increase in height. (Added 06/02/99) 
Modular Home. A factory-fabricated, single family dwelling built in one or more sections, designed for placement on a permanent foundation and not having a permanent chassis. A modular home is not a mobile home. (Amended 3/6/91; Amended 04/05/06) 
Motel. See Hotel/Motel. 
Multi-tenant. Two or more businesses that provide goods and/or services within separate structures located on the same site or within the same structure that provides wall separation and private access for each business. (Added 06/04/03) 
3.3.14 N 
NADIR. The point directly below the luminaire defined as 0 degrees vertical angle. (Added 05/05/04) 
Nightclub. A commercial establishment used primarily for entertainment and the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages; where the sale of prepared food, if any, is accessory to the primary use and the gross receipts from the sales of alcoholic beverages exceeds the gross receipts from the sales of food. A nightclub shall not be considered a Bar, Private Club or Club. (See Article 19.4.31(1).) (Res. No. 11-0884, pt. 1, 10-5-11) 
Nonconforming (Grandfathered) Lot, Use or Structure. A use, lot or structure that was nonconforming at the time of the adoption of the Fulton County Zoning Resolution on March 11, 1955, or subsequent amendments thereto, or created by deed between March 11, 1955 and September 21, 1967 (adoption of the Subdivision Regulations) and does not now meet the minimum requirements of the district in which it is located. Also, a use, lot or structure which has been made nonconforming by some county or state action. Any change or addition to a use, lot or structure must comply with current provisions of the Zoning Resolution. (See Section 4.3.1., Adopted 4/5/89; Amended 11/03/04) 
Nursing Home. A use in which domiciliary care is provided to 3 or more chronically ill non-family members who are provided with food, shelter and care. This use shall not include hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. Convalescent Center, nursing home and personal care home are further distinguished in Administrative and Use Permit provisions. 
3.3.15 O 
Off-Premise. A location outside of the subject lot for a designated use. (Added 09/01/99) 
Off-Site/Premise. The location of a structure or use outside the lot-of-record of the subject development including the adjoining street or other right-of-way. (Added 7/7/99) 
On-Premise. The individual lot-of-record on which the use is located. (Added 09/01/99) 
On-Site/Premise. The location of a structure or use within the confines of a property delineated by property lines or, if referenced in a zoning or use permit case, within the confines of the boundaries of the legal description filed with the petition. (Added 7/7/99) 
Office, Temporary. A mobile, manufactured or other structure which is used as an office for real estate sales, on-site construction management and related functions. Requires an administrative permit under Temporary Structures. 
Open space. A portion of a site which is permanently set aside for public or private use and will not be developed. The space may be used for passive or active recreation or may be reserved to protect or buffer natural areas. Open space may include wooded areas other than required landscape strips and buffers, pathways/walkways, fields, and sensitive environmental areas such as wetlands, etc. Detention facilities and platted residential lots shall not be included in open space calculations. (Added 04/05/06) 
Outparcel (spin-site). A portion of a larger parcel of land generally designed as a site for a separate structure and business from the larger tract. An outparcel may or may not be a subdivision of a larger parcel. To be recognized as an outparcel, the portion must be identified on a Site Plan approved for the larger parcel. (Added 12/4/91) 
3.3.16 P 
Parcel. See lot. 
Parking Lot. An area which is used for the parking of vehicle. 
Parking space. An area designated for the parking of one vehicle on an all weather surface. No more than two carport or garage spaces may offset the minimum parking requirements in a single-family residential district. (Amended 5/6/92) (Specifications Included In Article XVIII) 
Path. A cleared way for pedestrians and/or bicycles that may or may not be paved or otherwise improved. (Added 03/03/04) 
Pawn Shop. A business that lends money at interest on personal property deposited with the lender until redeemed. (Added 10/02/02) 
Personal Care Home/Assisted Living. A state licensed use in which domiciliary care is provided to adults who are provided with food, shelter and personal services. This use shall not include hospitals, convalescent centers, nursing homes, hospices, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. (Amended 7/7/99) 
Pipeline. Any conduit through which natural gas, petroleum, oxygen, or other flammable or combustible products, or any of their derivative products are conveyed or intended to be conveyed. (Added 08/04/99) 
Plans Review. The act of reviewing plans and specifications to insure that proposed undertakings comply with various governing laws, ordinances and resolutions. Compliance is subsequently utilized to determine that work and materials are in accordance with approved plans and specifications. 
Plant Nursery. Any land used to raise trees, shrubs, flowers and other plants for sale or transplanting, but not including the retail sale of any related garden supplies such as chemical fertilizer, tools and other similar goods and/or equipment, or the retail sale of plants not grown on the property except with an approved Use Permit for Landscaping Business, Plant Nursery, or Garden Center with Indoor Retail Component (Article 19.4.27). (Amended 7/7/99, 04/03/02) 
Plat, Final. A finished drawing of a subdivision which provides a complete and accurate depiction of all legal and engineering information required by the Subdivision Regulations. Certification is necessary for recording. 
Plat, Preliminary. A drawing which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to clearly indicate its feasibility, but is not in final form for recordation pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations. 
Pollution Point. The location of an air pollution source (AFS report*), CERCLA site (CERCLIS report*), HSI site (RCRA report*), NPDES site (PCS/ICIS report*), landfill, RCRA site (RCRA report*), solid waste landfill, TRI site (TRI report*), or known reported environmental violation. (*Found at Envirofacts website: www.epa.gov/enviro/) (Amd. No. 13-0175, 7-17-13) 
Porch. A roofed open structure projecting from the exterior wall of a building and having at least seventy percent of the total area of the vertical planes forming its perimeter unobstructed in any manner except by insect-screening between floor and ceiling. (Added 03/03/04) 
Primary Variance. An application requesting relief from the standards of the Zoning Resolution, except relief from use, minimum lot area, or minimum lot frontage. 
Prison/Correctional Facility. A public or state-licensed private owned building(s), and all accessory uses and structures, used for long-term confinement housing and supervision of persons who are serving terms of imprisonment for violation of criminal laws. A prison is distinguished from a jail, in that a prison is considered to be larger and for longer terms, and is normally operated under the authority or jurisdiction of the State or Federal government. (See Article 19.4.34, Private Correctional Facility) (Added 7/7/99) 
Private club. A corporation chartered, organized and existing under the laws of the state, exempt from federal income taxes pursuant to Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, actively in operation within the county, having at least 300 members regularly paying monthly, quarterly, or semiannual dues or user fees, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofitable purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any shareholder or member, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining and using a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; provided, that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages to the club or its members or guests beyond a fixed salary. In no event shall dues or user fees be paid on a daily basis. Activities defined by this Zoning Resolution as Adult Entertainment or facilities defined as an Adult Entertainment Establishment shall be prohibited within a Private Club establishment. A Private Club shall not be considered a Nightclub, Club or Bar. (See Article 19.4.31(1).) (Res. No. 11-0884, pt. 1, 10-5-11) 
Property. When used in conjunction with an application for rezoning, an area of land composed of less than one lot, or of accumulations of one or more lots, or parts thereof. 
Protected Zone. All lands that fall outside the buildable area of a parcel, all areas of a parcel required to remain in open space, all areas required as landscape strips and/or buffers (including zoning buffers, state water buffers and tributary buffers) and all tree save areas according to the provisions of the Fulton County Zoning Resolution, conditions of zoning, use permit or variance approval, and/or the Tree Preservation Ordinance. (Added 12/1/99) 
3.3.17 Q 
3.3.18 R 
Razor Wire/Barbed Tape. Razor wire has a central strand of high tensile strength wire and a steel tape punched into a shape with barbs. The steel tape is then cold-crimped tightly to the wire everywhere except for the barbs. Barbed tape is very similar, but has no central reinforcement wire. Razor wire or barbed tape may be straight or concertina style (formed in coils). (Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11) 
Recreational Court, Private. An improved area designed and intended for the playing of a game or event such as basketball or tennis, and which serves a single family dwelling(s), duplex dwellings and/or multi-family dwellings, or combinations of dwelling types, including such improved areas which are owned and/or controlled by a neighborhood club or similar organization. A basketball goal adjoining a driveway of typical residential driveway dimensions shall not constitute a recreational court. (Added, 7/5/89) 
Recreational Court, Public. An improved area designed and intended for the playing of a game or event such as basketball or tennis, and is operated as a business or as a club unless such club is a neighborhood club or similar organization identified under Recreational Court, Private. (Added 7/5/89) 
Recreational Facilities. Includes parks, recreation areas, golf courses, playgrounds, recreation counters (indoor & outdoor), playing fields, and other similar uses or facilities. (Added 7/1/92) 
Recreation Fields. An outside area designed and equipped for the conduct of sports and leisure time activities including but not limited to softball, soccer, football, and field hockey. (Added 7/7/99) 
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle used for leisure time activities and as a dwelling unit while traveling. Examples include a camper, a motor home and a travel trailer. As distinguished from a mobile home, dimensions shall not exceed a width of eight and one-half (8.5) feet and a length of forty five (45) feet. 
Recycling Center, Collecting. Any facility utilized for the purpose of collecting materials to be recycled including, but not limited to, plastics, glass, paper and aluminum materials. A drop off point for temporary storage of recyclables, no processing or reprocessing of materials is allowed. Such use may be principal or accessory to a non-residential use on non-residentially zoned property, except AG-1 zoned properties unless, the primary use is a permitted non-residential use. (Added 12/4/91) (Res. No. 11-0743, 9-7-11) 
Recycling Center, Reprocessing. A facility, in which recyclables, such as newspapers, magazines, cardboard, books and other paper products; glass; metal cans; and other products, are recycled, reprocessed and treated to return such products to a condition in which they may again be used in new products. The Recycling Center, Reprocessing use is allowed in the C-2 (Commercial) and M-1A (Industrial Park) districts with a Use Permit. The reprocessing or storage, bailing or otherwise dealing in scrap irons or other metals, used cloth, plumbing fixtures, appliances, brick, wood or other building materials; and the storage or accumulation outside of a storage building of used vehicle tires or tire carcasses is prohibited. A recycling center is not to be considered a landfill. (Added 12/4/91) (Amended 5/6/29; 7/7/99; Res. No. 11-0743, 9-7-11) 
Relocated Residential Structure. A dwelling which has been removed from one location for relocation to another lot. 
Reprocessing. Waste materials are subjected to a special process or treatment to return such products to a condition in which they may again be used in new products. (Res. No. 11-0743, 9-7-11) 
Residential Use Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof where one actually lives or has his home; a place of human habitation. (Added 7/1/92) 
Restaurant. An establishment where meals are prepared and served to seated patrons. Food orders are taken at the tables and served by wait staff. A cafeteria shall also be considered to be a restaurant. The serving of those meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. (Amended 4/6/94) (Res. No. 11-0884, pt. 1, 10-5-11; Res. No. 12-0356, pt. 2, 5-16-12) 
Restaurant, Fast Food. A food service establishment which sells food from a counter or window for consumption on-premises or off-premises. Tables may be provided, and food may be served at a table, but may not be ordered from a table. 
Retail Use. A business whose primary purpose is the sale of merchandise to consumers. (Added 06/04/03) 
Retreat. See Lodge. 
Right-of-Way. A portion of land over which a local or state government has designated a right of use. 
Roadside Produce Stand. A use offering either farm-grown, prepared food products such as fruits, vegetables, canned foods, or prepared packaged meats for sale from a vehicle or a temporary structure. The consumption of food on-site is prohibited. (Amended 07/07/93, 04/06/94, 04/05/06) 
Roadside Vending. The sale of merchandise such as clothing, crafts, household item, firewood, etc., from a temporary table or cart. (Added 07/07/93) (Amended 04/06/94, 02/07/01) 
Rooming House. A residential use other than a hotel or motel in which lodging may be provided to non-household members for periods of 30 days or longer, and which does not include the provision of meals. 
3.3.19 S 
Salvage/Storage/Junk Facility. Any use involving the storage or disassembly of wrecked or junked automobiles, trucks or other vehicles; vehicular impound lots; storage, bailing or otherwise dealing in scrap irons or other metals, used paper, used cloth, plumbing fixtures, appliances, brick, wood or other building materials; and the storage or accumulation outside of a storage building of used vehicle tires or tire carcasses which cannot be reclaimed for their original use. Such uses are storage and/or salvage facilities whether or not all or part of such operation is conducted inside or outside a building or as principal or accessory uses. The Salvage/Storage/Junk Facility is allowed in the M-1 (Light Industrial) and M-2 (Heavy Industrial) districts with a Use Permit. State approval is required for all sites utilized for reclamation and/or disposal of toxic and/or hazardous waste. (Amended 7/7/99; Res. No. 11-0743, 9-7-11) 
Scale. Scale refers to the relationship of the size of a building to neighboring buildings and of a building to a site. In general, the scale of new construction should relate to the majority of surrounding buildings. (Added 10/01/03) 
Schools, Colleges & Universities. Any educational facility established under the laws of the state (and usually regulated in matters of detail by local authorities), in the various districts, counties, or towns, maintained at the public expense by taxation, and open, usually without charge, to all residents of the city, town or other district; private schools which have students regularly attending classes and which teach subjects commonly taught in these schools of this state; any educational facility operated by a private organization or local county, or state that provides training or education beyond and in addition to that training received in grades kindergarten to twelfth, including but not limited to, trade, business and vocational schools; any institution of higher learning, consisting of an assemblage of colleges united under one corporate organization or government, affording instruction in the arts and sciences and the learned professions, and conferring degrees. (Added 7/1/92) 
School, Private. An educational use having a curriculum at least equal to a public school, but not operated by the Fulton County Board of Education. 
School, Special. An educational use devoted to special education including the training of gifted, learning disabled, mentally and/or physically handicapped persons, but not operated by the Fulton County Board of Education. 
Screen. A fence, wall, hedge, landscaping, earthen berm, buffer area or any combination of these that is designed to provided a visual and/or physical barrier. (Added 7/7/99) 
Seasonal Business Use. A primary use involving the sale of items related to calendar holidays, such as Christmas trees, Halloween pumpkins, etc., which may be conducted outside. (Amended 12/4/91, 5/6/92, 07/07/93, 04/06/94, 04/05/06) 
Secondary Variance. An appeal of a decision and/or action of a department director or deputy department director authorized to hear a variance request or interpretation of the Zoning Resolution. (Added07/07/99) 
Self-Storage/Mini. A single-level structure or group of structures containing separate spaces/stalls and which are leased or rented to individuals for the storage of goods. (Added 7/7/99) 
Self-Storage/Multi. A multi-level structure containing separate storage rooms/stalls under a single roof that are leased or rented. (Added 7/7/99) 
Senior housing. A single family or multi-family development intended for, operated for and designed to accommodate residents 62 years of age and older. Senior housing communities are designed for seniors to live on their own, but with the security and conveniences of community living. Some provide communal dining rooms and planned recreational activities (congregate living or retirement communities), while others provide housing with only minimal amenities or services. (Added 04/05/06) (Amd. No. 11-0288, 5-4-11) 
Service Commercial Use. A business whose primary purpose is to provide a service. (Added 06/04/03) 
Service Line. A distribution line that transports natural gas from a common source of supply to: (1) a customer meter or the connection to a customer's piping, whichever is farther downstream, or (2) the connection to a customer's piping if there is no customer meter. The customer meter is the meter that measures the transfer of gas from one operator to a customer. (Added 08/04/99) 
Service Station. A use which provides for the sale of motor vehicle fuels and automotive accessories, and which may provide minor repair and maintenance services. A service station shall be limited to four or fewer bays excluding no more than one attached or detached bay for washing cars. No portion of the site shall be used for the display of cars for sale. (Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11) 
Setback. A space between a property line and a building or specified structure. 
Setback, Minimum. The minimum yards as specified in the various use districts. A minimum required space between a property line and a structure. An area identified by a building line. 
Sidewalk. A paved area designated for pedestrians which is constructed in accordance with Fulton County standards. (Added 03/03/04) 
Sign. Any name, identification, description, display, illustration, writing, emblem, pictorial representation or device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or land in view of the general public, and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business. 
Sign, Abandoned. Any sign that is located on property which becomes vacant and /or unoccupied, pertains to a business which does not currently conduct a business of valid business licensing, or pertains to a product no longer being sold on premises or pertains to time, event or purpose which no longer applies. (Added 09/01/99) 
Sign Animated. Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene. (Added 09/01/99) 
Sign Area. The sign area of a freestanding sign shall be the combination of sign faces enclosing the limits of all representations measured from the extreme lowest point of the sign to the extreme highest point of the sign and from the extreme left edge to the extreme right edge of each sign face, including any frame and excluding any support structure. When sign representations are not placed upon an independent surface, the sign area shall be the area of the smallest regular polygon completely enclosing the limits of all representations including any frame (painted or otherwise as shown on Illustrations XXXIII-1 and 2), contrasting material or color differentiation against which representations may be placed. The sign area calculation shall encompass all open space within the polygon and any internally illuminated portions of the sign structure. 
The message area of an identification monument sign shall be delineated by a polygon touching the extremities of all representations thereon as shown on Illustration XXXIII-3. For V-shaped signs, the sign area shall be composed of the total area of both faces if the faces meet at an angle of 90 degrees or more, or the total area of the larger face if less than 90 degrees. The area of signs with more than two faces shall be one half of the sum of the area of all faces. (Revised 09/01/99) 
Sign, Candidate. A sign used for the purpose of soliciting votes for a public office or legislation. (Added 09/01/99) 
Sign, Canopy. Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. (Added 09/01/99) 
Sign, Changeable Copy (Electronic). Any sign that uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes. (Added 09/01/99) 
Sign, Changeable Copy (Manual). Any sign that has a reader board format serving as background for letters/messages that are manually changeable. (Added 09/01/99) 
Sign, Freestanding. Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure, but not including monument type signs. (Added 09/01/99) 
Sign Height. See Height, Sign. 
Sign, Identification Monument. A sign where the bottom of the sign structure is flush with the ground generally at the same horizontal width as the sign face, as distinguished from a pole sign. Identification monuments are permitted in lieu of other free-standing business signage allowed herein or in conjunction with a residential development and the sign face shall be a continuous polygon flush with the base of the sign and sign copy shall be limited to the name of the development, tenant names, logo and address of the development or business.(Revised 09/01/99) 
Sign, Illumination of. See Illumination. 
Sign, Kiosk. A sign consisting of a list of names of businesses located on a property or in a building.(Revised 09/01/99) 
Sign, Portable. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T- frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. (Added 09/01/99) 
Sign, Projecting. Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. (Added 09/01/99) 
Sign, Roof. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. (Added 09/01/99) 
Sign, Temporary. Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted. (Added 09/01/99) 
Sign, Vehicle. A vehicle with sign(s) permanently painted, attached or magnetically designed to be affixed to a vehicle for the purpose of providing advertisements of products, services or events or directing people to a business or activity. Trailers or non-motorized vehicles are not to be classified as vehicles with signs. (Added 09/01/99) 
Sign, Wall. Any sign attached parallel to, but within two feet of, a wall, painted on the wall surface, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building and which displays only one sign surface. (Added 09/01/99) 
Sign, Wall (Entry). Any single faced sign attached to or erected and confined within the limits of an exterior wall generally located along the perimeter of a development. (Added 09/01/99) 
Sign, Window. Any temporarily affixed sign of pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service, that is displayed within one foot of a window, attached inside a window or placed upon a window (including windows on doors) and is visible from the exterior of the window. (Added 09/01/99) 
Sign, Weekend Directional. Real estate signs for the purpose of marketing and providing directions to residential developments. (Amended 04/03/02) 
Site Plan. A detailed plan, drawn to scale, based on a certified boundary survey, and reflecting conditions of zoning approval, various requirements of State law, and County Ordinances and Resolutions. 
Site Plan, Preliminary. A detailed plan, normally associated with rezoning and Use Permit requests, which is drawn to scale and reflects the various requirements of State law and of County Ordinances and Resolutions. A Preliminary Site Plan must be drawn to scale and shall contain information listed for such a plan in the Development Review Guide. 
Skywalk. An elevated, grade separated pedestrian walkway or bridge located over a public right-of-way. 
Special Event. An event or happening organized by any person or organization which will generate or invite considerable public participation and/or spectators for a particular and limited purpose of time, including, but not limited to, special sales and service promotions, car shows, arts and crafts shows, horse shows, carnivals, festivals, exhibitions, circuses, fairs, show houses and tours of homes for charity. Special events are not limited to those events conducted on the public streets but may occur entirely on private property. Special events may be for profit or nonprofit. Events which will occur in the public right-of-way, such as roadway foot races, fundraising walks, bikeathons, parades, etc. are subject to the approval of the Fulton County Police Department. For special events local in nature and marketed only to the local community which anticipate less than 250 attendees at any one time, see administrative permit (Article 19.3.3. Event, Special Indoor/Outdoor). See use permit (Article 19.4.19. Festivals or Events, Outdoor/Indoor) for special events marketed to populations outside the local community where organizer anticipates 250 attendees or more at any one time. The director shall make the final determination of the appropriate category. (Added 4-5-06; 16-0363, pt. 3, 5-4-16) 
Specified Anatomical Areas. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. (Added 6-5-96) 
Specified Sexual Activities. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts. (Added 6-5-96) 
Spill Light. The light that illuminates surfaces beyond the intended area of illumination caused by the uncontrolled direct light component from the luminaires. (Added 2-1-06) 
Stadium. A large open or enclosed structure used for sports and other major events and partly or completely surrounded by tiers of seats for spectators. (Added 9-1-04) 
Story. A portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the floor or space above it, excluding basements and attics. 
Story, Half. A heated and finished area below a roof, one or more of the vertical walls of which are less than normal ceiling height for the building. (Amended 12-4-91) 
Street. A roadway/right-of-way located and intended for vehicular traffic. Streets may be public or they may be private if specifically approved by the Department of Environment and Community Development as part of a subdivision plat. (Amended 11-3-93, 9-5-01) 
Public streets are rights-of-way used for access owned and maintained by the federal, state, or local government. 
Private streets are roadways constructed to Fulton County Standards but owned and maintained by a private entity. Necessary easements for ingress and egress for police, fire, emergency vehicles and all operating utilities shall be provided. Should Fulton County ever be petitioned to assume ownership and maintenance of the private streets prior to dedication of the streets, they must be brought to acceptable Fulton County standards subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works. 
Stub streets are rights-of-way that dead ends into an interior property line. 
Freeway - Any multi-lane roadway having full access control and separation of directional traffic. A freeway accommodates large volumes of high speed traffic and provides efficient movement of vehicular traffic for interstate and major through travel. (Added 4-3-02) 
Principal Arterial - Any roadway that has partial or no access control and is primarily used for fast or heavy traffic. Emphasis is placed on mobility rather than access to adjacent land. (Added 4-3-02) 
Minor Arterial - Any roadway that has partial or no access control and is primarily used for interconnectivity of major arterials and places more emphasis on access to adjacent land over mobility than principal arterials. (Added 4-3-02) 
Collector Road - Any roadway that has partial or no access control and has more emphasis on access to adjacent land over mobility than arterials. The primary purpose is to distribute trips to and from the arterial system to their destination points and allow access to the local roads. (Added 4-3-02) 
Local Road - Any roadway that has no access control and places strong emphasis on access to adjacent land over mobility while service to through traffic is discouraged. (Added 4-3-02) 
Full Access Control - Preference is given to through traffic by providing access connections only with selected public roads and by prohibiting crossing at grade and direct private connections. (Added 4-3-02) 
Partial Access Control - Preference is given to through traffic to a degree that in addition to connection with selected public roads, there may be some crossing at grade and some private connections. (Added 4-3-02) 
No Access Control - Preference is generally given to access to adjacent land rather than mobility. (Added 4-3-02) 
Structure. Anything built or constructed which occupies a location on, or is attached, to the ground. Driveways, surface parking lots, patios, and similar paved surfaces are not considered structures. (Amended 4-5-06) 
Structure, Accessory. A subordinate structure, customarily incidental to a principal structure or use and located on the same lot. Examples of accessory structures in single-family dwelling districts include outbuildings, such as, tool sheds, woodsheds, workshops, outdoor kitchens, pool houses, gazebos, guest houses, storage sheds, detached garages and detached carports, etc. Fences and retaining walls are not considered accessory structures. Driveways, surface parking lots, patios, and similar paved surfaces are not considered accessory structures. (Amended 4-5-06) 
Structure, Principal. A structure in which the principal use or purpose on a property occurs, and to which all other structures on the property are subordinate. Principal shall be synonymous with main and primary. 
Subdivision. The division of land into two or more lots. A development consisting of subdivided lots. 
Surface, All-weather. Any surface treatment, including gravel, which is applied to and maintained so as to prevent erosion, and to prevent vehicle wheels from making direct contact with soil, sod or mud; and which effectively prevents the depositing of soil, sod or mud onto streets from areas required to be so treated. (Added 7-5-89) 
Swimming Pool, Private. A recreation facility designed and intended for water contact activities which serves a single family dwelling(s), duplex dwellings and/or multi-family dwellings, or combinations of dwelling types, including pools which are owned and/or controlled by a neighborhood club or similar organization. (Added 7-5-89) 
Swimming Pool, Public. A recreation facility designed and intended water contact activities which is operated as a business or as a club unless such club is associated with a neighborhood club or similar organization. (Added 7-5-89) 
3.3.20 T 
Tenant Panels. An on-premises sign panel(s) that list the name of tenants within a shopping center or development which the primary sign identifies. (Added 9-1-99) 
Thoroughfare, Major. Any street which is classified in the Transportation Element of the Comprehensive Plan as either a freeway, an arterial or a major collector. 
Thoroughfare, Minor. Any street which is classified in the Transportation Element of the Comprehensive Plan as a minor collector or local street. 
Tower. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers and monopoles but not Alternative Antenna Support Structures. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers and the like excluding amateur radio antenna. (Added 3/5/97) 
Transfer Station. A facility used to transfer solid waste from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal facility or processing operation. (Added 10/02/02) 
Transmission Line. A pipeline other than a gathering line that (1) transports fuel oil/liquid petroleum product from a gathering line or storage facility (tank farm) to a distribution center or storage facility (tank farm) and/or (2) transports fuel oil/liquid petroleum product within a storage field. (Added 08/04/99) 
Trespass Light. The off site spill light that illuminates beyond the property boundaries in which the light fixture is installed, where it is neither wanted nor needed. (Added 02/01/06) 
Truck Stop. Any business, premises, or land in which or upon which a business, service or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, storage, or repair of commercial vehicles is conducted or rendered, including the dispensing of motor fuel or other petroleum products directly into motor vehicles and the sale of accessories or equipment for trucks and similar commercial vehicles. A truck stop also may include overnight accommodations and restaurant facilities primarily for the use of truck crews. Trucks/trailers shall have current registration and license plates with decal. (Added 05/05/10) 
Truck Terminal. A primary use of property where trucks/trailers are temporarily stored maintained or based and where trucks load and unload cargo and freight and where the cargo and freight may be broken down or aggregated into smaller or larger loads for transfer to other vehicles or modes of transportation. Truck terminals may include uses incidental to the principal use such as facilities for servicing of trucks and warehouse storage facilities. Trucks/trailers shall have current registration and license plates with decal. (Permitted M-2 Heavy Industrial District). (Amended 2/7/96, 05/05/10) 
(Amd. No. 10-0497, 5-5-10) 
3.3.21 U 
Use. The purpose or function arranged or intended for a structure or property. 
Use, Accessory. A subordinate use which is customarily incidental to the principal use of a lot, and which is located on the same lot as a principal use. 
Use, Principal. The primary or main purpose or function of a lot or structure. Synonymous with Main and Primary. 
Use Permit. A permit approved by the Board of Commissioners, pursuant to a public hearing, which authorizes a use which must meet certain standards which exceed the requirements of the district as-a-whole. 
3.3.22 V 
Variance, Primary. An application requesting relief from the standards of the Zoning Resolution, except relief from use, minimum lot area, or minimum lot frontage. (Added 06/02/99) 
Variance, Secondary. An appeal of a decision and/or action of a department director or deputy department director authorized to hear a variance request or interpretation of the Zoning Resolution. (Added 06/02/99) 
Vegetative Screen. An evergreen planting which, within three years of planting, provides a 100 percent visual barrier between a lot and adjacent lots and uses with a minimum height of 6 feet. A vegetative screen is composed of plant materials. (Added 12/4/91) 
Vehicle, Junk or Salvage. Any automobile, truck or other vehicle which is missing one of the following: 1) current registration, 2) license plate with current decal, 3) proof of liability insurance, 4) drive train component for more than 30 days. (Amended 3/6/91) 
Veterinary Clinic/Hospital. A place where animals are given medical care and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital use. (Added 7/7/99) 
3.3.23 W 
Waste. Materials that are discarded, disposed of or no longer usable. 
Waste Disposal Boundary. The limit of all waste disposal areas, appurtenances, and ancillary activities (including but not limited to internal access roads and drainage control devices). (Added 04/03/02) 
Waste, Hazardous. See Georgia Department of Natural Resources definition. 
Waste, Solid. See Georgia Department of Natural Resources definition. 
3.3.24 X 
3.3.25 Y 
Yard. A land area extending between a structure and a lot line. (Amended 04/03/02) 
Yard, Front. A yard abutting any street except the side street on a corner lot. Front yards extend the entire length of an abutting street from intersecting lot line to intersecting lot line. The front yard of corner lots shall be applied to the street which abuts the lot for the shortest distance. (Amended 04/03/02) 
Yard, Minimum. The minimum distance between a building or specified structure and a lot line as specified in the district regulations. 
Yard, Rear. The rear yard is the minimum required distance between the rear lot line and a structure. True triangular lots do not have rear yards. Lots with more than one front lot line do not have rear yards. The Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development or his/her designee shall make the final determination of rear yards when in dispute or undefined by this definition. (Amended 04/03/02) 
Yard, Side. A yard which is not a front or rear yard. 
3.3.26 Z 
Zoning Conditions. Requirements placed on property by the Board of Commissioners at the time of approval of a rezoning and/or use permit. (Added 06/02/99) 
Zoning Modification. An application to change approved zoning conditions on rezonings and use permits where it has been determined by the Director of the Environment and Community Development Department that the requested change involves a matter of significant public interest. (Added 06/02/99) 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Adopted by the board of commissioners, October 5, 1988 with subsequent amendments. 

4.1 - Scope and intent. 
This article includes a variety of regulations that apply to uses and structures allowed in more than one use district or to uses and structures allowed in all use districts except when specifically excluded by provisions contained elsewhere in this resolution. 
4.1.1 Other laws apply. Compliance with this resolution shall not substitute for compliance with federal and state laws nor for other Fulton County ordinances and resolutions. 
4.1.2 Judicial and quasi-judicial actions. Zoning-related legal proceedings or appeals to boards designated within this resolution shall stay deadlines and expiration dates which are designated in this resolution. Appeals from decisions of the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be brought within 30 days. Appeals from the application, interpretation and administration of this resolution shall be to the Board of Zoning Appeals unless otherwise specifically provided for in the various sections of this resolution. 
4.1.3 Administrative approval. The action on a request brought under a provision of the Zoning Resolution which requires approval by at least one Fulton County official, accompanied or followed by an interoffice memorandum which shall be addressed to, and included in, the appropriate zoning file or alternate file if there is no zoning file. A courtesy copy of the authorization memo shall be sent to the Director of the Department of Public Works, and the Department of Environment and Community Development. (Added 7/5/89, Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
4.2 - Lot, structure and use regulations. 
4.2.1   Use, permitted use, change of use. Properties shall be used and structures or parts thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, modified, moved, enlarged, or altered in conformity with the regulations contained in this resolution and any conditions of zoning. (Amended 11/3/93) 
A.  Permitted uses. If either a specific use or a class of use is not listed as a permitted use in compliance with the zoning district standards and any zoning conditions, such specific use or class of use shall be prohibited in that district. 
B.  Change of use. Any change of use, including a change of a single use within a multiple use structure, shall comply with the requirements of this resolution and any condition of zoning. 
C.  Single family district limitations. Single family dwelling districts shall be restricted to no more than one main or principal structure per lot. 
4.2.2 Lots. Structures shall be erected and uses shall be established only upon a single lot which meets or exceeds the requirements of this resolution or conditions of zoning, whichever is more restrictive. Regardless of the minimum requirements of individual zoning districts, a plat shall not be approved until the buildable area (including the buildable area(s) within the 50 percent of a minimum lot size which must be outside a flood plain) of every lot is determined to be sufficient to accommodate a square configured from the minimum building area required by the zoning district. 
Lots created within a development project to accommodate detention and retention facilities which are incidental, related, appropriate, and clearly subordinate to the main use in the project are exempt from the minimum lot size requirements in all zoning districts. No other construction/building shall be permitted on such lots. A 10-foot access easement is required in accordance with established standards. (Added 6-4-03) 
4.2.3 Reduction of lot area. When a lot or property is reduced in size, all resulting divisions and all structures shall meet the minimum requirements of the applicable provisions of this resolution; except that if a lot or property is reduced in area to less than the district minimum lot size as a result of government action, the lot shall be deemed nonconforming. 
4.2.4 Division of conditionally-zoned parcels. All lots of a proposed subdivision must be in keeping with unit and density allocations, and other conditions of zoning as well as the Subdivision Regulations and this resolution. If each proposed parcel does not conform to such conditions, the proposed division shall require a rezoning to accomplish the desired modification of conditions. (Amended 7-5-89) 
4.2.5 Uses and structures permitted in yards, and outside storage. 
A.  Uses and structures permitted in yards. In addition to uses which may be provided for, conditioned or excluded from yards by other sections of this resolution, yards may be used for driveways, signs, at-grade parking, loading areas, fountains, flag poles, yard ornaments not to exceed four feet in height, walls, fences, walkways, lawns, buffers, landscape areas, underground utilities, well houses, storm water management facilities and tree preservation areas. No part of any yard or use made thereof shall serve the requirements for any other lot or structure. (Amended 7-5-89, 3-6-91, 5-6-92) 
B.  Limitations on the location of outside storage and accessory displays. Outside storage and accessory displays are permitted as indicated below for the various use districts. 
1.  Outside storage associated with residential uses or districts including AG-1 used for residential purposes only. Such storage is permitted in side and rear yards only, and must be screened from adjoining residential uses and from streets with an opaque fence or a vegetative screen which complies with Appendix G of the Tree Preservation Ordinance [See Code ch. 26, art. VI]. Any storage not normally associated with residential use shall be prohibited. 
2.  Outside storage associated with industrial uses or districts. Outside storage is permitted in rear and side yards only in the M1-A District and in all yards in the M-2 District. Outside storage shall be located at least 25 feet from any residential property line. Such storage must be screened, in accordance with Appendix G of the Tree Preservation Ordinance [See Code ch. 26, art. VI], from neighboring residential uses in all industrial districts and from streets in the M-1A and M-1 Districts. 
3.  Outside storage associated with institutional, office and/or commercial uses or districts. Outside storage is permitted only within rear yards, and shall be located at least 25 feet from any residential property line. Such storage must be screened from neighboring residential uses and streets with an opaque fence or a vegetative screen which complies with Appendix G of the Tree Preservation Ordinance [See Code ch. 26, art. VI]. 
4.  Outside accessory display associated with commercial and/or industrial uses or districts. Accessory displays for merchandise which is being offered for sale on-premises shall be permitted in the commercial and industrial districts only. Such displays may be located in any yard as long as it is not located in a minimum yard. Vehicle and similar displays may be located in minimum front yards, but may not encroach upon minimum landscape areas. 
4.2.6 Maintenance of vegetation. Pervious surfaces including yards shall be permanently maintained and shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubs, hedges and/or other landscaping materials approved by the county arborist. (Amended 3-6-91) 
4.2.7 Lots with well and/or septic tank. Any lot upon which both an individual well and septic tank/drain field are utilized shall be governed by regulations of the Fulton County Board of Health. Lots utilizing both a well and a septic tank shall be not less than one acre in size. Any lot proposed to be served by either a well or a septic tank/drain field shall comply with the larger of the minimum lot area required by the health code or the minimum required for the district in which the lot is located. 
4.2.8 Multiple zoning. Whenever a lot is zoned for more than one single family dwelling district or zoned a single family district(s) and AG-1, the district which comprises the largest area shall control the development standards for that lot. (Added 3-7-90, Amended 4-5-06) 
4.2.9 Building separations. All building separations shall be as specified by the Standard Building Code. (Added 6-4-03; Amended 3-3-04) 
(Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
4.3 - Exceptions. 
This resolution shall apply to every lot, parcel, property, use and structure in Fulton County except as excluded in this section. Furthermore, the provisions herein shall not apply to properties and structures owned, operated and/or leased for use by Fulton County for public purposes. The use of said property for a nonconforming use does not establish a precedent for other nonpublic (governmental) uses. Should the public use cease to exist, the provisions herein shall apply. (Amended 4-7-93) 
4.3.1 Nonconforming lots, uses and structures. Within the zoning districts established by this resolution there may exist lots, structures, and uses of both land and structures which were lawful before this resolution was adopted or subsequently amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this resolution as adopted or subsequently amended. Nonconforming lots, uses and structures may continue in their nonconforming status with the following limitations and/or requirements. (Added 4-5-89) 
A.  Nonconforming lot. A single, lawful lot-of-record which does not meet the requirements of this resolution for area or dimensions, or both, may be used for the buildings and accessory buildings necessary to carry out permitted uses subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Parking space requirements as provided for in article XVIII are met; and 
2.  Such lot does not adjoin another vacant lot(s) or portion of a lot in the same ownership. 
3.  If two or more adjoining lots or portions of lots in single ownership do not meet the requirements established for lot width, frontage or area, the property involved shall be treated as one lot, and no portion of said lot shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with this resolution. This paragraph shall not apply to nonconforming lots when 50 percent or more of adjoining lots on the same street are the same size or smaller. 
B.  Nonconforming uses of land. When a use of land is nonconforming pursuant to the provisions of this resolution, such use may continue as long as it remains otherwise lawful and complies with the following provisions: 
1.  No nonconforming use shall be enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than that which was occupied at the time use became nonconforming; 
2.  No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot not occupied by such use at the time the use became nonconforming; and 
3.  If any nonconforming use of land ceases for a period of more than one year, any subsequent use of such land shall comply with this resolution. 
C.  Nonconforming use of structures. If a lawful use of structure, or of a structure and lot in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption of this resolution or its subsequent amendment that would not be allowed under provisions of this resolution as adopted or amended, the use may be continued so long as it complies with other regulations, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this resolution shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a permitted use; 
2.  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a building which was arranged or designed for such use at the time the use became nonconforming, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building; 
3.  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure or structure and land may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or more restrictive nature; 
4.  When a nonconforming use of a structure or a structure and land in combination is replaced with a conforming use, such structure or land may not later revert to a nonconforming use; 
5.  When a nonconforming use of a structure or structure and land in combination is discontinued or abandoned for one year, the structure or structure and land in combination shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located; and 
6.  A nonconforming use of a structure and/or a nonconforming use of land shall not be extended or enlarged by attachment to a building or land of additional signs which can be seen from off the land or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district. 
D.  Nonconforming structures. When a structure exists on the effective date of adoption of this resolution or its amendments that could not be built under the terms of this resolution because of restrictions on building area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may remain as long as it complies with all other zoning regulations, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  No structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity; 
2.  Destruction, by any means, of more than sixty percent of the gross square footage of a structure shall require that the structure be reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this resolution; (Amended 03/03/04) 
3.  Any structure which is moved, for any reason and for any distance whatever, shall conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located. 
4.  Telecommunications Facilities. (Added 05/17/06) 
a.  All telecommunication facilities existing on the effective date of this ordinance shall be allowed to continue to be used as they presently exist. 
b.  Routine maintenance (including modifications to accommodate the co-location of an additional user or users) shall be permitted on existing telecommunication facilities. 
c.  Replacement of antennas on a structure with different antennas shall be considered routine maintenance so long as the replacement antenna(s) does not increase the height of any existing structure. 
E.  Rezoning Which Results in Nonconforming Structures. (Amended 3/6/91, 04/05/06) 
When a property containing lawful structures is rezoned, the following shall apply: 
1.  The approval of the rezoning by the Board of Commissioners shall automatically adjust minimum/maximum yards to the extent necessary for existing structures to comply. 
2.  All new construction, expansions or additions shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of the new district. 
3.  Buffers and landscape areas shall be established by conditions of zoning which shall have precedence over the district standards contained in section 4.23. 
4.  Destruction or removal of buildings which preexisted rezoning shall reinstate the development standards of the then applicable district provisions of this Zoning Resolution. 
F.  Exemptions due to state or county action. Whenever a lot becomes nonconforming as a result of land acquisition by the county or state, building permits shall be granted for new construction provided the proposed structure complies with all but lot area requirements, and setback requirements shall be reduced without requirement for a variance to the extent of the width of the acquired property. 
Whenever a structure becomes nonconforming as a result of county or state action other than an amendment to this resolution, the use of the structure may continue and the structure may be replaced as though no nonconformity exists if, subsequent to such action, the structure is destroyed. (Amended 3/6/91) 
4.3.2 Model homes. Dwelling units may be utilized for sales offices and/or model homes as long as two or more lots and/or dwelling units in the development have not undergone an initial sale or lease by the builder. (Amended 7/5/89) 
4.3.3 Height limits. The zoning districts' maximum height limitations for structures shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Church spires and belfries. 
B.  Water storage tanks. 
C.  Cooling towers. 
D.  Chimneys. 
E.  Mechanical penthouses located on roofs. 
F.  Smokestacks. 
G.  Flag poles. 
H.  Silos and grain elevators. 
I.  Fire towers. 
Public and semi-public buildings (except as exempt in section 4.3), hospitals and schools may be erected to 60 feet in height, and churches and temples may be erected to 75 feet in height. For each foot that said buildings exceed the height regulations of the district in which located, an additional foot of side and rear yard setbacks shall be required. 
4.3.4 Minimum building lines. The minimum yards (setbacks) in each district shall establish minimum building lines for all structures except those named in section 4.2.5 entitled Uses and Structures Permitted in Yards, and Outside Storage. (Amended 3/4/92) 
A.  Multiple frontage lots. Lots adjoining more than one public street shall provide a minimum front yard along each right-of-way except corner lots. The setbacks for the street-adjoining side yards of corner lots shall be as specified in the district regulations. 
B.  Permitted encroachments into yards. The following encroachments shall be allowed to the extent specified below: 
1.  Nonresidential. Canopies shall be allowed over walkways or driveways to within 12 feet of the street right-of-way or the right-of-way based on the street's functional classification, whichever is farther from the street's centerline. Fuel pumps and pump islands, when permitted, shall be set back as stated in this paragraph for canopies. 
2.  Single-family Residential and Townhouses used for single family on individual lots of record. (Amended 12/4/91, 03/03/04, 04/05/06) 
Porches, decks or patios attached to the main dwelling may extend no more than 10 feet into a minimum front or rear yard. 
Outdoor fireplaces and outdoor uncovered kitchens, whether stand-alone or constructed as a part of a patio, retaining wall or other structure, may only be located in the rear yard and may extend no more than 10 feet into the minimum rear yard. In no case shall an outdoor fireplace be located closer than 10 feet to a property line. 
Awnings may project to within 5 feet of a side lot line. 
3.  All zoning districts. (Amended 04/05/06) Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, steps, gutters, fire chases, chimneys which are a part of an exterior wall of the primary structure, and fire escapes may not encroach or project over more than 36 inches into any minimum yard. 
4.  Adjoining railroads. For those uses which utilize a rail siding for loading and unloading, there shall be no minimum rear yard requirement adjoining the siding. 
C.  Flag lots. Minimum yards shall not be identified within the stem portion of a flag lot unless such portion, independent of the flag portion, can meet the requirements of 4.2.2. Measurements for a front yard setback shall begin at the point of intersection of the stem and the flag portion of a flag lot running along the property line the most perpendicular to the stem. A flag lot stem shall not be less than 15 feet in width. (Added 7/5/89, Amended 2/7/96) 
4.3.5 Encroachment on public rights-of-way. No privately owned structures other than driveways, access walkways, and mailboxes shall be permitted within a publicly owned right-of-way. Mailbox support structures shall also be permitted within the county owned right-of-way provided that the mailbox support structure or appurtenance conforms to the following conditions. 
1.  Mailbox support structures or appurtenances shall not be constructed of masonry, concrete or stone unless the support design has been shown to be safe by crash tests and is approved by the director of the department of environment and community development. 
2.  With the exceptions noted in subsection 1. above, the mailbox support structure shall be a single four-inch × four-inch or four-inch circumference wooden or metal post with strength no greater than a two-inch diameter standard steel hollow pipe and embedded not more than 24 inches in to the ground. 
3.  A mailbox support structure containing a metal post shall not be fitted with an anchor plate, but it may have an anti-twist device that extends no more than ten inches below the ground surface. 
Mailbox structures along roadways with posted speed limits of 35 miles per hour or less within platted subdivisions of the county shall be exempt from this provision. Landscaping shall be allowed within the public right-of-way with permission of the Georgia Department of Transportation or the director of the department of environment and community development, or as specified in the tree preservation ordinance, as applicable. Signs and other structures belonging to the State of Georgia, Fulton County, or a railroad or utility are exempt from this provision. 
(Ord. No. 97-0328, 3-5-97; Amd. No. 09-1008, 10-7-09) 
4.4. - Large Scale retail/service commercial structures and developments 75,000 square feet or greater. (Added 04/05/06) 
4.4.1. Purpose and Intent. "Large-scale retail" refers to any individual retail establishment that is 75,000 square feet or greater. This size threshold refers to an individual establishment and its associated areas used for display and storage. 
The purpose of establishing requirements for large-scale retail establishments is to apply design standards and additional conditions to large developments proposed in unincorporated Fulton County in order to ensure the development of appropriate, functional, well-planned, aesthetically pleasing retail/service commercial developments that stimulate economic and social growth, are integrated with surrounding areas, positively contribute to the changing community character, with facilities that have functional reuse potential in the future. 
As such, these regulations intend to promote high quality materials and design, promote pedestrian-friendly environments, encourage infrastructure concurrency, encourage responsible storm-water management practices, and promote environmental planning policies. 
The regulations are to be used in conjunction with the development criteria of the Fulton County Zoning Resolution and all other adopted development standards and criteria, including overlay district standards. 
4.4.2. Number, Size and Location Criteria. Large scale retail establishments or developments cannot be accessed solely via collector or local roads, as defined by Fulton County guidelines and depicted on the Georgia DOT Road Functional Classification maps. They are solely permitted on sites with at least one frontage on an arterial road. However, the Director may waive the road classification criteria if the developer can demonstrate that the proposed road improvements, with identified funding sources, will accommodate projected traffic volume to be generated by the proposed development to the degree that the current LOS or better is maintained for the affected road segment. 
No more than four large scale retail establishments, as defined in this ordinance, are allowed in a single development. Developments may include additional smaller retail structures as part of the overall development; however the number of retail establishments 75,000 square feet or larger is limited to four, and such developments are subject to the regulations outlined in this ordinance. 
Developments are encouraged to create a cluster effect in order to achieve a village and/or town center effect. The ordinance promotes an appropriate mix of large and small scale retail with smaller retail buildings located closer to streets in order to reduce the visual scale of the development, encourage pedestrian traffic, and promote the use of architectural details. 
The ordinance also recognizes the varied types of developments in Fulton County and promotes the use of screening and buffers in areas with a more rural aesthetic. 
4.4.3. Site Design Guidelines and Requirements. 
A.  General Site Guidelines. 
1.  To the extent feasible, on site creeks should be integrated into the site as amenities. 
2.  New construction shall conform to the existing topography as much as possible subject to approval by the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development. 
3.  Buildings shall be discouraged on sites with existing slopes greater than 33%. This condition may be amended as approved by the Director. 
4.  Where retaining walls are required, they must be faced with stone, brick or decorative concrete modular block. Use of landscape timber as exterior treatment in retaining walls is prohibited. Retaining walls above 5 feet shall have evergreen plantings in front or as approved by the Director. 
5.  Detention facilities are encouraged to be designed pursuant to the Alternative Design Standards described in the Fulton County 2003 Subdivision Regulations. 
6.  To the greatest extent practicable, design of a traditional detention facility shall follow the natural landforms around the perimeter of the basin. 
B.  Open Space. 
1.  A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the site shall be landscaped open space. 
2.  Each retail development shall contribute to the establishment or enhancement of the community and public spaces by providing at least two community amenities such as patio/seating area, water feature, clock tower, and pedestrian plazas or benches. Such features shall be constructed of materials that are the same or similar to those used for the principal buildings and landscape. 
3.  Square footage of community areas can be counted towards the minimum open space requirement. 
C.  Screening and Fencing. 
1.  Landscaping and fencing materials should be used to minimize visual and noise impact of parking, loading areas and accessory site features. 
2.  All loading areas shall be located to the rear or side of the building. Location should be restricted, however, to whichever location does not abut a residentially zoned property, if applicable. Loading areas shall be screened from view of any public street by a 5-foot berm, a continuous row of evergreen hedges 5 foot in height at the time of planting, or architectural treatment. 
3.  Refuse areas and receptacles shall be placed in the least visible location from public streets and shall be enclosed on 3 sides with opaque walls. The 4th side shall be a self-closing gate with an architectural finish. Opaque walls shall be a minimum of twelve inches higher than the receptacle. Wall materials shall be noncombustible brick, stone, or split-faced concrete masonry. 
4.  Accessory site features, as defined in each zoning district of the Zoning Resolution, shall be placed in the least visible location from public streets, and shall be screened from view of any right-of-way and/or any property zoned, used, or developed for residential uses, including the AG-1 zoning district, by one of the following means: (1) placement behind the building, (2) 100% opaque fencing which must be constructed of the same type of exterior material used for the building, or (3) by a berm or vegetative screening. The screening shall consist of evergreen shrubs, be 3½ to 4 feet at time of planting, and reach a height of 6 feet within 2 years or planting. 
5.  Fencing materials along public streets and side yards are restricted to brick, stone, iron, decorative wrought iron, and treated wood, and or combinations of the above not resulting in an opaque fence. 
6.  Fences adjacent to a public street shall not exceed 55 inches from finished grade. 
7.  Chain link fencing, except as required along detention/retention ponds, is prohibited from public view. All chain link fencing shall be black vinyl clad. 
8.  Suburban Developments: All parking areas shall be screened from view of any public street by: (1) a 25 foot-wide landscape strip planted to buffer standards or (2) a berm planted with a continuous hedge or evergreen shrubs. Plants shall be a minimum height of 3 1 / 2 to 4 feet at time of planting, and such plants (or in the case of option 2 above, the berm and the planting combined) shall be capable of reaching a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
D.  Outdoor Storage and Display. 
1.  Display or sale of goods outside the permanent portions of a building is prohibited. Garden centers, and other similar areas, with permanent walls/fencing on the outside are considered permanent structures. Exceptions: Seasonal holiday trees, pumpkins, and open air fairs, provided an administrative permit is obtained, pursuant to Article 19. 
2.  Vending machines, paper stands and other similar devices must be located interior to the building structure. 
E.  Buffer Standards. 
1.  Suburban Developments: 
a.  All developments shall provide a minimum 25-foot wide landscape strip along all public streets, if buildings within the development do not front the street. 
b.  A minimum 100-foot wide natural, undisturbed buffer with a 10-foot improvement setback shall be provided along any interior property line adjacent to a residential zoning and/or use. This buffer shall be augmented with plantings if it does not achieve the intended visual screening. 
c.  To ensure that a visual buffer is achieved (for developments adjacent to a residential zoning and/or use), the County may require the installation of a four-foot high earthen berm with plantings per the County Buffer Standards. The County Arborist will make the determination of a berm requirement based upon a review of the Landscape Plan and existing topography and vegetation. 
d.  A minimum 15-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided along any interior property line adjacent to a nonresidential zoning and/or use. 
2.  Infill/Urban Developments: 
a.  Developments are encouraged to place small retail storefronts on the public street. 
b.  If buildings do not front a public street, all properties shall provide a minimum 15 foot-wide landscape strip along all public streets. The fifteen (15) foot-wide strip shall be planted with minimum 2" caliper hardwood over-story trees every 30' feet. 
c.  A minimum 10-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided along any interior property line adjacent to a nonresidential zoning and/or use. This provision does not apply to individual lots within an overall development. 
d.  A minimum 25-foot wide natural, undisturbed buffer with a 10-foot improvement setback shall be provided along any interior property line adjacent to a residential zoning and/or use. This buffer shall be augmented with plantings if it does not achieve the intended visual screening. 
F.  Landscaping. 
1.  Specimen trees should be preserved to the extent possible. 
2.  Large overstory street trees in the landscape strips shall be planted in asymmetrical groupings at a minimum density of one tree per 30 feet of street frontage. 
3.  Street trees shall be a minimum of 2" caliper. 
4.  Street trees shall be selected from the list provided in Appendix E of the Fulton County Tree Preservation Ordinance and Administrative Guidelines or as may be approved by the Fulton County Arborist. 
5.  Street trees may be counted towards the required tree density for a site as approved by the Fulton County Arborist. 
G.  Parking Lot Landscaping Islands. 
1.  Parking lot landscaping shall follow the standards within the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. 
H.  Landscape Installation and Maintenance. 
1.  Landscaping must be installed, or a landscape installation guaranty must be provided prior to the release of Certificate of Occupancy (CO), unless appropriate provisions are made to guarantee the installation of landscaping after such certificate is issued, such as approval by the Department of a bond for landscaping. The guaranty shall be stamped and signed by a registered landscape architect certifying that landscaping meets the standards of the Fulton County Tree Ordinance. Landscape plantings must be replaced if damaged or dead. 
I.  Sidewalks and Pedestrian Circulation. 
1.  Sidewalks or pedestrian paths are required along all public and private road frontages and may meander around existing trees subject to the approval of the Fulton County Arborist. 
2.  Pedestrian paths may be installed instead of sidewalks as approved by the E&CD Director. 
3.  Sidewalks shall be a minimum width of five feet. 
4.  Pedestrian paths shall be a minimum of 5 feet wide. They shall be made out of a hard surface material such as concrete, brick or pavers. Paths may be gravel or gravel dust as approved by the E&CD Director. 
5.  Sidewalks for all new projects should connect with existing walks, where applicable. 
6.  Pedestrian access should be provided to all entrances including access from rear parking areas. 
7.  Inter-parcel connectivity shall be required for multiuse, pedestrian paths and sidewalks. 
8.  All internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of color and durable, low maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort, as well as the attractiveness of the walkways. 
J.  Parking. 
1.  Parking lots should be distributed around large buildings along not less than two facades (front, rear or sides) in order to shorten the distance to other buildings and public sidewalks. 
2.  A minimum of 50% of the required surface parking for out-parcels shall be located at the rear of the out-parcel building, interior to the overall development or facing the large retail parking lot. 
3.  No parking or loading area shall be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing or storing of any vehicle, equipment, materials or supplies. 
4.  All developments must provide space for parking bicycles. This area may be within the parking lot or courtyard. A bike rack, permanently attached to the ground accommodating a bicycle lock or chain 
5.  Suburban Developments: Where feasible, no more than fifty (50) percent of the off-street parking area for the lot, tract or area of land devoted to the large retail establishment should be located along the property fronting a public road and between the front facade and the road. 
6.  Urban Developments: On-street parking is allowed subject to the approval of the Director. 
K.  Architectural Standards. 
1.  The design and lay out of a development should build upon and complement the design of the surrounding community. The size, orientation, setback and scale of buildings are integral elements of communities. A building's orientation and placement should complement and relate to adjacent buildings, structures and properties. 
2.  The location of a building should take into consideration its surrounding and take advantage of opportunities to maintain open views and spaces. Buildings should be in proportion, in scale and characteristic to their natural setting. The building design and material should contribute to the style and surrounding areas. Building design that is based on a standardized formula associated with a business or franchise shall be modified to meet the provisions of this section. 
3.  Buildings shall include architecture elements such as columns, arcades, covered entry-walkways, arches, facade offsets, windows, balconies, recesses/projections, clock towers, cupolas and/or courtyards. 
L.  Orientation. 
1.  All buildings shall be oriented to a public street. An entrance to a building should be located on the side of the building facing a public street. 
2.  Small retail stores as part of an overall development should be oriented to a public street; with the larger retail buildings in the rear. 
3.  Principal buildings should have articulated building entryways with greater architectural details, to include a minimum of two of the following elements: 
a.  Decorative columns or posts 
b.  Pediments 
c.  Arches 
d.  Brackets 
e.  Transoms over doorways 
f.  Sidelights 
g.  Porticos 
M.  Height. 
1.  There shall be a maximum height limit of two stories with the maximum height 35 feet from average-finished grade to the bottom of the roof eave. 
2.  Urban/Infill Developments: Three story buildings with a height limit of 50 feet from average-finished grade to the bottom of the roof eave are permitted. 
N.  Scale. 
1.  For every one hundred feet of building length on a single face, visible from the public street, there shall be variation in the exterior. This exterior variation shall be accomplished through the following means: 
a.  For each one hundred feet of building exterior wall, the building exterior and roof shall be offset. 
b.  For each one hundred feet of building exterior wall, there shall be a change in details, or patterns or materials. 
O.  Building Material: 
1.  The exterior wall materials of all buildings shall consist of a minimum of 60% (per vertical wall plane) of the following: brick, stone, stucco, EIFS, solid plank, cementatious plank, or horizontal clapboard siding. 
2.  Accent wall materials on buildings shall consist of glass, architecturally treated concrete masonry, stone, EIFS, or stucco and shall not exceed 40% per vertical wall plane. 
3.  Prohibited exterior building facade materials are: metal panel systems, precast, smooth concrete masonry or plain, reinforced concrete slabs, aluminum or vinyl siding, plywood, mirrored glass, press-wood or corrugated steel (exceptions: mechanical penthouses & roof screens). 
4.  To the extent any rear or side of any building is adjacent to a public street or single family residence, architectural treatment shall continue through the rear or side. 
P.  Colors. 
1.  Permitted colors for exterior walls, building components, sign structures, accent and decorative elements shall be a specified by the appropriate overlay district. 
2.  If large scale retail establishment or development is not located in an overlay district, all aspects of a development should use colors common in the area and in nature. Earth-toned, subtle and muted colors provide for a development that incorporates sensitivity to its natural surrounding. High intensity colors shall be avoided. 
Q.  Roof. 
1.  Permissible roofs types are flat, gable, pyramidal, and hip. Shed roofs are permitted over porches, additions, and accessory structures. 
2.  Roof pitches shall be in the range of 4 over 12 to 12 over 12. 
3.  Roof pitch material shall be made out of the following materials: asphalt shingle, wood shingle, wood shake, standing seam metal, or materials designed to give the appearance of the above mentioned materials. 
4.  A decorative parapet or cornice shall be constructed along all roof lines with a lower pitch than specified in above. 
5.  Flat roofs and roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from the view of public and private streets by a parapet. No parapet shall be required to be greater than 4 feet above roof. 
R.  Additional Requirements. 
1.  Burglar bars, steel gates, metal awnings and steel roll-down curtains are prohibited on the exterior and interior of the structure except at the structure's rear. Steel roll down curtains may be located in other areas if not visible from the front of a building or from a public street. 
2.  Neon lights outlining and/or detailing building features are prohibited. 
3.  Where additional stores will be located in a large retail establishment, each such store that is 5,000 square feet and greater shall have at least one (1) exterior customer entrance, which shall conform to the above requirements. 
4.4.4. Adaptive Reuse of Properties And Store Closure. If an establishment remains empty for a period of 12 consecutive months the owner and/or lessee must work with Fulton County Economic Development Department to create a plan for the removal or adaptive reuse of the principal structure. 
4.4.5. Vacancy Maintenance Requirements. 
1.  Owner shall provide security patrols on the site to deter vandalism or other illegal activities on the property. 
2.  Retail establishments that have been closed should be maintained at the standard of the occupied store, prior to store closure, this includes all parking lot surfaces and landscaping. 
3.  Building fenestration, including doors and windows cannot be boarded up. 
Previous provision, parking in residential districts, (superseded by 18.3.1, Adopted 4/5/89) 
4.5 - Accessory uses and structures. 
4.5.1 Construction of accessories. Accessory structures shall be constructed concurrently with or subsequent to a principal structure. 
4.5.2 Regulations applicable to selected accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and structures shall be restricted as stated herein: 
A greenhouse accessory to a residential use shall be limited in size to one-third of the floor area of the principal dwelling. 
4.5.3 Antennas. This provision shall apply to all antennas and towers except those that exceed the maximum height of the district in which they are located (19.3.1 and 19.4.3). Antennas and towers are accessory structures when erected on a residential lot in association with a residential use and must meet all accessory structure requirements for the district in which the antenna is located except that principal structure height requirements shall control. Antennas which are located on roofs shall be located only on that portion of the roof most closely associated with yard(s) for which accessory structures are allowed. In addition, an antenna shall be designed such that the entire structure will remain on the property or within a fall easement if it should fall. (Amended 3/6/91) 
4.6 - Refuse areas. 
Refuse areas shall be identified on site plans for lots improved with structures other than single family dwellings, and such areas shall be screened to 100 percent opacity with fences or walls, or a vegetative screen which complies with the screening requirements of the Tree Protection Ordinance [See Code ch. 26, art. VI]. The refuse containers located therein shall not be visible from streets or adjoining properties. Vegetative screens must comply with the provisions of section 4.23. Refuse areas shall not be located in required landscape areas, required buffers, required parking areas, or required loading areas. 
4.7 - Open. 
4.8 - Animals. 
This section shall apply to animals other than animals associated with farming as a principal or accessory use. 
4.8.1 Horses (See AG-1 District for standards therein. One horse or other member of the horse (equine) family per fenced acre shall be allowed in association with a single family dwelling or in single family dwelling districts. All structures for the shelter of horses in all districts except the AG-1 District shall be: 
A.  At least 100 feet from the lot line of any residentially zoned or used property. 
B.  Located within the rear yard. 
4.9 - Night sky ordinance. 
(Added 02/01/06) 
4.9.1. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this ordinance is to provide a regulatory strategy for outdoor lighting that will permit reasonable uses of outdoor lighting for nighttime safety, utility, security, productivity, enjoyment and commerce; curtail and reverse the degradation of the nighttime visual environment and the night sky; preserve the dark night sky for astronomy; minimize glare, obtrusive light and artificial sky glow by limiting outdoor lighting that is misdirected, excessive or unnecessary; conserve energy and resources to the greatest extent possible; and help to protect the natural environment from the damaging effects of night lighting from man-made sources. 
4.9.2. Conformance With Applicable Codes. All outdoor illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance, the Building Code and the Electrical Code as applicable and under appropriate permit and inspection. Where there is conflict between the provisions of this ordinance and other regulations, the most restrictive provision shall prevail. 
4.9.3. Applicability. For all land uses, developments and buildings that require a permit, all outdoor lighting fixtures shall meet the requirements of this ordinance. All building additions or modifications of twenty-five (25) percent or more in terms of additional dwelling units, gross floor area, or parking spaces, either with a single addition or with cumulative additions subsequent to the effective date of this provision, shall invoke the requirements of this ordinance for the entire property, including previously installed and any new outdoor lighting. Cumulative modification or replacement of outdoor lighting constituting sixty (60) percent or more of the permitted lumens for the parcel, no matter the actual amount of lighting already on a non-conforming site, shall constitute a major addition for purposes of this section. 
A.  Minor Additions. Additions or modifications of less than twenty-five (25) percent to existing uses, as defined in Section (a) above, and that require a permit, shall require the submission of a complete inventory and site plan detailing all existing and any proposed new outdoor lighting. Any new lighting on the site shall meet the requirements of this ordinance with regard to shielding and lamp type. 
B.  Exempt Lighting. The following luminaries and lighting systems are exempt from these requirements: 
1.  Lighting for pools used at night. 
2.  Underwater lighting used for the illumination of swimming pools and fountains; 
3.  Temporary holiday lighting; 
4.  Lighting required and regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration, or other federal, state or local agency; 
5.  Emergency lighting used by police, fire, or medical personnel, or at their direction; 
6.  All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly from the combustion of fossil fuels, such as kerosene and gasoline; 
7.  Security lighting controlled and activated by a motion sensor device for a duration of 10 minutes or less. 
C.  Prohibited Lighting. The following lighting systems are prohibited: 
1.  Aerial lasers; 
2.  Searchlight style lights; 
3.  Other very intense lighting, defined as having a light source exceeding 200,000 lumens or intensity in any direction of 2 million candelas or more; 
4.  Mercury vapor lamps; 
5.  Neon lighting. 
4.9.4. Outdoor Lighting Standards. All nonexempt outdoor lighting fixtures shall meet the following criteria: 
A.  Shall be full cutoff placed so as to allow no light above the horizontal as measured at the luminaire, except as herein noted in this ordinance (as in the case of period fixtures, cutoff fixtures may be used). 
B.  Shall be located, aimed or shielded so as to minimize glare and stray light trespassing across property boundaries and into the public right of way in accordance with the following standards: 

 

 
C.  Flood or spot lamps must be positioned no higher than 45 degrees above straight down (half-way between the vertical and the horizontal) when the source is visible from any off-site residential property or public roadway. 
D.  All light fixtures that are required to be shielded shall be installed and maintained in such a manner that the shielding is effective as described herein for fully shielded fixtures. 
E.  Multi use development lighting must conform to the standards of its respective use. 
F.  Illumination levels are measured from any height and orientation of the measuring device at any location along the property line, except the lighting of parking lots shall be measured at grade with the meter sensor held horizontally on the surface. 
4.9.5. Special Uses. All lighting not directly associated with the special use areas designated below shall conform to the lighting standards described in this ordinance. 
A.  Outdoor Sports, Recreation Fields, or Performance Areas. Lighting of outdoor recreational facilities (public or private), such as, but not limited to, outdoor athletic fields, courts, tracks, special event or show areas shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Facilities designed for municipal leagues, elementary to high school levels of play and training fields for recreational or social levels of play, college play, semi-professional, professional or national levels of play shall utilize luminaries with minimal uplight consistent with the illumination constraints of the design. Where fully shielded fixtures are not utilized, acceptable luminaries shall include those which: 
a.  Are provided with internal and/or external glare control louvers or lenses, and are installed so as to minimize uplight and offsite light trespass and glare; and 
b.  Are installed and maintained so as to avoid aiming no more than 2.5 times the mounting height. 
2.  Illuminance. All lighting installations shall be designed to achieve the illuminance levels for the activity as recommended by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA RP-6). 
3.  Off Site Spill. The installation shall also limit off-site spill (off the parcel containing the sports facility) to the maximum extent possible consistent with the illumination constraints of the design. For all recreational or social levels of play and training fields, as well as, performance areas, illumination levels shall not exceed 1.5 foot-candles at any location along any non-residential property line, and 0.5 foot-candles at any location along any residential property line. 
4.  Curfew. All events shall be scheduled so as to complete all activity no later than 10:30 p.m. Illumination of the playing field, court or track shall be permitted after the curfew only to conclude a scheduled event that was unable to conclude before the curfew due to unusual circumstances. Field lighting for these facilities shall be turned off within 30 minutes after the last event of the night. 
5.  Setback. All light poles shall be set back the greater of fifty feet or one foot for every foot in height from any residential property line or right-of-way. 
6.  This Section 4.9.5 shall not be construed to overrule any standards established in any Overlay Improvement District or as established in Section 19.4. 
B.  Service Station Canopies and Parking Structures. 
1.  All luminaries mounted on or recessed into the lower surface of service station canopies and parking structures shall be fully shielded and utilize flat lenses. 
2.  The total light output of luminaries mounted on the lower surface, or recessed into the lower surface of the canopy, and any lighting within signage or illuminated panels over the pumps, shall not exceed 50 foot-candles. 
3.  The total light output of illuminated areas of a service station other than as detailed in 2. above shall not exceed 15 foot-candles. 
4.  Illuminance levels for the interior of parking structures, where interior lighting is visible from outside the structure, shall conform to the IESNA recommendation (RP-20). 
5.  Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides of a canopy and the sides of a canopy shall not be illuminated. 
C.  Security Lighting. 
1.  Security lighting shall be directed toward the targeted area. 
2.  Sensor activated lighting must be located in such a manner as to prevent direct glare and lighting into properties of others or into a public right-of-way, and the light shall not be triggered by activity off the property. 
D.  Pedestrian Path Lighting. 
1.  Lighting post shall not exceed 16 feet from the finished grade. 
E.  Architectural Accent Lighting. 
1.  Fixtures used to accent architectural features, materials, colors, style of buildings, landscaping, or art shall be located, aimed and shielded so that light is directed only on those features. Such fixtures shall be aimed or shielded to minimize light spill into the dark night sky in conformance with the luminaire standards. 
2.  Lighting fixtures shall not generate glare, or direct light beyond the facade onto a neighboring property, streets or into the night sky. 
F.  Temporary Lighting Permits. 
1.  Permits for temporary lighting will be granted by the Department if the total output from the luminaries does not exceed 50 foot-candles and the following conditions apply: 
a.  The purpose for which the lighting is proposed can be completed within thirty (30) days, except that the permit for a major construction project may extend to completion. 
b.  The proposed lighting is designed in such a manner as to minimize light trespass and glare. 
c.  Permits issued for temporary recreational lighting shall be extinguished by 10:30 p.m. 
2.  The application for the Temporary Lighting Permit shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
a.  Name and address of applicant and property owner; 
b.  Location of proposed luminaire(s); 
c.  Date and times for the lighting; 
d.  Type, wattage and lumen output of lamp(s); 
e.  Type and shielding of proposed luminairies; 
f.  Intended use of the lighting; 
g.  Duration of time for requested exemption; 
h.  The nature of the exemption; and 
i.  The means to minimize light trespass and glare. 
G.  Commercial Parking Areas. 
1.  All lighting fixtures servicing parking lots, except floodlights, shall be cutoff fixtures, directed downward and not toward buildings or other areas. 
2.  The minimum illumination level for a parking lot shall be 0.4 foot-candles at grade level and the ratio of the average illumination to the minimum illumination shall not exceed 4:1. 
3.  Floodlights should be aimed or shielded to minimize uplight. 
4.  Light poles used in parking lots shall not exceed 35 feet in height. 
H.  Street lights. 
1.  All street light fixtures new, repaired (outside of normal maintenance) or replaced fixtures shall be cutoff. 
4.9.6. Variances. 
A.  Any person may submit an application to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a variance from the provisions of this ordinance. The application should include, but not be limited to, evidence about the following: 
1.  How the proposed design and appearance of the luminaire are superior; 
2.  How light trespass and glare will be limited; 
3.  How the proposed solution will provide a benefit without negative impact on the health, safety, or welfare of the community. 
B.  The application may include the recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a professional engineer, or other authority on outdoor lighting. 
4.9.7. Submission of Plans and Evidence of Compliance. The applicant for any permit required by any provision of the laws of Fulton County in connection with proposed work involving outdoor lighting fixtures shall submit, as part of the application for permit, evidence that the proposed work will comply with this ordinance. Even should no other such permit be required, the installation or modification, except for routine servicing and same-type lamp replacement of any exterior lighting, shall require submission of the information described below. The submission shall contain but shall not necessarily be limited to the following, all or part of which may be part or in addition to the information required elsewhere in the laws of Fulton County upon application for the required permit: 
A.  Plans indicating the location on the premises of each illuminating device, both proposed and any already existing on the site. 
B.  Description of all illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, both proposed and existing. The description may include, but is not limited to catalog cuts and illustrations by manufacturers. 
C.  Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers or similar, showing the angle of cut off of light emissions. 
Additional Submission. The above required plans, descriptions and data shall be sufficiently complete to enable the Department to readily determine whether compliance with the requirements of this ordinance will be secured. If such plans, descriptions and data cannot enable this ready determination, the applicant shall additionally submit as evidence of compliance to enable such determination such certified reports of tests as will do so provided that these tests shall have been performed and certified by a recognized testing laboratory. 
Subdivision Plats. All new subdivided properties shall submit information as described herein for installed street lights and other common or public area outdoor lighting. 
Certification. For all projects, certification that the lighting as installed, conforms to the approved plans shall be provided by an illumination engineer/professional before the Certificate of Occupancy is issued. Until this certification is submitted, approval for use by the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued. 
4.10 - Architectural treatment of common aggregate block. 
Whenever visible from a public street in all except the AG-1 and industrial districts, and whenever adjoining a residential zoning district in all districts, the exterior of all common aggregate blocks shall be provided with an architectural treatment such as stucco, stone, brick, wood or an alternate treatment approved by the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development. Split rib and marble aggregate block shall not be deemed to be common aggregate block. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
4.11 - Fences and walls. 
Fences and walls which conform to the provisions stated herein shall be permitted by the Department of Environment and Community Development. Fences erected for agricultural purposes in the AG-1 District shall be exempt from permit requirements. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
A.  Visibility triangle. Fences, walls and vegetative materials used in association therewith must not obstruct the minimum sight distance requirements which are specified in Fulton County Subdivision Regulations administered by the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development. (Amended 2/7/01) 
B.  Gates. No part of a gate shall be located within 20 feet of a public right-of-way, nor shall any gate or vehicle in any way obstruct a public right-of-way or the minimum sight distance specified in the Subdivision Regulations regardless of whether open, closed or in an intermediate position. 
C.  Maintenance of required landscape areas. Landscape areas or strips required pursuant to this section shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of the Tree Preservation Ordinance [See Code ch. 26, art. VI]. 
D.  Fence and wall materials. Where the Zoning Resolution or zoning conditions require fences and walls to be solid/opaque, the visual density of the fence shall be such that it can not be seen through. The following standards shall apply to fences and walls. (Amended 4/7/93, 11/3/93, 4/5/95) 
1.  Adjoining right-of-way. In all zoning districts except AG-1, M-1, M-1A, and M-2, wire and plastic fencing materials, including chain-link fencing with plastic or wooden inserts shall not be used adjoining a street right-of-way. The architectural treatment of poured concrete, common aggregate block or concrete block walls shall be approved by the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development. This provision shall not preclude the use of chain link fencing as a security fence around storm water facilities. (Amended 2/7/01) 
2.  Fences along all property lines. Walls and fences constructed along all property lines shall be constructed with a finished side toward the neighboring property. (Amended 4/5/95) 
3.  Barbed wire—Agricultural. Barbed wire may be used in the AG-1 District as long as its use is associated with a legitimate agricultural pursuit. Barbed wire use shall meet the following: 
a.  Barbed wire shall not be allowed on any single-family dwelling lots including such lots which are located in the AG-1 District; 
b.  Barbed wire use adjacent to the public right-of-way shall be installed in a straight strand manner, coiled/concertina style installation shall be prohibited; and 
c.  Razor wire is prohibited. 
4.  Barbed wire, razor wire, chain link—Commercial and industrial. Barbed wire/razor wire/chain link may be used in all Commercial and Industrial Districts as follows: 
a.  All chain link fence shall be green or black vinyl coated; 
b.  All chain link fences shall be constructed with a top rail to ensure fence stability; 
c.  Barbed wire/razor wire use adjacent to the public right-of-way shall be installed in a straight strand manner, coiled/concertina style installation shall be prohibited. 
5.  Use of fabric as fence or screen. The use of fabric as a fence or screen is prohibited except as a windscreen around recreational courts. 
6.  Minimum landscape requirements. A minimum three-foot landscape strip shall be provided between a fence or wall and a public right-of-way. 
E.  Height. Fences and walls shall not exceed a height of eight feet from grade in residential districts. Column and ornament heights are permitted to exceed the maximum fence/wall height up to three feet. (Amended 4/5/95) 
F.  Setback. Fences and walls shall be set back a minimum of three feet from a public right-of-way. (Added 11/03/04) 
G.  Retaining Walls. Retaining walls that are monolithically placed and structurally tied to a house or building foundation wall do not require a separate wall permit if said walls are shown on the plans for which a building permit was issued. All other retaining walls over 4 feet high require a permit if they were not shown and permitted on a Land Disturbance Permit. Walls 4 feet to 6 feet high can be permitted upon execution of an Owner Certification/Indemnification form for Retaining Walls 4 feet to 6 feet high. All walls over 6 feet high and any walls 4 feet to 6 feet high for which an owner is not prepared to execute the Owner Certification/Indemnification form shall require execution of the an Engineer Certification/Indemnification form for Retaining Walls permit. Please note that the latter form requires both an engineer's certification and an Owner's Certification/Indemnification. A Checklist for Retaining Wall Permit Drawing shall be completed by the applicant to verify the adequacy of the submittal for issuance of the permit. A separate permit form and fee is required for each wall. 
(Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11; Res. No. 12-0356, pt. 3, 5-16-12) 
4.12 - Home occupation.(Added 12/4/91) 
A home occupation is permitted as an accessory use of a dwelling unit in any zoning district and its operation and employees are limited to members of the resident family only. The following are limitations on home occupations: 
A.  The smaller of 25 percent or 750 square feet of the gross floor area of a dwelling unit may be used for activities devoted to the home occupation. 
B.  Accessory buildings and structures may not be used for the home occupation. 
C.  There shall be no signs identifying the home occupation, nor shall there be any storage, display or activity associated with the home occupation visible outside the structure. (Amended 03/03/04) 
D.  Said uses are excluded: auto repair or similar operations, restaurants, keeping of animals, funeral homes, retail or wholesale shops, motel type establishments, taxi services, or any other occupation found incompatible with the intent of this resolution. (Amended 03/03/04) 
E.  Resident participants in a home occupation must have the appropriate occupational licensing, including business licenses. 
F.  No home occupation shall generate traffic, sound, smell, vibration, light, or dust that is offensive. 
G.  No more than two clients or patrons are allowed on the premises at the same time in conjunction with the home occupation (except for persons in care at a family day care homes, where no more than six clients are allowed). 
H.  Vehicles kept on site in association with the home occupation shall be used by residents only. 
I.  The transporting of goods by truck is prohibited. Incoming vehicles related to the home occupation shall be parked off-street within the confines of the residential driveway or other on-site permitted parking. 
J.  Home occupations must exclude the use of instruments, machinery or equipment that emit sounds (i.e. musical instruments, sewing machines, saws, drills) that are detectable beyond the unit. 
K.  Family day care homes are prohibited within multifamily dwelling units. 
L.  Family day care homes shall provide outdoor play areas as required by Georgia law, but such areas shall be limited to side or rear yards outside the minimum yard area, and shall not occupy any yard adjoining a street. 
M.  Family day care home shall be located at least 1,000 feet in all directions from any other such use operated as a home occupation. 
N.  Family day care home hours of operation shall be limited to Monday through Saturday from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
O.  Family day care home operators shall have a current, certified copy of the operator's State of Georgia Family Day Care Home registration which shall be filed with the business license application and renewals. 
P.  No home occupation shall be operated so as to create or cause a nuisance. 
4.13 - Outparcel development.(Added 12/4/91) 
Outparcel development permitted as a condition of zoning approval and identified on a site plan shall comply with the following standards. 
A.  The total floor area for outparcels shall be included in the total floor area allowed for the larger parcel. 
B.  Access for outparcels shall be from internal drives with no direct access to public roads. 
C.  Each outparcel abutting a public right-of-way shall have a minimum of 200 feet of frontage on that public right-of-way. 
D.  Internal entrance drives shall be located at least 100 feet from any publicly dedicated right-of-way. 
4.14 - Open. 
4.15. - Noise. 
The Fulton County Site Acceptability Noise Standards shall apply to all new proposed residential and special uses described herein. (Added 04/05/06) 

 
1.  New residential development proposed within 5 miles of the Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport boundary shall be in compliance with the Fulton County Site Acceptability Noise Standards. 
2.  No residential dwelling shall be occupied if the interior day-night average sound level is 50 dBA or higher. 
3.  Any existing legal residential lot of record that does not change use or zoning classification is exempt from the requirements of this Section. 
4.16. - Landfills, transfer stations, quarries and/or surface mining sites. 
(Added 04/05/06) 
1.  No portion of a new proposed residentially zoned or used property shall be located within a one (1) mile radius of the property lines of an existing active landfill. 
2.  No portion of a new proposed residentially zoned or used property shall be located within a one (1) mile radius of the property lines of an existing active transfer station. 
3.  No portion of a new proposed residentially zoned or used property shall be located within a 1.5 mile radius of the property lines of an existing active quarry. 
4.  No portion of a new proposed residentially zoned or used property shall be located within a 500 foot radius of the property lines of an existing active surface mining site. Surface mining is defined as specified in O.C.G.A 12-4-72. 
5.  Any existing legal residential lot of record located within the radius requirements of Sections 4.16.1, 4.16.2, 14.16.3 and 14.16.4 that does not change use or zoning classification is exempt from the requirements of this Section. 
6.  Reference maps titled "2005Z-0108 Environmental Standards for Unincorporated North Fulton" and "2005Z-0108 Environmental Standards for Unincorporated South Fulton" located online in the Fulton County GIS Map Catalog for locations of active landfills, transfer stations, quarries and surface mining sites. 
7.  Any owner of property located within a one (1) mile radius of the property lines of an existing active landfill or existing active transfer station or within a 1.5 mile radius of the property line of an existing active quarry, shall, prior to the sale or transfer of said property, notify and disclose in writing the existence of the landfill, transfer station, or quarry to the potential owner or transferee. 
4.17. - Endangered species. 
1.  Areas of confirmed, Georgia Department of Natural Resources listed, endangered plant and animal species throughout Fulton County shall comply with the Federal Endangered Species Act of 1973. (Added 04/05/06) 
4.18 - Environmentally adverse uses. 
4.18.1. Acceptable separation distance. 
A.  If a property is the subject of a rezoning, use permit or land disturbance permit (limited to only those land disturbance permits tied to a new business location) which involves the development of an Environmentally Adverse Use as listed in Section 4.18.3 and any portion of such property is located within a ½ mile of an Environmentally Stressed Community, the acceptable separation distance referenced in that Section shall be required. 
B.  If a property is the subject of a rezoning, use permit or land disturbance permit (limited to only those land disturbance permits tied to a new business location) which involves the development of an Environmentally Adverse Use that is not specifically listed in Section 4.18.3 and any portion of such property is located within a ½ mile of an Environmentally Stressed Community, an acceptable separation distance may be required after completion of an Acceptable Separation Distance Review by the Fulton County Department of Planning and Community Services, in collaboration with the Fulton County Board of Health. 
4.18.2. Determination of the acceptable separation distance for environmentally adverse uses not listed in 4.18.3. When determining whether an identified Environmentally Adverse Use not listed in 4.18.3 should be subject to an acceptable separation distance or other regulation by Fulton County, the Department of Planning and Community Services, in its discretion, may consult those Environmental Protection Agency documents referenced in the definition of Environmentally Adverse Use as well as the following: 
(1)  The Environmental Protection Agency (Technology Transfer Network, Health Research, Air and Radiation, and National-Scale Air Toxic Assessment); 
(2)  Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (Minimal Risk Levels List and the Division of Toxicology and Environmental Medicine, Scientific Assessments and Consultations documents); and 
(3)  The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's Acceptable Separation Distance Guidebook, Office of Planning and Development Environmental Planning Division. 
Findings of the Acceptable Separation Distance Review shall designate a prescribed acceptable separation distance from Environmentally Stressed Communities based on the data utilized in determining the uses' adverse status and otherwise identified herein. 
If a proposed use is subject to the Acceptable Separation Distance Review process, the County's response and the results of the Acceptable Separation Distance Review will be provided to the applicant within ten (10) business days of the County's acceptance of a complete Acceptable Separation Distance Review submission. The Office of Planning and Community Services in collaboration with the Fulton County Board of Health shall determine when such submissions are deemed complete. 
4.18.3. Minimum acceptable separation distance requirements between environmentally adverse uses and the nearest environmentally stressed community. The uses listed in the following chart are hereby declared to be Environmentally Adverse Uses for purposes of this Article. If a proposed Environmentally Adverse Use is not specifically listed in the following chart, the determination of whether that use should be subject to an acceptable separation distance or other regulation by Fulton County will be made through an Acceptable Separation Distance Review as referenced in Article 4.18.2. 

 
(Amd. No. 13-0175, 7-17-13; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
_____
4.19—4.22 - Open. 
4.23 - Tree preservation ordinance and administrative guidelines.(Amended 12/6/89; 4/3/02) 
Standards for tree preservation are as set forth by the Fulton County Tree Preservation Ordinance and Administrative Guidelines, adopted by the Board of Commissioners on December 1, 1999 and effective on January 1, 2000. (Amended 4/3/02) 
4.23.1 Minimum landscape strips and buffers. (Amended 4/3/02) 
A.  Landscape strips shall be provided along all lot lines, as specified in Table 4.23.1, except when zoning buffers are required. 
B.  Zoning buffers shall be provided along all lot lines, as specified in Table 4.23.1. adjacent to properties zoned AG-1, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-4A, R-5, R-5A, R-6, TR, A, A-L, NUP, CUP and MIX with residential components, and adjacent to all single family residential uses in all zoning districts. (See Illustration 4.23.1.) (Amended 10/2/02) 
C.  TR, A and A-L zoned districts shall provide landscape areas adjacent to TR, A, and A-L zoned districts, as specified in Table 4.23.1, unless adjacent properties are developed with single-family residential uses. If adjacent properties are developed with single-family residential uses, zoning buffers are required as specified in Table 4.23.1. (See Illustration 4.23.1) 
D.  Zoning buffers shall be undisturbed except for approved access and utility crossings and replantings as required by the Fulton County Arborist. 
E.  An additional setback of ten feet for all improvements shall be interior to all zoning buffers as specified in Table 4.23.1. No reduction of the ten-foot improvement setback is allowed nor shall any grading or land disturbance or tree clearing be allowed within this improvement setback unless permission is obtained from the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development through an Administrative Variance pursuant to section 22.4. Said approval shall include a site visit report and recommendation by the Fulton County Arborist. 
F.  Fences and/or walls shall be located interior to any required buffers and/or improvement setbacks except that when zoning buffers are required between properties zoned for single family residences or developed with single family residences, fences may be constructed along side and rear lot lines. (Amended 03/03/04) 
Unless otherwise specified, lots developed with single-family detached dwelling units are not required to provide landscape areas or zoning buffers. 
When minimum landscape areas or zoning buffers for uses in existing structures do not meet the requirements herein, conditions of zoning shall apply. 
Whenever deemed necessary to protect adjoining or nearby properties or to otherwise promote the public health, safety or welfare, the Board of Commissioners may specify conditions which require increased landscape strips and/or buffers, setbacks, berms, or other treatments to protect surrounding and nearby properties. 
TABLE 4.23.1 

 
*Nonresidential uses only.  **The second number applies when a lot line adjoins a less intense non-residential (except AG-1) district. 
  
 Minimum Landscape Strips and Buffers 
4.23.2. Parking lot landscaping. At-grade, non-single-family parking lots shall provide landscape islands with a minimum of 200 square feet of contiguous soil space. These islands shall be located at both ends of a parking bay, and also after every five parking spaces. A parking bay is a module consisting of one row of parking spaces and the aisle from which motor vehicles enter and leave the spaces. Such landscape islands shall include minimum two-inch caliper shade trees from Fulton County's list of recommended shade trees for parking lots. No parking space shall be more than 40 feet from a tree. Refer to the Fulton County Tree Preservation Ordinance, Appendix J. Landscaping in these islands should preserve and maintain adequate sight lines from the minor lane to the major lane. Alternate methods of landscaping parking lots may be approved whenever the Director of Environment and Community Development or his/her designee determines that the alternate method equals or exceeds this standard. (Amended 4/3/02) 
(Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11) 
4.24 - Floodplain management. 
4.24.1 Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
F.  Adopt and comply with the requirements of the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 (Pub. L. 93-234, December 31, 1979) and section 60.2 (h), 60.3 (d) and 65.5 of the National Flood Insurance Program (24 CFR 1909, etc.) thereby assuring that the unincorporated areas of Fulton County and its citizens shall continue to participate in the benefits of the program and not be subject to the prohibitions contained in section 202 (a) of the 1973 act as amended. 
4.24.2 Objectives. The objectives of this section are: 
A.  To protect human life and health; 
B.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding, generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, street and bridges located in floodplains; 
F.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; and 
G.  To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
4.24.3 Jurisdiction. This section shall apply to all the unincorporated areas of Fulton County which contain special flood hazard or flood prone areas. 
4.24.4 Flood areas established. 
A.  Special flood hazard area shall be designated on the "floodway boundary and floodway maps" (FBFM), the "flood insurance rate maps" (FIRM), and the "flood insurance study" (FIS) prepared and revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) effective June 22, 1998. As defined by FEMA, special flood hazard areas (SFHA) are classified as numbered or unnumbered zones A, AE, (formerly A1-A30), AO, and AH which are available for review on maps in the Department of Environment and Community Development or the Department of Public Works. The accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision are hereby adopted by reference, declared to be a part of this resolution, and shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth in this resolution. SFHA shall be identified as follows: (Amended 2/7/01) 
1.  Fifty lots or five acres space or more. When FEMA has not produced water surface elevations data and the proposed development is more than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, base flood elevation data determined in studies by the U.S. Corps of Engineers or other reputable reports based on competent engineering studies prepared by a current state-registered professional engineer and accepted by the department of public works shall be adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this section. 
2.  Fewer than 50 lots or five acres. When FEMA has not produced water surface elevation data and the proposed development is not fewer than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, then the base flood elevation data may be determined by the best information available. 
B.  Regulatory floodway area shall be designated on the "flood boundary and floodway map" and the "flood insurance study" as revised by FEMA from time to time. It is the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
C.  Flood prone area shall be designated on the "flood insurance rate map." Flood prone areas shall be those areas classified as areas of moderate and minimal flood hazards, shown thereon as "Zone X" (formerly Zone B). (Amended 6/3/98) 
4.24.5 Use regulations. (Amended 04/05/06) Notwithstanding the uses permitted by the zoning district applying to the property, the following shall be prohibited in the Special Flood Hazard Area (100 year IRF): buildings and structures; filling; and compensatory flood storage for placement of either fill or for construction of a structure in the floodplain with exception to exempted uses as specified in Section 4.24.5.A. 1-8: 
Floodplain designation shall be based on data generated by FEMA, Fulton County flood studies, or data from engineering flood studies prepared by a state-registered professional engineer and accepted by Fulton County (whichever is most representative of the current floodplain). Flood studies shall be approved contingent upon acceptance by FEMA. 
Construction (which is consistent with the exemption provisions of this resolution) shall be allowed within floodways only if it is directed towards improving the capacity or flow characteristics of the flood waters or crossing, relocating or altering the floodway channel itself. All such construction must be in conformance with the provisions of the Fulton County Zoning Resolution and the national Flood Insurance Program. 
A.  Special Flood Hazard-Flood Prone Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in Special Flood Hazard and Flood Prone Areas. 
1.  Agricultural, including forestry and livestock raising, requiring no structure. Agriculture and forestry access roads are permitted provided they are constructed in conformance with the development standards of the regulations. 
2.  Dams, provided that they are constructed in accordance with the requirement of this section, the Department of Public Works, the U.S.D.A. Soil and Conservation Service and when applicable, meet the specifications of The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
3.  Fences having sufficient open area to permit the free flow of water and/or debris. 
4.  Identification, regulatory and warning signs. 
5.  Public and private parks and recreational areas including boat ramps and docks and other functionally dependent uses not including any temporary or permanent buildings, provided; such use is approved by the Department of Environment and Community Development, if applicable, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
6.  Parking. 
7.  Utility lines, pipelines, sewers, roads and stream crossings (if no other means of access is available), and similar facilities, provided they are constructed in such a manner as to permit the free flow of flood waters. 
4.24.6 Permit required. A land disturbance permit or grading permit shall be required prior to the commencement of any improvement, including grading and filling, within the special flood hazard or flood prone areas. (Amended 11/3/93) 
A.  Activities on lots within existing development. In developments that require only a building permit on a developed lot, portions of which are subject to flooding, the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development shall review the application and issue the permit as part of the building permit. The flood elevation study as required by paragraph 4(a)(1) above may be waived by the Department of Public Works provided: (Amended 2/7/01) 
1.  A licensed surveyor submits base flood elevation data based on the best information available. 
2.  That the base flood elevation data is to be used only to establish the lowest floor elevation of a structure. 
B.  Activities requiring land disturbance permit. In developments that require a land disturbance permit as provided in the "Erosion and Sedimentation Ordinance of 1978" [See Code ch. 26, art. II], the Department of Environment and Community Development shall review the application and issue the permit as part of the land disturbance permit. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
C.  Other activities. In all other developments that involve change, modification, or alteration to a flood area, except such activities as plowing, tilling, seeding, planting, or any other agricultural or landscaping pursuit which does not result in change to the cross sectional area of the floodplain nor a significant or hazardous change in the flow characteristics, the developer shall be required to obtain the applicable permit prior to the commencement of any construction within the floodplain. 
4.24.7 Permit procedure. (Amended 11/3/93) 
A.  Application. Application for a permit shall be made to the Department of Environment and Community Development as indicated under permit required above. If the proposed development requires a land disturbance permit or is of such a nature as to require review and approval by the Department of Environment and Community Development, or any other appropriate agencies, the applicant shall be so advised. Such review may require additional data and/or plans to be furnished by the applicant to assure compliance with all applicable regulations. (Amended 2/7/01) 
B.  Certification. The Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development shall inform an applicant of the requirements that "as-built" lowest floor elevation certificates be obtained prior to approval of a certificate of occupancy for any structure built in or immediately adjacent to a special flood hazard area. Certificates of elevation: 
1.  Shall be prepared by a professional engineer or surveyor licensed by the State of Georgia. 
2.  Shall be maintained in a file in the offices of the Department of Environment and Community Development and the Department of Public Works. (Amended 2/7/01) 
4.24.8 Plans and studies required. Wherever it is necessary to determine that the proposed use conforms to the requirements of this section, the Department of Environment and Community Development shall require the applicant to furnish complete and sufficient plans, specifications, hydrological and engineering studies or data. Depending on the size or nature of the proposed use, any or all of the following may be required: (Amended 11/3/93, 6/3/98, 2/7/01) 
A.  Grading, replanting and drainage plans; 
B.  Proposed temporary and permanent drainage and sedimentation control structures and facilities; 
C.  Complete hydrologic and hydraulic analysis, prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia, establishing the 100-year base flood elevations and horizontal flood plain limits. 
D.  A determination of the channel cross-section area required to carry the affected stream during the base flood; 
E.  Complete hydrologic studies to evaluate the total effects a development under review may have upon affected drainage facilities and systems; 
F.  The Department of Environment and Community Development may require the applicant to furnish a written agreement to limit use and development in accord with the approved plan and specifications. (Amended 2/7/01) 
4.24.9 General development provisions and standards. (Amended 11/3/93) 
A.  Relocation and realignment. Within a special flood hazard or flood prone area any relocation or realignment of river and stream channels shall be prohibited if it would reduce the floodway capacity with respect to the base flood elevation, or significantly alter water flow characteristics so as to create a hazard. 
B.  Nonconforming uses. Except as restricted or exempted below, existing nonconforming uses within a special flood hazard or flood prone area may be maintained or repaired; modified, altered or repaired to incorporate floodproofing measures; improved to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
1.  Restrictions. 
a.  The cost of such improvement shall not equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure either, (i) before the improvement is started or (ii) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
b.  Such nonconforming use shall not be expanded. 
2.  Exemption. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
C.  Structures elevated above flood hazard or flood prone areas. No new structure shall be approved or constructed so as to extend over a special flood hazard or flood prone area, whether it be a cantilever design or supported by structural elements located within the floodplain. 
D.  Structures adjacent to flood hazard or flood prone areas. For any proposed new structure adjacent to a special flood hazard or flood prone area the ground surface shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation. Further, when a filled building site is required, the ground surface at the face of the wall shall be at least ten feet distant from the base floodplain. See paragraph 65.5 of the National Flood Insurance Program as amended. 
E.  The lowest minimum floor elevation. The lowest floor elevation, as described in FEMA's elevation certificate on page 5 and 6, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation and meet the requirements of 4.24.9.G. (Amended 4/5/95) 
F.  Removing flood hazard or flood prone areas. Lands may be removed from a special flood hazard area or flood prone area by raising the elevation of such land above the base flood elevation, provided the raising of such land is accomplished in accordance with the requirements of this resolution. Refer to FEMA National Flood Insurance Program Regulation 44 CFR 65 for procedures to amend the FIRM, FHBM, or FIS. The developer/property owner shall prepare all plans and engineering studies and pay any fees necessary to obtain a letter of map revision for their development. (Added 4/5/95) 
G.  Residential lots. In districts which permit residential use, development is prohibited in special flood hazard areas. Fulton County may allow such development provided: (Amended 4/5/95) 
1.  Not less than 70 percent of the buildable land area lies above the base flood elevation, a minimum of one foot, and/or 
2.  Not less than 50 percent of the minimum lot area, as established by the applicable zoning district, shall be above the base flood elevation. 
H.  Utilities. The location, design, elevation, and construction of all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, on-site waste disposal systems, water systems and streets shall be in such a manner as to minimize or eliminate damage by flooding. 
I.  Drainage structures. All drainage structures and facilities located within special flood hazard or flood prone areas shall be constructed in accordance with Fulton County Standards and Specifications. They shall be maintained by the owner in a sanitary, fully functional and operable state so that the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse is preserved. 
J.  Erosion and sediment control. Provision shall be made for the adequate control of erosion and sedimentation. 
K.  Riverine considerations. Fulton County shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Georgia State Coordinating Office prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. 
L.  Watercourse alteration or relocation. Fulton County, prior to approval of a permit to alter or relocate a portion of any watercourse shall require an agreement indemnifying Fulton County from all liability arising from the construction pursuant to said permit and providing for the continued maintenance to assure the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated water course. 
4.24.10 Development within flood prone areas. 
A.  Development limitations. Within flood prone areas, no construction including grading and filling shall be allowed that would: 
1.  Raise the base flood elevation beyond the boundaries of the ownership of the property being developed. Submittal of this certification and the supporting studies by a professional engineer are required. 
2.  Reduce the flood storage capacity. Fill placed within the floodplain must be compensated. All cut areas must drain by gravity to the main watercourse. Certification by a professional engineer and an "as-built" topographical map superimposed on the original topography are required. 
3.  Impede the movement of flood waters. Applies to any obstruction placed within the floodplain, i.e., fill, but in particular, roads, driveways, bridges and culverts. All such encroachments shall be designed and submitted by a professional engineer and shall provide: 
a.  That there shall be no reduction in the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse. 
b.  A certification together with supportive data. 
c.  Sufficient opening provided for the passage of the flood waters so as to prevent or greatly reduce the hazard of debris or trash blocking the flood's flow. 
4.  Changes the flow characteristics of the flood waters as they pass the boundaries of the developed property. Requires certification by a professional engineer along with all supportive studies. 
5.  Create hazardous or erosion producing velocities. Requires certification by a professional engineer along with supportive studies. 
B.  Stormwater management structures. Detention ponds, lakes and similar impoundment structures may be constructed within a flood prone area provided they do not violate the restrictions enumerated under paragraph 10(a) above. Provided further that any such detention pond, lake or similar impoundment structure shall provide adequate discharge control and sufficient storage capacity to assure that the rate of runoff calculated for the proposed development including that drainage increased or diverted by reason of the development shall not exceed that calculated for the property in its natural state in the event of the 100-year storm. 
C.  Studies and plans required. A hydrologic analysis shall be required to be submitted to the Department of Environment and Community Development with each application for a land disturbance permit for property containing a flood prone area. Any or all of the other plans or studies referred to in paragraph 4.24.8 above may be required. Such studies shall take cognizance of existing conditions which affect the flow of water on adjacent properties and also such future conditions as can reasonably be expected to occur in the drainage basin. Such reports shall meet the requirements of the Department of Environment and Community Development. (Amended 11/3/93, 6/3/98, 2/7/01) 
D.  Revision criteria. Each application for a land disturbance permit for property containing a flood prone area shall also submit therewith documented results of hydrology and hydraulic analysis prepared by a registered professional engineer demonstrating that any area defined on the FIRM or FBFM as moderate or minimal flood hazard (Zone X) is not actually a SHFA. Such results and analysis shall demonstrate that none of the following criteria is met in any flood prone area(s) on the site: (Added 6/3/98) 
(1)  The flood prone area(s) is subject to a one percent (1%) annual chance of flooding with average channel depths greater than one foot or; 
(2)  The flood prone area(s) has a contributing drainage area greater than one square mile or; 
(3)  The flood prone area(s) has hazardous velocities in the channel and/or overbank areas greater than 3.5 feet per second. (The county may accept velocities of up to 5 feet per second depending upon the results of a soil study by the engineer). 
In the event that any of the above criteria is met, the applicant shall submit to the Department of Environment and Community Development the relevant data for a Letter of Map Revision and the appropriate fees required by FEMA. The Fulton County Department of Public Works shall then submit the relevant data, letter of map revision and accompanying fees to FEMA for a determination of whether a map revision is warranted. In the event of such a map revision reclassifying an area as an SHFA, development within the affected area(s) shall comply with section 4.24.12 of this article. (Amended 2/7/01) 
4.24.11 Development with unstudied special flood hazard areas. Development and revisions criteria in the unstudied special hazard areas shall be the same as in the flood prone areas, subsection 4.24.10. (Amended 6/3/98) 
4.24.12 Development within studied special flood hazard areas. 
A.  Development limitations. No construction shall be allowed within the studied special flood hazard areas that would: 
1.  Raise the base flood elevation. Submittal of this certification and the supporting studies by a professional engineer are required. 
2.  Reduce the flood storage capacity. Fill placed within the floodplain must be compensated. All cut areas must drain by gravity to the main watercourse. Certification by a professional engineer and an "as-built" topography map superimposed on the original topography are required. 
3.  Impede the movement of flood waters. Applies to any obstruction placed within the floodplain but in particular, roads, bridges, driveways and culverts. All such encroachments shall be designed by a professional engineer and shall provide: 
a.  That there shall be no reduction in the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse. 
b.  A certification together with supportive data. 
c.  Sufficient opening provided for the passage of the flood waters so as to prevent or greatly reduce the hazard of debris or trash blocking the flow of the flood. 
4.  Change the flow characteristics of the flood waters. Requires certification by a professional engineer along with all supportive studies. 
5.  Create hazardous or erosion producing velocities. Requires certification by a professional engineer along with supportive studies. 
B.  Increase base flood elevation. The department of public works may from time to time, request a review and determination from the floodplain management administrator to permit an increase in the base flood elevation. Such increased elevation shall not exceed that depth shown in the Flood Insurance Study, Table 2, Base Flood Water Surface Elevation with Floodway Column. (Amended 4/5/95) 
1.  This increase may be granted when: 
a.  The development is a proposed public road, bridge and/or culvert, public utility poles, towers, pipelines, sewers and similar facilities. 
b.  The development is a private lot, bridge/culvert, private utility poles, towers, pipelines, sewers or other similar facilities. 
2.  A professional engineer must submit a certification along with supportive documentation that the increase does not extend beyond the boundaries of the property upon which the improvement is proposed and shall not cause any appreciable expansion of flooding, siltation, erosion or inundation hazards. (Amended 11/3/93) 
3.  A developer shall apply to the Floodplain Management Administrator of Fulton County for review and approval of an application for a letter of map revision to FEMA. (Added 4/5/95) 
4.  The floodplain management administrator may apply for a conditional FIRM revision to FEMA prior to permitting encroachment into a special flood hazard area. Refer to the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations 44 CFR, Part 65.12 for FEMA requirements. (Added 4/5/95) 
4.24.13 Floodway alteration. 
A.  Construction within regulatory floodway. When construction is proposed within the regulatory floodway such as flood control projects, stream channelization, stream relocation, construction of new dams, reservoirs, artificial canals, private levees or flood protection systems which would result in a change in the base flood elevations as shown on the flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), the following shall be required: 
1.  Complete plans, data, studies and documentation for the proposed construction shall be submitted to the Department of Public Works. 
2.  If the Department of Public Works determines that the project is feasible and acceptable, then the department shall submit the project to FEMA in compliance with the provisions of the National Flood Insurance Program, paragraph 65.5 as amended from time to time. 
Note: Fulton County may require a fee for review of such proposals. 
4.24.14 Mobile homes. All mobile homes located within the 100-year floodplain must adhere to all applicable regulations stated elsewhere in this resolution as well as the following: 
A.  Anchoring. All mobile homes should be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement, by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that: 
1.  Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations. Mobile homes which are less than 50 feet long must have one additional tie per side; 
2.  Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points. Mobile homes which are less than 50 feet long require four additional ties per side; 
3.  All components of the anchoring system must be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and 
4.  Any additions to the mobile home must be similarly anchored. 
B.  General requirements. All mobile homes are required to have: 
1.  Lots that are elevated on compacted fill in accordance with paragraph 4.24.9(D). 
2.  Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler. 
4.24.15 Subdivision plats. Hereinafter, proposed preliminary and final subdivision plats for property located contiguous to or within flood prone or special flood hazard areas shall not be approved except in accordance with the following requirements: (Amended 4/5/95) 
A.  Each plat shall contain a notation clearly stating the water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to mean sea level as approved and accepted by the Department of Public Works. Any lands below this elevation shall be designated on the plat by a heavy line, depicting the base flood elevation at that point. 
B.  No lot shall be approved which has less than the minimum lot area as established by the applicable zoning district regulations and 4.24.9.G above the base flood elevation. 
C.  Preliminary and final subdivision plats that were approved prior to the enactment of this section are exempt from the requirements of 4.24.9.D and 4.24.15.B above, and building permits shall be issued accordingly. 
D.  No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the county where development has altered the special flood hazard area unless the county has first received a letter of map amendment, letter of map revision or notice of conditional FIRM revision from FEMA as stipulated in the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations 44 CFR 65. (Added 4/5/95) 
4.24.16 Abrogation and greater restrictions. This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this section and another section of this resolution conflict or overlap, however, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
4.24.17 Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this section, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
4.24.18 Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. 
Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This section shall not create liability on the part of Fulton County or by any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
4.24.19 Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations. 
4.24.20 Appeal. (Deleted 3/4/92, See article XXII) 
4.25 - Property number/street address. 
Property numbers issued by the Fulton County Department of Environment and Community Development shall be posted so as to be clearly visible from the street for which the property number was assigned. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
4.26. - Inclusionary housing zoning. 
(Added 04/05/06) 
4.26.1. Purpose and Intent. This section of the Fulton County Zoning Ordinance is intended to provide that residential projects in Fulton County contain a defined percentage of housing affordable to very low, low, and moderate income households; to provide for a program of incentives and local public subsidy to assist in this effort; and to implement the mixed income and housing policies of the Housing and Implementation Elements of Fulton County's Comprehensive Plan. Participation in the Inclusionary Housing Zoning Program shall be voluntary for a twenty-four month period after which it will sunset until the Board of Commissioners can assess the effectiveness of the program and determine the conditions for its future implementation. 
The Ordinance seeks to: 
(a)  Provide for a full range of housing choices, conveniently located in a suitable living environment, for all incomes, ages and family sizes; 
(b)  Provide housing to meet the existing and anticipated future needs of very low, low and moderate-income households; 
(c)  Assure that affordable housing units are dispersed throughout the County by providing such units in all residential developments, except as otherwise may be provided for in this Article; 
(d)  Encourage the construction of affordable housing by allowing increases in density to offset land and development costs; 
(e)  Ensure that developers incur no loss or penalty and have reasonable prospects of realizing a profit on affordable housing units by virtue of the density bonus and other incentive provisions herein. 
4.26.2. Definitions. 
Affordable. Rented at an Affordable Rent or sold at an Affordable Housing Price. 
Affordable Housing Price. A sales price, at which Low, Very Low, or Moderate Income Households, as provided in this Section, can qualify for the purchase of for-sale Inclusionary Units, based on designated income standards. For purposes of this calculation, housing expenses shall include mortgage principal and interest, taxes, insurance, and assessments. 
Affordable Rent. (1) for a unit whose occupancy is restricted to a Low Income Household that the monthly rent consists of a maximum of one-twelfth of thirty percent (30%) of eighty percent (80%) of the median income applicable to Fulton County; and (2) for a unit whose occupancy is restricted to a Very Low Income Household that the monthly rent consists of a maximum of one-twelfth of thirty percent (30%) of fifty percent (50%) of the median income applicable to Fulton County. In each case, the median income applicable to Fulton County is as determined annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, adjusted for household size, less a reasonable allowance for utilities and in compliance with the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program administered by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
Affordable Rental Agreement. Legal restrictions by which the rents for rental Inclusionary Units will be controlled to ensure that rents remain Affordable for a period of thirty (30) years or longer. 
Bond Financed Projects. Affordable housing developments financed with tax-exempt bonds and therefore eligible for 4% federal credits. 
Density Bonus. A minimum density increase of at least twenty percent (20%) over the otherwise maximum residential density as permitted by the Fulton County Zoning Ordinance and the Comprehensive Land Use Plan at the time of application. 
Developer. Any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or any entity or combination of entities which seeks Fulton County's approvals for all or part of a Development Project. Developer includes Owner. 
Development Agreement. An agreement entered into between Fulton County and a Developer. 
Development Project. Any real-estate development project that includes Market Rate Units and is required to provide an Inclusionary Housing Component pursuant to the provisions of this Section. Projects at One Location undertaken in phases, stages or otherwise developed in distinct sections shall be considered a single Development Project for purposes of this Section. 
Dwelling Unit. A residential unit within a Development Project. 
External Subsidy. Any source of funds that is not Local Public Funding, including Federal or state grants, loans, bond funds, tax credits or other tax-based subsidy. 
First-time Home buyer. An individual purchaser or spouse who has not owned a home during the past three years, or that the purchaser meets at least one of the following criteria: 
A.  The purchaser is a displaced homemaker, defined as a person who has not worked full-time for a number of years, worked primarily without remuneration to care for the home and family, is unemployed or underemployed, is experiencing difficulty in obtaining or upgrading employment, and, while a homemaker, owned a home with a previous spouse; 
B.  The purchaser is single (unmarried or legally separated), has one or more minor children of whom purchaser has custody, and, while previously married, owned a home with a previous spouse; or 
C.  The purchaser owns or owned as a principal residence during the past three years, a dwelling unit which structure is not permanently affixed to a permanent foundation in accordance with the Fulton County's Zoning Ordinance, or is not and cannot be brought into compliance with Fulton County's Zoning Resolution for less than the cost of replacing the structure. 
Fulton County Government. Fulton County, Georgia. 
Household. One person living alone or two or more persons sharing residency whose income is considered for housing payments. 
Household Income. The combined adjusted gross income for all adult persons residing in a living unit. 
Household, Low Income. A household whose annual income does not exceed eighty (80) percent of the area median income, adjusted for family size as published and annually updated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Household, Moderate Income. A household whose annual income does not exceed one hundred and twenty (120) percent of the area median income, adjusted for family size as published and annually updated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Household, Very Low Income. A household whose income does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the area median income, adjusted for family size as published and annually updated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Housing Trust Fund. The fund created by Fulton County and administered by the Fulton County Office of Housing (FCOH). 
Inclusionary Housing Agreement or Agreement. The agreement between a Developer and the County setting forth the manner in which the Inclusionary Housing Component will be met in the Development Project. 
Inclusionary Housing Plan. A plan required at the time of concept review for a land disturbance permit or building permit that provides the details of proposed inclusionary units. 
Inclusionary Housing Component. The provision of the Inclusionary Housing Units in a Development Project. 
Inclusionary Housing Unit or Inclusionary Unit. An ownership or rental dwelling unit developed as a part of the Inclusionary Housing Component of a Development Project as provided in this Section. 
Inclusionary Housing Development. A development containing a building with more than eight (8) units for multi-family or for all residential developments of 20 units or more in which 10 percent of the total units must be inclusionary units restricted for occupancy by very low, low, or moderate income households except as otherwise provided for herein. 
Inclusionary Incentives. The fee waivers or reductions, planning and building standards waivers or reductions, regulatory incentives or concessions, and Federal, State, and Local Public Funding provided by Fulton County to a Development Project to assist in the provision of the Inclusionary Housing Component. 
Income, Area Median. The annual median family income of a geographic area of the state, as annually estimated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to Section 8 of the Housing Act of 1937. 
Initial Owner. The first person or persons to purchase a new for-sale Inclusionary Unit for his, her or their primary residence. 
Legislative Entitlement. Means and includes general and community plan designations and redesignations, zonings and rezonings, and planned unit development site plans and revised site plans. 
Local Public Funding. Loans and grants from the Housing Trust Fund, federal Home Investment Partnership Program ("HOME" funds), and redevelopment area tax increment housing set-aside funds, and other funds originating from or administered by Fulton County. 
Low Income Housing Tax Credits. Federal and State financing in which federal housing tax credits are awarded to developers to raise capital for the development of affordable multi-family rental units. 
Market Rate. Rates not restricted to an Affordable Housing Price or Affordable Rent. 
Multi-family Residential. Residential units planned, approved, or built on land planned or zoned for other than Single Family Residential in which Housing Tax Credits have been awarded for the purpose of developing affordable multi-family rental units. 
Off-Site Unit. An Inclusionary Unit that is built separately or at a different location than the main development. 
On-Site Unit. An Inclusionary Unit that will be built as apart of the main development. 
One Location. All adjacent land owned or controlled by the same Owner or a Related Owner, the property lines of which are contiguous at any point, or the property lines of which are separated only by a public or private street, road, or other public or private right of way. 
Owner. Includes the person, persons, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, or public or private entity having sufficient proprietary interest in real property to commence, maintain, and operate a Development Project. 
Percent. A one hundredth part. In applying percentages referred to in this Section, any portion of a Percent less than one half (0.5%) shall be disregarded and any portion of a Percent one half (0.5%) or greater shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
Project, For Sale. A residential project, or portion thereof, which is intended to be sold to owner-occupants upon completion. 
Project Level Approval. Includes a concept plan, a Special Permit, or other administrative or adjudicatory approval or determination in connection with a Development Project. 
Related Owner. A person or entity, including but not limited to, partnerships, limited partnerships, and corporations, which has any of the following relationships with an Owner: (1) they share the majority of members of their governing boards; (2) they share two or more officers: (3) they are owned or controlled by the same majority shareholder(s) or general partner(s); (4) they are in a parent-subsidiary relationship; or (5) the person is a sibling, offspring or parent of an individual Owner. For purposes of this subsection, a controlling interest means fifty percent (50%) or more of the voting power of a corporation, and a parent-subsidiary relationship exists when one corporation owns, directly or indirectly, fifty percent (50%) or more of the voting power of another corporation. For purposes of this section, a person and any general partnership in which the person is a general partner, or a person and any corporation in which the person owns a controlling interest, shall be treated as one and the same. 
Residential Project. The entirety of Market Rate residential development in a Development Project subject to the requirement to provide an Inclusionary Housing Component as specified in this Section. 
Single-family Residential. A development planned, approved, or built on land planned or zoned solely for a permitted residential density of one unit per parcel. Where such a planning or zoning single-family designation also allows as a conditional use duplexes or similar uses, the designation is nonetheless considered Single-family Residential for purposes of the Inclusionary Housing Component and the other provisions of this Section. 
Fulton County Zoning Ordinance. The Fulton County Zoning Ordinance as it may be amended from time to time. 
4.26.3. Standard Inclusionary Housing Component. 
A.  Number and Affordability of Inclusionary Units. For all residential developments of 20 units or more, the Inclusionary Housing Component shall consist of Inclusionary Units developed for, offered to, and leased or sold to Very Low, Low, and Moderate Income Households as follows: at least 5 percent of the units must be restricted to occupancy of moderate income households and 5 percent of the units must be restricted to occupancy of low and/or very low income households. For the purposes of calculating the number of inclusionary units, any decimal fraction of 0.5 or more shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
B.  Location of Inclusionary Units. Except as provided in this Section, Inclusionary Units shall be built on the site of the Development Project and must be dispersed throughout a Residential Development. 
C.  Timing of Development. The Inclusionary Housing Plan and Inclusionary Housing Agreement shall include a phasing plan, which provides for the timely development of the Inclusionary Units as the Residential Project is built out. The phasing plan shall provide for development of the Inclusionary Units concurrently with the Market Rate Units; provided however, that the phasing plan will be adjusted by the Director of Environment & Community Development (E&CD) away from strict concurrency where necessary in order to account for the different financing and funding environments, economies of scale, and infrastructure needs applicable to development of the Market Rate and the Inclusionary Units. Multi-family development shall 
D.  Design. Inclusionary units for single-family shall be comparable in infrastructure (including sewer, water and other utilities), construction quality, and exterior design to the market rate units. Inclusionary units may be smaller in aggregate size and have different interior finishes and features than market rate units so long as the interior features are durable, of good quality and consistent with contemporary standards for new housing. Inclusionary single-family units must be a minimum of 1,600 square feet for moderate-income households, 1,250 square feet for low-income households, and 1,000 square feet for very low-income households. The number of bedrooms in the inclusionary units should be comparable in number to those in the market rate units. The ratio of bathrooms per bedroom should be equal to the ratio of bathrooms per bedroom in market rate units. Multi-family design standards shall be consistent with the proposed development. 
E.  Unit Size. The Inclusionary Housing Component shall accommodate diverse family sizes by including a mix of studio, one, two and three-bedroom units as determined by the Director of E&CD, upon recommendation by the Director of the Office of Housing. 
F.  Exterior Appearance. Inclusionary Units shall be visually compatible with the Market Rate Units. External building materials and finishes shall be the same type and quality for Inclusionary Units as for Market Rate Units. Interior materials finishes may vary. 
G.  Development Standards. Except as provided in the Inclusionary Housing Agreement pursuant to this Section, Inclusionary Units shall comply with all applicable Development Standards. 
4.26.4. Incentives, Assistance and Subsidies. The Developer of a Development Project subject to the Inclusionary Housing provisions may request that Fulton County provide Inclusionary Incentives as set forth in this Section. The goal of these Inclusionary Incentives is to apply available incentives to qualifying projects in a manner that, to the extent feasible, offsets the cost of providing the Inclusionary Housing Component. The Director of E&CD shall respond to that request at the time and in the manner specified in this Section, and shall make a determination as to a package of Inclusionary Incentives for the Inclusionary Units as provided in this Section. 
A.  Fee Waivers or Deferrals. Upon application, Fulton County shall make available to a Residential Project Developer a program of waiver, reduction or deferral of development fees, Impact Fee Waiver, administrative and financing fees for Inclusionary Units. Such a program may include application, on behalf of a Developer, to other government entities for fee waiver and deferral program for waiver and/or deferral of other impact or development fees. 
B.  Modification of Development Standards. Upon application, Fulton County may modify for Inclusionary Units, to the extent feasible in light of the uses, design, and infrastructure needs of the Development Project, as determined by the Director of E&CD and the Office of Housing Director, development standards, including but not limited to, road widths, curb and gutter, parking, and housing types. 
C.  Interior Finish Reductions. Upon application, Fulton County may, to the maximum extent appropriate in light of project design elements as determined by the Director of E&CD, allow builders to finish out the interior of Inclusionary Units with less expensive finishes and appliances. 
D.  Streamlining and Priority Processing. The Director of E&CD shall expedite development Permits for Residential Projects that include an Inclusionary Housing Component. Fulton County shall develop further procedures for streamlining and priority processing which relieve Inclusionary Units of permit processing requirements to the maximum extent feasible consistent with the public health, safety and welfare. 
E.  Density Bonus. Fulton County shall make available to the Residential Project a Density Bonus as provided in this Section. The number of units allowed may be increased by 20 percent provided, however, that the affordability requirements to qualify for a Density Bonus shall be those stated in this Section. 
F.  Local Public Funding. The Developer may apply to the Office of Housing for Local Public Funding to assist in the financing and development of the Inclusionary Housing Component. Local Public Funding may serve to facilitate state allocation of tax credits, mortgage revenue bond funds, or state or federal assistance to the Project ("External Subsidy"); provided that the provision of such Local Public Funding requires that Developer diligently pursue such External Subsidy and is not intended to substitute for such External Subsidy. A Developer seeking Local Public Funding shall apply to the Office of Housing Director for such funding pursuant to this Section. The Office of Housing Director shall submit the proposed Local Public Funding assistance package to the Director of E&CD for inclusion in the Fulton County's Inclusionary Incentives for the project. 
The Office of Housing Director, as to the feasible elements of Local Public Funding and in making the determination as to inclusion of Local Public Funding in the Inclusionary Incentives, shall consider: (1) the number, percentage, and tenure of the Units for Very Low Income or Low Income Households in the Inclusionary Housing Component; (2) the financial structure and financing needs of the Inclusionary Housing Component; (3) the cost-efficiency of the solution to the Inclusionary Housing Component, (4) the Developer's initiatives in applying for grants and other funds external to Local Public Funding; (5) the availability of funds given the funding priorities of Office of Housing and other funding agencies at the time, and other development of housing for Very Low or Low Income Households under way, proposed or anticipated; and (6) other factors necessary to the evaluation. Office of Housing shall adopt and provide to Developers and other interested parties criteria for evaluation of applicants for Local Public Funding. These criteria may be contained in the Guidelines as outlined by the Office of Housing. 
4.26.5. Construction of the Inclusionary Housing Component to Avoid over Concentration. The following principles shall apply to the development of the Inclusionary Housing Component: 
A.  The Inclusionary Housing Plan shall provide for the dispersal of buildings containing Inclusionary Units to the maximum extent feasible taking into account the funding and financing environments applicable to Inclusionary housing development. 
B.  Multi-family buildings may contain any proportion of inclusionary units, but no Inclusionary Housing Development may be located adjacent to another Inclusionary Housing Development. For purposes of this Section, Inclusionary Housing Development means a development containing a building with more than eight (8) units for multi-family or for all residential developments of 20 units or more, in which 10 percent of the total units must be inclusionary units restricted for occupancy by very low, low, or moderate income households except as otherwise provided for herein. The Director of E&CD may allow for variation from these principles, but only the extent necessary, if he or she determines that an alternative configuration of Inclusionary Units is required by funding or financing considerations associated with the development of the Inclusionary Units or by the applicable residential land use designations within and adjacent to the Residential Project. 
C.  Proposed Inclusionary Single-family Housing Developments that are located within a census track(s) in which 95% of the existing units are below 80% AMI, must submit a Housing Development Plan that includes the following mixed housing price points for sale: 
i.  20% not to exceed $150,000 
ii.  60% between $150,000 and $216,000 
iii.  20% Market 
4.26.6. Alternatives to the Standard Inclusionary Housing Component. Subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners (BOC), in lieu of constructing affordable housing units on site, a developer may dedicate land or pay in-lieu housing fees. At the time of concept plan review, the developer shall be required to provide a report to the E&CD Director identifying the reasons the construction of the required number of affordable housing units within the development is not feasible. The report shall include sufficient independent data, including appropriate financial information, which supports the developer's claim that it is not feasible to construct the required affordable units and a detailed analysis of why the density bonus cannot mitigate the conditions that prevent the developer from constructing the affordable units. The Director shall review all such requests and prepare a recommendation to the Board of Commissioners. Such requests shall be considered on a case-by-case basis by the BOC and may be approved at the BOC's sole discretion. The monetary value of an alternative equivalent must be equal to or exceed the cost to produce the required number of affordable housing units on site. 
A.  Land Dedication and Off-Site Compliance Options. Upon a determination by the Director of E&CD that the criteria outlined in number 4 below have been met, a Residential Project may provide all or part of its Inclusionary Housing Component by means of the following options: 
(1)  Dedication of land to Fulton County at no cost. Under this option, a developer may donate to the County a site on which all or a portion of the mandated inclusionary units can be built. The dedicated site must be located in the same planning area (as defined by the Comprehensive Plan) in unincorporated Fulton County and must be physically suitable for development at the time of conveyance. It must be of sufficient size and properly zoned to accommodate the requisite number of units. It must already have access to water and sewer and public services (police, fire, etc.). The property should not have physical constraints that cause delay or increase construction costs (e.g., grading) or be unsuitable for residential development (e.g., contain toxins). The developer shall provide an appraisal of the land and its appraised value shall be confirmed by the County's Land Division of the General Services Department. 
(2)  Development of Inclusionary Units Off-site. Inclusionary units may be constructed outside the Development Project within an Area ("Off-Site") for a Residential Project that is single-family or multi-family. 
(3)  A combination of options (1) and (2). 
(4)  Standard for Approval. The Director of E&CD may approve the proposal only if it provides a more cost-efficient solution to the Inclusionary Housing Component than the standard approach set forth in this Section, or if the location of Off-Site development would be superior to on-site development from the perspective of access to transportation or other applicable residential planning policies in the Fulton County Comprehensive Plan. 
(5)  Number of Inclusionary Units Credited to the Dedication or Off-Site Location. The number of Inclusionary Units credited to the dedication or Off-Site location will consist of the number of Inclusionary Units which can with reasonable degree of certainty be developed on the land, given (a) the mix of Inclusionary Unit sizes and type of structure in the Inclusionary Housing Plan; (b) densities permitted by applicable planning and zoning designations; and (c) site, infrastructure, environmental and other physical and planning constraints. 
(6)  Site Suitability. The land proposed for dedication or for Off-Site location must be suitable from the perspective of size, configuration, physical characteristics, physical and environmental constraints, access, location, adjacent use, and other relevant planning criteria. The site must allow development of Inclusionary Units in a manner that complies with this Section including the over-concentration provisions set forth in Section 4.26.4. 
(7)  Site Identification and Regulatory Status. The Developer must identify the proposed dedicated site or Off-Site location and the number of proposed Units to be credited thereby as part of the Inclusionary Housing Plan required in this Section. At the same time or before the Development Project receives its Inclusionary Incentives, the dedicated or Off-Site land shall have received all the Inclusionary Incentives necessary for development of the Inclusionary Units on such land. Unless the phasing plan requires otherwise, at the same time or before a Residential Project receives its first Project specific Entitlements, the dedicated or Off-Site land shall have received all the necessary Project-Level Approvals necessary for development of the Inclusionary Units on such land, and prior to the issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy for a Residential Project, the dedicated land or Off-Site land shall be fully served with the infrastructure necessary for residential development. 
(8)  Director of E&CD Action. The Director of E&CD may recommend conditional approval or denial of the proposed land dedication or Off-Site development proposal. In reviewing the proposal, the Director of E&CD will consult with the Director of the Office of Housing. If the land dedication or the Off-Site proposal is accepted or accepted as modified, the relevant elements of the Inclusionary Housing Plan shall be included in the applicable Legislative Approvals for both the Residential Development generating the requirement for the Inclusionary Housing Component and, if applicable, the dedicated site or Off-Site Development Project where all or part of that requirement is proposed to be met. If the dedication or Off-Site proposal is rejected, the Inclusionary Housing Component shall be provided as set forth in this Section within the Development Project. 
(9)  Implementation. As early as possible in the regulatory process, and in no case later than the negotiation of the Inclusionary Housing Agreement as provided in this Section, the Owner of the Residential Project must: (1) in the case of land dedication, provide an irrevocable offer of dedication for the dedicated site at no cost to Fulton County; and (2) in the case of Off-Site land, demonstrate to the Director of E&CD and the Office of Housing Director that the Off-Site location is and will remain committed to the timely development of the Inclusionary Units as provided in the Inclusionary Housing Plan. This commitment may be demonstrated through ownership of the Off-site location, or through adequate control of the use of the Off-site location through joint ownership, joint venture or other contractual means. If necessary to ensure that Inclusionary Housing Units are developed contemporaneously with the Market Rate Units, the Director of E&CD may require the offer of dedication or evidence of Off-Site control as early as the first Legislative Entitlement. With respect to an Off-site location, the Director of E&CD may also condition development or occupancy of the Residential Project on development or occupancy of the Off-Site Inclusionary Units, and the Inclusionary Housing Agreement must apply to and be recorded against both the Residential Project and the Off-Site land. With respect to dedicated land, Fulton County, upon acceptance of the offer of dedication, shall publish a request for proposal for development of the site(s), which will result in the production of the number of Inclusionary Units credited to the site(s). 
B.  In-Lieu Housing Fees. For Residential Developments of 20 or more units, including Inclusionary Units, the requirements of this Section may be satisfied by paying an in-lieu fee to the Affordable Housing Trust Fund. 
(1)  Under this option, the developer may pay an amount equivalent to the cost of constructing the mandated units at the required affordability levels. Fees shall be calculated for the construction of affordable housing units for moderate and low and very low income households and shall be adjusted annually based upon the estimated average construction cost per square foot of floor area for single-family (not including the value of the improved lot) as estimated for the region (south) by the National Association of Home Builders or the American Apartment Association for multi-family development. 
(2)  The County Manager shall establish an affordable Housing Trust Fund for the receipt and management of in-lieu housing fees. Monies received into the fund shall be utilized solely for the construction or purchase and maintenance of affordable housing and for the costs of administering programs consistent with the purposes of the section. In all cases, the required number of housing units at the required levels of affordability shall be provided for by this fund. 
(3)  Fees must be paid within ten calendar days of issuance of a building permit for the Development or the permit will be null and void. For phased Developments, payments may be made for each portion of the Development within ten calendar days of the issuance of a Building Permit for that phase. When payment is delayed, in the event of default, or for any other reason, the amount of the in-lieu fee payable under this Section will be based upon the fee schedule in effect at the time the fee is paid. 
(4)  No final inspection for occupancy will be completed for any corresponding Market-rate Unit in a Residential Development unless fees required under this Section have been paid in full to the Department of E&CD. 
C.  Combined Dedication of Land and In-Lieu Housing Fees. Under this option, the developer may dedicate land and pay in-lieu housing fees equivalent to the cost of producing the mandated units at the required affordability levels. The developer shall provide an appraisal of the land and its appraised value shall be confirmed by the County's Land Division of the General Services Department. 
4.26.7. Exclusions. The requirements of this Article do not apply to: 
(a)  Housing developments of fewer than 20 lots; 
(b)  Structures that have been destroyed by fire, flood, earthquake or other act of nature provided that the reconstructed site does not increase the number of residential units; 
(c)  Developments that already have more units that qualify as affordable to moderate, low and very low income households than this Article requires; 
(d)  Housing constructed by other government agencies. 
4.26.8. Duration of Affordability. 
A.  Rental Inclusionary Units. Units shall remain Affordable for a period of no less than thirty (30) years from the recordation of the Affordable Rental Agreement. 
B.  For Sale Single Family Unit. Units shall remain Affordable for a period of no less than fifteen (15) years from the recordation of the Affordable Housing Agreement; 
4.26.9. Affordability and Resale of For-Sale Units (Sustainability Policy). Each affordable unit created in accordance with this Section shall have limitations governing its resale. The purpose of these limitations is to preserve the long-term affordability of the unit and to ensure its continued availability for affordable income households. The resale controls shall be established through a restriction on the property and shall be in force for a period of fifteen (15) years concurrent with an equity-sharing program between the County and the homeowner. 
A.  Initial Sale. To ensure that only eligible households purchase affordable housing units, the purchaser of an affordable unit shall be required to submit copies of the last three years' federal and state income tax returns and certify, in writing and prior to the transfer of title, to the developer of the housing units or his/her agent, and within thirty (30) days following transfer of title, to the local housing trust, community development corporation, housing authority or other agency as established by the County, that household's annual income level does not exceed the maximum level as established by the Office of Housing, and as may be revised from time to time. 
B.  Maximum Cost. The maximum housing cost for affordable units created under this bylaw is as established by the Office of Housing and the Local Initiative Program or as revised by the County. 
C.  Resale to an Income Eligible Person Exception. The Owner of a Residential project shall sell Inclusionary Housing Units to an income-eligible Initial Owner at an Affordable Price. Thereafter for a period of fifteen (15) years from the recordation of the note or other document as provided below, the Initial Owner and any subsequent owner shall notify the Office of Housing in writing of their intent to sell the Inclusionary Unit. The Homeowner or its assignee shall have ninety (90) days from receipt of the notification to (1) identify, qualify, and refer to the seller an income-eligible purchaser or request an extension. The Initial Owner and any subsequent owner shall sell the unit to the referred purchaser at the resale price established by the Office of Housing as provided in this section. In the event that the Homeowner or its assignee does not complete the purchase of the unit within the time frames specified above, an extension for the sale of the Inclusionary Unit must be obtained from the Office of Housing. 
D.  Recordation of Note—Agreement or Covenant and Recapture Upon Sale. At the time of the initial sale and any subsequent sale to an income-eligible purchaser, the Office of Housing shall record an interest-bearing note, secured by a deed of trust, and/or regulatory agreement or covenant to recapture the difference between the Inclusionary Unit's market value, as determined by an appraiser approved by Office of Housing, and its Affordable Housing Price at the time of sale or resale. The Office of Housing shall also record a deed of trust encumbering any other monetary Inclusionary Incentives. The deed of trust, regulatory agreement, or covenant shall require that for a period of no less than 15 years, the unit may be resold to an income eligible purchaser. The full principal amount and interest will be due on sale to any non income eligible purchaser; due on change of use from an owner-occupied residential unit to any other use or if the Inclusionary Unit is rented; and due on any refinance of the Inclusionary Unit without the Office of Housing approval. The Office of Housing shall apply all recaptured funds to subsidize other for sale Inclusionary Housing Units. 
E.  Resale Price. Sales beyond the initial sale to a qualified affordable income purchaser shall include the initial discount rate between the sale price and the unit's appraised value at the time of resale. This percentage shall be recorded as part of the restriction on the property noted in this Section. For example, if a unit appraised for $100,000 is sold for $75,000 as a result of this bylaw, it has sold for 75 percent of its appraised value. If, several years later, the appraised value of the unit at the time of proposed resale is $150,000, the unit may be sold for no more than $112,500—75 percent of the appraised value of $150,000. 
Right of first refusal to purchase: The purchaser of an affordable housing unit developed as a result of this Resolution shall agree to execute a deed rider prepared by their attorney, consistent with model riders prepared by the Office of Housing, granting, among other things, the County's right of first refusal to purchase the property in the event that a subsequent qualified purchaser cannot be located. 
The Office of Housing shall require, as a condition for permitting under this Section, that the applicant comply with the mandatory set-asides and accompanying restrictions on affordability, including the execution of the deed rider noted in this Section. E&CD shall not issue an occupancy permit for any affordable unit until the deed restriction is recorded. 
F.  Equity Sharing Program. A homeowner is entitled to a share of the equity for each year of ownership pursuant to policies established by the Office of Housing. After the expiration of the 15 year affordability period, the homeowner must pay one half of the excess of the total resale price over the sum of: prior maximum sales price; a percentage of the affordable unit's prior purchase price with the cost of living increase since last sold; the fair market value documented capital improvements; and a reasonable sales and commission. If the amount remaining is less than $20,000, the amount due to the special revenue fund will be adjusted so the seller receives $10,000. If the amount is less than $10,000, the seller will receive the entire amount. 
G.  The Office of Housing Guidelines. The County Manager's Office of Housing shall adopt guidelines for the administration of this program. The guidelines may provide for a graduated increase in the rate of increase of market value over the time of ownership of a for-sale Inclusionary Unit by one Owner or for forgiveness of all or a portion of the note(s) when (1) the resale value of the Inclusionary Unit falls below the market value of the unit at its last sale; or (2) the income-eligible owner occupies the unit for a substantial period of time. 
4.26.10. Occupancy Requirement. 
A.  Rental Units. Any person who occupies a rental Inclusionary Unit shall occupy that Unit as his or her principal residence. 
B.  For-Sale Units. An Individual who purchases a for-sale Inclusionary Unit shall occupy that unit as his or her principal residence, and shall certify to the Developer of the Unit or the Office of Housing that he or she is income eligible. 
4.26.11. Administration of the Inclusionary Housing Component. The Inclusionary Housing Program shall be administered by two County agencies: E&CD and the County Manager's Office of Housing. Environment and Community Development shall oversee the zoning and permitting process. The Director of the Office of Housing shall be responsible for determining targeted rental and ownership affordability, resident qualifications, and monitoring the program. The Office of Housing shall conduct a study within eighteen (18) months of the 24-month voluntary period, to determine the success of the Resolution to determine whether the Program should remain voluntary or mandatory. 
A.  Proposed Inclusionary Housing Plan. At the time of and as part of the application for the Inclusionary Zoning, the Developer of a Development Project shall present to E&CD and the Office of Housing a draft Inclusionary Housing Plan, which shall contain, at a level of detail appropriate to the request, the number, unit mix, location, structure type, affordability, and phasing of Inclusionary Units. If land dedication or an Off-Site location is proposed, the draft Plan shall include information necessary to establish site location, suitability, development constraints, and the number of Inclusionary Units assigned. 
B.  Action on Inclusionary Housing Plan. E&CD and the Office of Housing shall review the proposed Inclusionary Housing. No Zoning designation shall be granted without an adequate Inclusionary Housing Plan. The elements of the Inclusionary Housing Plan shall be incorporated into the terms and conditions of the applicable Project-specific Approvals. 
C.  Inclusionary Housing Agreement. 
1.  Requirement. No Development Agreement or Project-specific Approval may be issued by Fulton County without an executed Inclusionary Housing Agreement executed by the Owner, the Developer (if not Owner), and the Director of the Office of Housing acting with the advice of the E&CD Director. Recordation of the Agreement shall be a condition of approval of any Development Agreement, Disposition and Development Agreement or Project-level Approval. 
2.  Timing. The Inclusionary Housing Agreement shall be negotiated concurrently with the processing of an application for the earlier of a Development Agreement or the first Project-specific Approval. At the request of the Developer, and if Developer makes the project development and financing details set forth below in subparagraphs 3 and 4 available, the Inclusionary Housing Agreement may be negotiated earlier in connection with the issuance of a Legislative Entitlement. 
3.  Contents. The Agreement shall be consistent with the Inclusionary Housing Plan, and shall indicate: ownership or rental project, the number and size of Moderate, Very Low and Low income Units, the developer of the Inclusionary Units, the phasing and construction scheduling of the Units, commitments for Inclusionary Incentives, including Office of Housing commitments for Local Public Subsidy, and any other information required by the Office of Housing relative to the Inclusionary Housing Component. In the case of land dedication or Off-Site Inclusionary Housing, the Agreement shall also contain the information required in this Section. 
4.  Information Required from Developer. The Developer of the Development Project shall present to E&CD and the Office of Housing: (1) plans, schematics, and details of phasing of the Residential Project as a whole including the Inclusionary Housing Component; (2) financial pro-forma for the Inclusionary Housing Component with sufficient economic information to allow for evaluation of feasibility, financing and equity sources and requirements, and rates of return; (3) the name and address of the entity which will develop the Inclusionary Housing Component if not Developer; (4) in the case of land dedication, an executed irrevocable offer of dedication at no cost; (5) in the case of Off-Site location, the evidence of site control required in this Section, and (6) any other information reasonably required by the Office of Housing in connection with the Agreement. 
5.  Local Public Subsidy. The Developer of the Development Project may apply to the Office of Housing for Local Public Subsidy. Such an application shall contain the planning and financial information necessary to evaluate the eligibility and suitability of the project for Local Public Funding and shall include timetables or copies of proposals for External Subsidy. The application will be considered pursuant to the Office of Housing Multi Family Lending Guidelines, Office of Housing Single Family Ownership Housing Financing Guidelines, and any Guidelines developed pursuant to this Section. The Office of Housing shall determine the Inclusionary Incentives it will make available in connection with the Residential Project as provided in this Section. The Inclusionary Housing Agreement shall specify the nature and amount of Local Public Funding. If Fulton County fails to make available the Inclusionary Incentives set forth in an executed and recorded Inclusionary Housing Agreement, the Residential Project shall be relieved of the portion of the Inclusionary Obligation that represents the percentage of local public funding committed in the Agreement but not provided. At Fulton County's option, the Agreement may provide that if the Local Public Funding component of the Inclusionary Incentives is delayed beyond the time provided for in the Agreement, the construction of Inclusionary Units may be deferred until funding availability, or that during the period of delay, the Owner may offer the Inclusionary Units as rental units at Market Rate until such time as the Local Public Funding indicated in the Agreement becomes available, at which time such rental units, upon being voluntarily vacated by existing market rate tenants, would be offered as Inclusionary Units. 
6.  Incorporation into Project-level Approvals and Recordation. The Developer's obligations and the Inclusionary Incentives in the Agreement shall be incorporated into the Project-specific Approvals. The executed Agreement shall be recorded as a covenant running with the land against the real property of the Residential Project and, in the case of Off-Site Inclusionary Units, against the real property on which such Units are to be located. 
D.  Administration of Affordability for Rental Inclusionary Housing. The Owner of rental Inclusionary Units shall be responsible for certifying the income of tenant to the Office of Housing at the time of initial rental and annually thereafter. The Owner of rental Inclusionary Units shall apply the same rental terms and conditions (except rent levels, deposits and income requirements) to tenants of Inclusionary Units as are applied to all other tenants, except as otherwise required to comply with government subsidy programs. Discrimination based on subsidies received by the prospective tenant is prohibited. The Fulton County Office of Housing shall keep confidential the personal identifying information of the household members occupying an Inclusionary Unit. 
E.  Guidelines. The Office of Housing Multi-family Development Financing Guidelines and the Office of Housing Single Family Ownership Housing Financing Guidelines shall apply to Inclusionary Housing developed under this Section. The Director of E&CD and Office of Housing Director may jointly develop, and either of them may adopt, additional guidelines as necessary for the implementation of this Section consistent with the terms contained herein. 
4.26.12. Administrative Fees. The Fulton County Board of Commissioners may by resolution establish reasonable fees and deposits for the administration of this Section. 
4.26.13. Participation. Participation in the Inclusionary Housing Zoning Program shall be voluntary for a twenty-four month period after which it will sunset until the Board of Commissioners determines the effectiveness of the program and the conditions for its future implementation. 
4.26.14. Enforcement and Penalties. 
A.  No Inclusionary Incentives shall be issued or valid without an Inclusionary Housing Plan as required by this Section. 
B.  No Project-specific Approval nor Development Agreement shall be issued for any Development Project unless an Inclusionary Housing Agreement has been approved and executed, and no building permit or certificate of occupancy shall issue until the Inclusionary Housing Agreement has been recorded as required by this Section. 
C.  If the developer violates this ordinance in any way, including not constructing the required affordable units, the County may deny, suspend, or revoke any and all building or occupancy permits. The County can also withhold any additional building permits until the affordable units are built. 
D.  If the ordinance is violated by the sale of an affordable unit, the County can enjoin or void any transfer of the affordable unit and require the owner to sell the unit to an eligible income individual. 
E.  Fulton County may bring such civil and criminal enforcement actions as are provided for in the Fulton County Code. 
4.26.15. Severability. The Fulton County Board of Commissioners hereby declares that every section, paragraph, clause and phrase of this Ordinance is severable. If, for any reason, any provision of the ordinance is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions. 
4.26.16. Appeals. Any persons aggrieved by a final decision of the Department of Environment and Community Development relating to this article may appeal such final decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals by filing in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly why the final decision is contrary to law per the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision of the department is rendered. 
4.26.17. Effective Date. The effective date of this Zoning Amendment shall be January 1, 2007. 
4.27—4.29 - Open. 
4.30 - Zoning text, district classifications and boundaries. 
In order to regulate the location of structures, the height and bulk of structures, the use and intensity of use of lots and structures, and to regulate open spaces and aesthetics, unincorporated Fulton County is divided into zoning districts which are individually described in this resolution. Those districts are set forth below from lowest to highest intensity. Within the listing are individual zoning districts which are no longer active but which continue to apply to properties zoned in those classifications. Those inactive zoning districts are contained in Appendix A, Inactive Zoning Districts, at the end of this resolution. Appendix A includes the inactive A-1, A-O, old TR and Suburban A, B and C Districts. Zoning districts as of the date of adoption of this resolution of amendment are: (Amended 3/6/91, 11/1/95) 

 
4.30.1 Boundaries. The boundaries of the several zoning districts are shown on the Fulton County zoning maps. Street rights-of-way shall serve as district boundaries adjoining property lines, and all such rights-of-way shall not be zoned. Inconsistencies between legal boundary descriptions submitted at the time of rezoning and lot lines identified from more recent surveys shall be interpreted to attach the zoning to the legal lot. 
4.30.2 Zoning text. The official text of the Fulton County Zoning Resolution shall be kept on file by the clerk to the Board of Commissioners. The Department of Environment and Community Development shall provide all county departments with copies of amendments within 15 days of approval by the Board of Commissioners, and shall provide a subscription and update service for the public. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
4.30.3 Zoning maps. The Fulton County zoning maps and all information contained thereon are part of this resolution and have the same force and effect as if fully set forth and/or described herein. The zoning maps are on file with the Department of Environment and Community Development. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
4.30.4 Territory added. All unincorporated territory which may be annexed to Fulton County or which may be unincorporated from a municipality within the County shall be classified in the R-1, Single Family Dwelling District until, as applicable, the territory may be more appropriately zoned by the Board of Commissioners based upon a Staff recommendation with consideration given to the suggestion of the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map and/or zonings of adjacent properties in Fulton County. (Amended 03/03/04) 
4.30.5 Abandonment. Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is abandoned by Fulton County or by the State of Georgia, the zoning district adjoining such street, alley or public way shall be extended to the center of such public way. 
ARTICLE V. - AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Adopted by the board of commissioners, March 7, 1990. 

5.1 - AG-1 Agricultural District. 
5.1.1 AG-1 District intent and scope. Regulations set forth in this article are the AG-1 District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative or use permit. The AG-1 District is intended to encompass lands devoted to a wide range of uses including individual parcels devoted to residential use, single family subdivisions, agricultural and closely related uses. 
5.1.2 Use regulations. 
A.  Permitted uses. A building or property may be used for only the following purposes: 
1.  Single family dwelling. 
2.  Agriculture, general and specialized farming, including: horticulture, plant nursery, greenhouse, dairy farming, livestock raising and poultry raising provided, however, that buildings used for housing animals must be at least 100 feet from all property lines. 
3.  Roadside stand for the sale of agricultural products produced on the property. 
4.  Riding stable other than accessory, provided buildings housing animals are at least 100 feet from all property lines and the lot is not less than ten acres. Standards for keeping horses other than for a nonaccessory public riding stable are the same as the standards contained in section 4.8.1 pertaining to the keeping of horses in a single family dwelling district. 
5.  Kennel, veterinary hospital or veterinary clinic, provided buildings housing animals are fully enclosed and at least 100 feet from all property lines; and pens, runs, etc. which are not located in a fully enclosed building are at least 200 feet from all property lines. 
B.  Accessory uses. A building or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
5.1.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. (Amended 2/7/96) 
B.  Minimum front yard: 60 feet. 
C.  Minimum side yard: 
— 25 feet adjacent to interior line. 
— 40 feet adjacent to street. 
D.  Minimum rear yard: 50 feet. 
E.  Minimum lot area: 
— one acre with frontage on paved road. 
— three acres with frontage on unpaved road. (Added 5/6/92) 
F.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
G.  Minimum lot frontage: 35 feet adjoining a street. (Amended 11/3/93) 
H.  Minimum heated floor area: There is no minimum heated floor area in this district. 
I.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Accessory structures may be located in rear or side yards, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
J.  Conservation subdivision. The development standards of a conservation subdivision shall be in accordance with Section VI of the Fulton County Subdivision Regulations. (Added 05/05/04) 
5.1.4 Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the AG-1 District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
ARTICLE VI. - SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

6.1 - R-1 Single Family Dwelling District. 
6.1.1 R-1 District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the R-1 District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative or use permit. The R-1 District encompasses lands devoted to residential areas and closely related uses. (Amended 4/7/93) 
6.1.2 Use regulations. Within the R-1 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as permitted shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
1.  Single family dwelling. 
2.  Agriculture, general and specialized farming, initiated prior to March 7, 1990, including: horticulture, plant nursery, dairy farming, truck gardening and poultry raising provided, however, that agricultural buildings must be at least 200 feet from all side and rear property lines, and that no products shall be offered for sale on land so utilized. 
B.  Accessory uses. A building or lot may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
6.1.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. (Amended 2/7/96) 
B.  Minimum front yard: 60 feet. 
C.  Minimum side yard: 
— 25 feet adjacent to interior line. 
— 40 feet adjacent to street. 
D.  Minimum rear yard: 50 feet. 
E.  Minimum lot area: two acres. 
F.  Minimum lot width: 200 feet. 
G.  Minimum lot frontage: 35 feet adjoining a street. (Amended 11/3/93) 
H.  Minimum heated floor area: 
1,800 s.f. on ground level for less than two story. 
2,000 s.f. for two story or more than two story with 1,200 s.f. on ground floor. 
I.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
J.  Conservation subdivision. The development standards of a conservation subdivision shall be in accordance with Section VI of the Fulton County Subdivision Regulations. (Added 05/05/04) 
6.1.4 Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to uses allowed in the R-1 District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
6.2 - R-2 Single Family Dwelling District. 
6.2.1 R-2 District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the R-2 District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative or use permits. The R-2 District is intended to provide land areas devoted to very low density residential uses. The district also provides for closely related uses. (Amended 4/7/93) 
6.2.2 Use regulations. Within the R-2 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as permitted shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
1.  Single family dwelling. 
2.  Agriculture, general and specialized farming, initiated prior to March 7, 1990, including: horticulture, plant nursery, dairy farming, truck gardening and poultry raising provided, however, that agricultural buildings must be at least 200 feet from all side and rear property lines, and that no products shall be offered for sale on land so utilized. 
B.  Accessory uses. A structure or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
6.2.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. (Amended 2/7/96) 
B.  Minimum front yard: 60 feet. 
C.  Minimum side yard: 
— 15 feet adjacent to interior line. 
— 30 feet adjacent to street. 
D.  Minimum rear yard: 40 feet. 
E.  Minimum lot area: one acre. 
F.  Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
G.  Minimum lot frontage: 35 feet adjoining a street. (Amended 11/3/93) 
H.  Minimum heated floor area: 
1,600 s.f. on ground level for less than two story. 
1,800 s.f. for two story or more than two story with 1,050 s.f. on ground floor. 
I.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
J.  Conservation subdivision. The development standards of a conservation subdivision shall be in accordance with Section VI of the Fulton County Subdivision Regulations. (Added 05/05/04) 
6.2.4 Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the R-2 District. 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
6.3 - R-2A Single Family Dwelling District. 
6.3.1 R-2A District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the R-2A District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permit or use permit. The R-2A District is intended to provide land areas devoted to low density residential uses. The district also provides for closely related uses. (Amended 4/7/93) 
6.3.2 Use regulations. Within the R-2A District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by administrative permit or use permit shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
1.  Single family dwelling. 
2.  Agriculture, general and specialized farming, initiated prior to March 7, 1990, including: horticulture, plant nursery, dairy farming, truck gardening and poultry raising provided, however, that agricultural buildings must be at least 200 feet from all side and rear property lines, and that no products shall be offered for sale on land so utilized. 
B.  Accessory uses. A structure or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
6.3.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. (Amended 2/7/96) 
B.  Minimum front yard: 60 feet. 
C.  Minimum side yard: 
— 15 feet adjacent to interior line. 
— 30 feet adjacent to street. 
D.  Minimum rear yard: 40 feet. 
E.  Minimum lot area: 27,000 square feet. 
F.  Minimum lot width: 120 feet. 
G.  Minimum lot frontage: 35 feet adjoining a street. (Amended 11/3/93) 
H.  Minimum heated floor area: 
1,700 s.f. on ground level for less than two story. 
1,800 s.f. for two story or more than two story with 1,050 s.f. on ground floor. 
I.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
J.  Conservation subdivision. The development standards of a conservation subdivision shall be in accordance with Section VI of the Fulton County Subdivision Regulations. (Added 05/05/04) 
6.3.4 Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the R-2A District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
6.4 - R-3 Single Family Dwelling District. 
6.4.1 R-3 District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the R-3 District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permit or use permit. The R-3 District is intended to provide land areas devoted to low density residential uses. The district also provides for closely related uses. (Amended 4/7/93) 
6.4.2 Use regulations. Within the R-3 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by administrative permit or use permit shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
1.  Single family dwelling. 
2.  Agriculture, general and specialized farming, initiated prior to March 7, 1990, including: horticulture, plant nursery, dairy farming, truck gardening and poultry raising provided, however, that agricultural buildings must be at least 200 feet from all side and rear property lines, and that no products shall be offered for sale on land so utilized. 
B.  Accessory uses. A structure or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
6.4.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. (Amended 2/7/96) 
B.  Minimum front yard: 50 feet. 
C.  Minimum side yard: 
— ten feet adjacent to interior line. 
— 20 feet adjacent to street. 
D.  Minimum rear yard: 35 feet. 
E.  Minimum lot area: 18,000 square feet. 
F.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
G.  Minimum lot frontage: 35 feet adjoining a street. (Amended 11/3/93) 
H.  Minimum heated floor area: 
1,200 s.f. on ground level for less than two story. 
1,320 s.f. for two story or more than two story with 900 s.f. on ground floor. 
I.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
J.  Conservation subdivision. The development standards of a conservation subdivision shall be in accordance with Section VI of the Fulton County Subdivision Regulations. (Added 05/05/04) 
6.4.4 Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the R-3 District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
6.5 - R-3A Single Family Dwelling District. 
6.5.1 R-3A District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the R-3A District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permit or use permit. The R-3A District is intended to provide land areas devoted to low density residential uses. The district also provides for closely related uses. (Amended 4/7/93) 
6.5.2 Use regulations. Within the R-3A District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by administrative permit or use permit shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
1.  Single family dwelling. 
2.  Agriculture, general and specialized farming, initiated prior to March 7, 1990, including: horticulture, plant nursery, dairy farming, truck gardening and poultry raising provided, however, that agricultural buildings must be at least 200 feet from all side and rear property lines, and that no products shall be offered for sale on land so utilized. 
B.  Accessory uses. A structure or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
6.5.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. (Amended 2/7/96) 
B.  Minimum front yard: 50 feet. 
C.  Minimum side yard: 
— ten feet adjacent to interior line. 
— 20 feet adjacent to street. 
D.  Minimum rear yard: 35 feet. 
E.  Minimum lot area: 18,000 square feet. 
F.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
G.  Minimum lot frontage: 35 feet adjoining a street. (Amended 11/3/93) 
H.  Minimum heated floor area: 
1,600 s.f. on ground level for less than two story. 
1,800 s.f. for two story or more than two story with 1,050 s.f. on ground floor. 
I.  Minimum accessory structure requirements. Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
J.  Conservation subdivision. The development standards of a conservation subdivision shall be in accordance with Section VI of the Fulton County Subdivision Regulations. (Added 05/05/04) 
6.5.4 Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the R-3A District. 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
6.6 - R-4 Single Family Dwelling District. 
6.6.1 R-4 District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the R-4 District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permit or use permit. The R-4 District is intended to provide land areas devoted to low density residential uses. The district also provides for closely related uses. (Amended 4/7/93) 
6.6.2 Use regulations. Within the R-4 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by administrative permit or use permit shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
1.  Single family dwelling. 
2.  Agriculture, general and specialized farming, initiated prior to March 7, 1990, including: horticulture, plant nursery, dairy farming, truck gardening and poultry raising provided, however, that agricultural buildings must be at least 200 feet from all side and rear property lines, and that no products shall be offered for sale on land so utilized. 
3.  Two family dwelling which complies with minimum lot area, yard and floor area requirements of the R-6, Two Family Dwelling District, and where 40 percent or more of the dwellings fronting on the same side of a street between two intersecting streets is occupied by either two family or multifamily dwellings initiated prior to March 7, 1990, 
B.  Accessory uses. A structure or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
6.6.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. (Amended 2/7/96) 
B.  Minimum front yard: 35 feet. 
C.  Minimum side yard: 
— seven feet adjacent to interior line. 
— 20 feet adjacent to street. 
D.  Minimum rear yard: 25 feet. 
E.  Minimum lot area: 9,000 square feet. 
F.  Minimum lot width: 70 feet. 
G.  Minimum lot frontage: 35 feet adjoining a street. (Amended 11/3/93) 
H.  Minimum heated floor area: 
1,000 s.f. on ground level for less than two story. 
1,100 s.f. for two story or more than two story with 800 s.f. on ground floor. 
I.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
J.  Conservation subdivision. The development standards of a conservation subdivision shall be in accordance with Section VI of the Fulton County Subdivision Regulations. (Added 05/05/04) 
6.6.4 Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the R-4 District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
6.7 - R-4A Single Family Dwelling District. 
6.7.1 R-4A District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the R-4A District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permit or use permit. The R-4A District is intended to provide land areas devoted to low density residential uses. The district also provides for closely related uses. (Amended 4/7/93) 
6.7.2 Use regulations. Within the R-4A District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by administrative permit or use permit shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
1.  Single family dwelling. 
2.  Agriculture, general and specialized farming, initiated prior to March 7, 1990, including: horticulture, plant nursery, dairy farming, truck gardening and poultry raising provided, however, that agricultural buildings must be at least 200 feet from all side and rear property lines, and that no products shall be offered for sale on land so utilized. 
B.  Accessory uses. A structure or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and the principal dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
6.7.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. (Amended 2/7/96) 
B.  Minimum front yard: 35 feet. 
C.  Minimum side yard: 
— seven feet adjacent to interior line. 
— 20 feet adjacent to street. 
D.  Minimum rear yard: 25 feet. 
E.  Minimum lot area: 12,000 square feet. 
F.  Minimum lot width: 85 feet. 
G.  Minimum lot frontage: 35 feet adjoining a street. (Amended 11/3/93) 
H.  Minimum heated floor area: 
1,200 s.f. on ground level for less than two story. 
1,320 s.f. for two story or more than two story with 900 s.f. on ground floor. 
I.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
J.  Conservation subdivision. The development standards of a conservation subdivision shall be in accordance with Section VI of the Fulton County Subdivision Regulations. (Added 05/05/04) 
6.7.4 Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the R-4A District. 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
6.8 - R-5 Single Family Dwelling District. 
6.8.1 R-5 District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the R-5 District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permit or use permit. The R-5 District is intended to provide land areas devoted to low density dwelling uses. Land areas zoned R-5 are further intended to provide a transition between medium and moderate density dwelling areas and higher density residential areas or nonresidential areas. (Amended 4/7/93) 
6.8.2 Use regulations. Within the R-5 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by administrative permit or use permit shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
1.  Single family dwelling. 
2.  Agriculture, general and specialized farming, initiated prior to March 7, 1990, including: horticulture, plant nursery, dairy farming, truck gardening and poultry raising provided, however, that agricultural buildings must be at least 200 feet from all side and rear property lines, and that no products shall be offered for sale on land so utilized. 
3.  Two family dwelling which complies with minimum lot area, yard and floor area requirements of the R-6 District, and where 40 percent or more of the dwellings fronting on the same side of a street between two intersecting streets is occupied by either two family or multifamily dwellings initiated prior to March 7, 1990. 
B.  Accessory uses. A structure or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
6.8.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. (Amended 2/7/96) 
B.  Minimum front yard: 20 feet. 
C.  Minimum side yard: 
— five feet adjacent to interior lot lines. 
— 15 feet adjacent to street. 
D.  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet. 
E.  Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet. 
F.  Minimum lot width: 60 feet. 
G.  Minimum lot frontage: 35 feet adjoining a street. (Amended 11/3/93) 
H.  Minimum heated floor area per unit: 650 s.f. 
I.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
J.  Conservation subdivision. The development standards of a conservation subdivision shall be in accordance with Section VI of the Fulton County Subdivision Regulations. (Added 05/05/04) 
6.8.4 Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the R-5 District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
6.9 - R-5A Single Family Dwelling District. 
6.9.1 R-5A District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the R-5A District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permit or use permit. The R-5A District is intended to provide land areas devoted to medium density, single family dwellings. Land areas zoned R-5A are further intended to provide a transition between low and high density dwelling areas or between low density dwelling areas and nonresidential areas. (Amended 4/7/93) 
6.9.2 Use regulations. Within the R-5A District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by administrative permit or use permit shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purpose: 
1.  Single family dwelling. 
B.  Accessory uses. A structure or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
6.9.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. (Amended 2/7/96) 
B.  Minimum lot area: 4,000 square feet. 
C.  Minimum lot width: None unless specified in conditions. 
D.  Minimum lot frontage: 20 feet adjoining a street. (Amended 11/3/93) 
E.  Minimum heated floor area per unit: 
Single family, 850 s.f. 
F.  Minimum perimeter setback for the entire R-5A development: 40 feet. 
G.  Minimum interior setbacks: No orientation to buildings. 
1.  Minimum front yard: 20 feet. 
2.  Minimum side yard: To place a building along an interior side lot line at between zero and seven feet shall require an encroachment and maintenance easement allowing a minimum of seven feet of access to such buildings. A minimum building separation of 14 feet shall be maintained. 
— 20 feet adjoining local streets. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet. 
H.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Accessory structures may be located in rear or side yards, but shall not be located within a minimum rear yard except that detached garages may locate along a rear lot line at between zero and seven feet with an encroachment and maintenance easement allowing a minimum of seven feet of access to the garage. 
I.  Minimum interior building separations: All building separations shall be as specified by the Standard Building Code. (Amended 03/03/04) 
J.  Conservation subdivision. The development standards of a conservation subdivision shall be in accordance with Section VI of the Fulton County Subdivision Regulations. (Added 05/05/04) 
6.9.4 Other regulations. The headings below contain some additional, but not necessarily all, provisions applicable to the R-5A District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
ARTICLE VII. - TWO FAMILY AND MULTIFAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Adopted by the board of commissioners, March 7, 1990. 

7.1 - R-6 Two Family Dwelling District. 
7.1.1 R-6 District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the R-6 District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permit or use permit. The R-6 District is intended to provide land areas devoted to medium density, single family and two family dwellings. Land areas zoned R-6 are further intended to provide a transition between low and high density dwelling areas or between low density dwelling areas and nonresidential areas. (Amended 4/7/93) 
7.1.2 Use regulations. Within the R-6 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by administrative permit or use permit shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
1.  Single family dwelling. 
2.  Agriculture, general and specialized farming, initiated prior to March 7, 1990, including: horticulture, plant nursery, dairy farming, truck gardening and poultry raising provided, however, that agricultural buildings must be at least 200 feet from all side and rear property lines, and that no products shall be offered for sale on land so utilized. 
3.  Two family dwelling. 
B.  Accessory uses. A structure or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
7.1.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. (Amended 2/7/96) 
B.  Minimum front yard: 25 feet. 
C.  Minimum side yard: 
— seven feet adjacent to interior lot line. 
— 20 feet adjacent to street. 
D.  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet. 
E.  Minimum lot area: 9,000 square feet. 
F.  Minimum lot width: 70 feet. 
G.  Minimum lot frontage: 35 feet adjoining a street. (Amended 11/3/93) 
H.  Minimum heated floor area per unit: 
Single family, 1,000 s.f. on ground level for less than two story. 
1,100 s.f. for two-story or more than two-story dwelling with 800 s.f. on ground floor. 
I.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Accessory structures may be located in rear or side yards, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
7.1.4 Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the R-6 District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
7.2 - TR Townhouse Residential District[6] 
7.2.1 TR District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the TR District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permit or use permit. The TR District is intended to provide land areas devoted to medium density uses consisting of single family and multifamily dwellings. Land areas zoned TR are further intended to provide a transition between low density and higher density residential areas or between low density residential and nonresidential areas. The TR District is intended to: (Amended 4/7/93) 
A.  Encourage the provision of usable open space and recreation areas as part of a living environment. 
B.  Be located primarily in areas near or adjacent to single family areas. 
C.  Be located so as to provide a transition between single family areas and nonresidential areas. 
D.  Be located near retail shopping and major thoroughfares. 
E.  Encourage home ownership. 
7.2.2 Use regulations. Within the TR District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by administrative permit or use permit shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
1.  Single family dwelling. 
2.  Two family dwelling. 
3.  Townhouse. 
4.  Triplex (Added 04/05/06) 
5.  Quadruplex (Added 04/05/06) 
B.  Accessory uses. A structure or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
7.2.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. (Amended 2/7/96) 
B.  Minimum lot area or land area per unit: 2,000 s.f. 
C.  Maximum density: Nine units per gross acre 
D.  Minimum lot width: 20 feet. 
E.  Minimum TR development frontage: 35 feet. 
F.  Minimum lot frontage: 
— 20 feet adjoining a street except up to 35 feet may be required whenever the director of public works requires the extra width to protect catch basins. (Amended 11/3/93) 
G.  Minimum heated floor area per unit: 1,100 s.f. 
H.  Minimum perimeter setbacks for the entire TR development. 
1.  Minimum front yard: 40 feet. 
2.  Minimum side yard: 
— 30 feet adjacent to interior line. 
— 40 feet adjacent to street. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: 35 feet. 
I.  Minimum interior setbacks when one building per lot: 
1.  Minimum front yard: 20 feet from right-of-way. 
2.  Minimum side yard: 
— 7 feet adjacent to interior lot line, except that up to a 7-foot encroachment and maintenance easement may be provided on adjacent parcels, in combination with or in lieu of a side yard, such that a minimum building separation of 14 feet is maintained. 
- zero if units are attached, for example, townhouses on separate lots of record 
- 15 feet adjacent to street. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: 25 feet. 
J.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Single family and two family uses, accessory structures may be located in the rear and side yards only, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. Townhouse accessory structures may be located within the side or rear yards only, but not within minimum perimeter setbacks or minimum yards. 
K.  Maximum lot coverage: The area of the footprint of all buildings and parking shall not exceed 50 percent of the total land area. 
L.  Minimum building separation when more than one building per lot. All building separations shall be as specified by the Standard Building Code. (Amended 03/03/04) 
M.  Other minimum standards: 
1.  No more than 20 dwelling units shall form a single building. 
2.  Setbacks and roof lines shall be varied by at least two feet so that no more than three adjoining dwellings within a single building shall have the same front setback or roof line. 
7.2.4 TR District subdivision. In the TR Zoning District, dwellings proposed to be sold with the lot upon which the dwelling is located shall comply with comply with the Subdivision Regulations of Fulton County. 
7.2.5 Other regulations: The headings below contain provisions applicable to the TR District. 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Applies to land zoned TR Townhouse Residential after April 6, 1983. See Appendix A for TR regulations prior to April 1983. 

7.3 - A Medium Density Apartment District. 
7.3.1 A District scope and intent. Regulations in this section are the O-I District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permit or use permit. The A District is intended to provide land areas for medium density apartment dwellings which will: (Amended 7/7/99) 
A.  Encourage attractive apartment developments. 
B.  Encourage the provision of recreation areas and facilities, and 
C.  Be located in areas of moderate to intense development near retail shopping, schools and major thoroughfares. 
D.  Be located so as to provide a transition between moderate density residential areas and high density residential areas or between moderate density residential areas and nonresidential areas. 
7.3.2 Use regulations. Within the A District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by administrative permit or use permit shall be prohibited. (Amended 7/7/99) 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for the following purposes: 
1.  Single family dwelling 
2.  Two family dwelling 
3.  Triplex (Added 04/05/06) 
4.  Quadruplex (Added 04/05/06) 
5.  Townhouse (Added 04/05/06) 
6.  Multi-family dwelling 
7.  Rooming House and Boarding House 
8.  Convalescent Home/Nursing Home/Hospice (Added 07/07/99) 
9.  Personal Care Home (Added 07/07/99) 
10.  Medical Related Lodging (Added 07/07/99) 
11.  Group Residence (Added 07/07/99) 
B.  Accessory uses. A structure or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
7.3.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: Buildings shall be no higher than 45 feet or three stories, whichever is higher, except when a use permit to exceed the maximum height is approved. 
B.  Minimum front yard: 40 feet from right-of-way. 
C.  Minimum side yard: 
— 25 feet adjacent to interior lot line. 
— 40 feet adjacent to street. 
D.  Minimum rear yard: 25 feet. 
E.  Minimum land area or lot size per unit: 2,000 s.f. 
F.  Minimum width: 200 feet throughout depth from front to rear lot line. 
G.  Minimum lot frontage: 35 feet adjoining a street. (Amended 11/3/93) 
H.  Maximum density: 14 units per gross acre. 
I.  Minimum heated floor area per unit: 
Single family—1,100 s.f. 
Two family—800 s.f. 
Efficiency or studio—450 s.f. 
All other multifamily—700 s.f. 
J.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Single family and two family uses, accessory structures may be located in the rear and side yards only, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
Multifamily uses, accessory structures may be located in the rear yard only, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
K.  Maximum lot coverage. The area of the footprint of all buildings and parking shall not exceed 40 percent of the total land area. 
L.  Minimum building separation. All building separations shall be as specified by the Standard Building Code. (Amended 03/03/04) 
7.3.4 A District subdivision. In the A Zoning District, dwellings proposed to be sold with the lot upon which the dwelling is located shall comply with the Subdivision Regulations of Fulton County. 
7.3.5 Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the A District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
Noise study report. Article 28.4.7 (Added 4/3/02) 
7.4 - A-L Apartment Limited Dwelling District. 
7.4.1 A-L District scope and intent. Regulations in this section are the O-I District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permit or use permit. The A-L District is intended to provide land areas for high to very high density apartment dwellings which will: (Amended 7/7/99) 
A.  Encourage attractive apartment living opportunities; 
B.  Encourage the provision of recreation areas and facilities; 
C.  Be located in areas of intense development near retail shopping, schools and major thoroughfares; and 
D.  Be located so as to provide a transition between medium density residential areas and nonresidential areas. 
7.4.2 Use regulations. Within the A-L District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by administrative permit or use permit shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for the following purposes: 
1.  Multi-family dwelling. 
2.  Any use permitted in the A District. (Added 7/7/99) 
3.  Triplex. (Added 4/5/06) 
4.  Quadruplex. (Added 4/5/06) 
5.  Townhouses. (Added 4/5/06) 
B.  Accessory uses. A structure or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. Accessory retail and service uses such as restaurants, gift shops, flower shops, snack bars, barber shops, and beauty shops shall be located wholly within principal buildings with no outdoor advertising. 
7.4.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: Buildings shall be no higher than 60 feet or four stories, whichever is higher except when a use permit to exceed the maximum height is approved. 
B.  Minimum front yard: 40 feet. 
C.  Minimum side yard: (Amended 3/4/92) 
Adjacent to interior side line: 20 feet. 
Adjacent to street side line: 40 feet. 
D.  Minimum rear yard : 20 feet. 
E.  Minimum width: None. 
F.  Minimum A-L lot frontage: 35 feet adjoining a street. (Amended 11/3/93) 
G.  Minimum heated floor area: 
Three bedroom apartments: 700 s.f. 
Two bedroom apartments: 600 s.f. 
One bedroom apartments: 500 s.f. 
Efficiency or studio apartments: 400 s.f. 
H.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Accessory structures shall not be located in the minimum front yard. 
I.  Maximum lot coverage. The area of the footprint of all buildings and parking shall not exceed 70 percent of the total land area. 
J.  Minimum building separation: All building separations shall be as specified by the Standard Building Code. (Amended 03/03/04) 
K.  Outdoor recreation: Outdoor area consisting of not less than ten percent of the gross land area shall be provided for recreation. 
7.4.4 Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the A-L District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape Area and Buffer Regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Noise study report, Article 28.4.7 (Added 4/3/02) 
ARTICLE VIII. - MULTIPLE USE DISTRICT REGULATIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Adopted by the board of commissioners, March 3, 1990. 

8.1 - O-I Office Institutional District. 
8.1.1 O-I District scope and intent. Regulations in this section are the O-I District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permit or use permit. The O-I District is intended to provide land areas for office and institutional uses where proximity to residential, public, commercial and other land uses, and existing and projected traffic patterns make it desirable to locate office and institutional uses. 
8.1.2 Use regulations. Within the O-I District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by administrative permit or use permit shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for the following purposes: (Amended 7/7/99, 2/7/01) 
1.  Single family dwellings. 
2.  Two family dwellings. 
3.  Rooming house and boardinghouse. 
4.  Art galleries. 
5.  Assembly halls. 
6.  Churches, temples or other places of worship. 
7.  Clinics. 
8.  Community center buildings. 
9.  Convalescent centers/nursing homes/hospices. 
10.  Dancing schools. 
11.  Day care facilities. 
12.  Financial establishments. 
13.  Funeral homes. 
14.  Group residences. 
15.  Gymnasiums. 
16.  Health clubs/spas. (Added 2/7/01) 
17.  Hospitals. 
18.  Hotels. 
19.  Institutions of higher learning, business colleges, music conservatories, and similar institutions. 
20.  Libraries. 
21.  Motels 
22.  Museums. 
23.  Offices. 
24.  Parking garages/decks. 
25.  Parking lots. 
26.  Personal care homes. 
27.  Recording studios. (Added 2/7/01) 
28.  Research laboratories. 
29.  Stadiums. 
30.  Thrift institutions. 
B.  Accessory uses. Structures and land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. No more than 25 percent of the total floor area of a building may be devoted to storage. 
1.  Accessory retail and service uses shall be located within a building with a majority of the floor area designed for office uses. Accessory uses shall be located wholly within the principal buildings with no outdoor advertising except that a car wash, detail shop or service station may be located inside a parking garage as long as such uses are not visible from the exterior of the parking garage. 
2.  Retail and service uses permitted shall be limited to employee convenience, business oriented retail, and service establishments such as computer hardware and software companies, commercial art, drafting, travel agencies, office equipment and supply stores, reproduction services, stenographic services, typing services, messenger services, delivery services, telecommunications sales and teleconferencing centers, personnel services and training centers, florists, gift shops, tailor shops, radio and television repair shops, shoe repair shops and barber or beauty shops. Restaurants are accessory whenever office and institutional floor area is at least 100,000 square feet. Fast food restaurants shall be limited to no more than ten percent of the total floor area devoted to retail and service business uses, and shall not occupy more than ten percent of any floor in a building. A drug store is accessory, provided only drugs, prescription medicines, medicinal supplies and pharmaceutical products shall be sold. 
8.1.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: Buildings shall be no higher than 60 feet or four stories, whichever is higher, except when a use permit to exceed the maximum height is approved. 
B.  Minimum front yard: 40 feet. 
C.  Minimum side yard: 
— 40 feet adjacent to street. 
— 20 feet interior. (Amended 5/6/92) 
D.  Minimum rear yard: 25 feet. 
E.  Minimum lot area per dwelling: 
Single family: 18,000 s.f. 
Two family: 18,000 s.f. 
F.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet for residential use only. 
G.  Minimum O-I lot frontage: 
— 100 feet adjoining a street. 
— 35 feet adjoining a street for residential uses. (Amended 11/3/93) 
H.  Minimum heated floor area: 
Single family: 1,100 s.f. 
Two family: 800 s.f. 
I.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Single family and two family uses, accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only, but shall not be located within a minimum yard: 
Multifamily use: Accessory structures shall not be located in the minimum front yard. 
J.  Maximum lot coverage: The area of the footprint of all buildings and parking shall not exceed 70 percent of the total land area. 
8.1.4 Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the O-I District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
Noise study report, article 28.4.7 (Added 4/3/02) 
8.2 - MIX Mixed Use District.[8] 
8.2.1 MIX district scope and intent. Regulations in this Section are the MIX District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The MIX District is intended to encourage flexible, innovative and creative concepts in site planning and efficient use of land and to provide a stable multiple use environment compatible with surrounding uses. The MIX District is particularly encouraged in areas designated by the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map as suitable for commercial (including retail, service commercial and office) uses and in Living-Working corridors. 
8.2.2 Use regulations. The MIX District mandates a residential component of single family dwellings, duplexes, triplexes, quadruplexes, townhouses, multifamily dwellings or any combination thereof along with at least two of the following: commercial, office or institutional uses. 
Within the MIX District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted Uses. (Amended 04/05/06) Structures and land may be used for the following purposes: 
1.  Single family dwellings 
2.  Duplexes 
3.  Triplexes 
4.  Quadruplexes 
5.  Townhouses 
6.  Multifamily dwellings 
7.  Rooming houses and Boarding houses 
8.  Art Galleries 
9.  Assembly Halls 
10.  Car Washes, detail shops and/or service stations located inside a parking garage as long as such uses are not visible from the exterior of the parking garage. 
11.  Convalescent Centers/Nursing Homes/Hospices 
12.  Churches, Temples or Other Places of Worship 
13.  Clinics 
14.  Community Center Buildings 
15.  Dancing Schools 
16.  Day Care Centers 
17.  Financial Establishments 
18.  Funeral Homes 
19.  Group Residence 
20.  Gymnasiums 
21.  Health Clubs/Spas 
22.  Hospitals 
23.  Hotels 
24.  Institutions of Higher Learning including Business Colleges, Music Conservatories, and Similar Institutions 
25.  Libraries 
26.  Museums 
27.  Offices 
28.  Parking Garages/Decks 
29.  Parking Lots 
30.  Personal Care Homes 
31.  Recording Studios 
32.  Research Laboratories 
33.  Retail and/or Service Establishments 
34.  Restaurants and/or Fast Food Restaurants 
35.  Stadiums 
36.  Theaters 
B.  Accessory Uses. Structures and land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. No more than 25 percent of the total floor area of a building may be devoted to storage. 
8.2.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height Regulations. Structures shall be no higher than 60 feet, except with a Use Permit to exceed the maximum height. 
B.  Minimum Development Front Yard - As specified in conditions 
C.  Minimum Development Side Yards - As specified in conditions 
D.  Minimum Development Rear Yard - As specified in conditions 
E.  Minimum Development Frontage - 35 feet 
F.  Minimum Internal Setbacks, Separations, Landscaping and Buffering Between Uses - As specified in conditions 
G.  Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit for Single Family or Duplex - As specified in conditions 
H.  Minimum Lot Frontage for Single Family or Duplex - 20 feet adjoining a street. 
I.  Minimum Lot Width for Single Family or Duplex - None, unless specified in conditions 
J.  Minimum Interior Setbacks for Single family or Duplex 
1.  Minimum Front Yard - As specified in conditions 
2.  Minimum Side Yard - As specified in conditions 
3.  Minimum Rear Yard - As specified in conditions 
K.  Minimum Building Separations - All building separations shall be as specified by the Standard Building Code. (Amended 03/03/04) 
L.  Minimum Heated Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit - As specified in conditions 
M.  Minimum Accessory Structure Requirements. Single family, duplex and townhouse accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. Multifamily accessory structures shall not be located in the minimum front yard. 
N.  Minimum Common Outdoor Area. Twenty percent (20%) of the total site area shall be common outdoor area and shall be maintained by the property owner(s). 
O.  Pedestrian Connectivity. All components are required to be interconnected with pedestrian paths constructed of either colored/textured materials or conventional sidewalk materials and clearly identified. 
P.  Parking. Subject to the approval of the Director of Environment and Community Development, off-street parking as required by Article 18 may be reduced and shared parking among uses may be permitted. 
8.2.4 Other regulations. The headings below contain some additional, but not necessarily all, provisions applicable to the MIX District. 
Development Regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain Management. Section 4.24 
Off Street Parking and Loading. Article XVIII 
Outside Storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape Area and Buffer Regulations Section 4.23 
River Protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
Noise Study Report, Article 28.4.7 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Adopted by the board of commissioners, August 1, 1990. Amended by the board of commissioners June 4, 2003. 

ARTICLE IX. - COMMERCIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Adopted by the board of commissioners, March 3, 1990. 

9.1 - C-1 Community Business District. 
9.1.1 C-1 District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the C-1 District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permits or use permits. The C-1 District is intended to provide locations in which neighborhood and community-oriented retail and service activities conclude a transition, or land areas which compliment a transition into a more intense activity area. Complimentary noncommercial uses are also permitted. 
9.1.2 Use regulations. Within the C-1 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as permitted shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: (Amended 11/1/95, 7/7/99) 
1.  Amusements, indoor. 
2.  Apartments, above or behind commercial and office uses in the same building. 
3.  Art galleries. 
4.  Assembly halls. 
5.  Automotive parking lots. 
6.  Automotive specialty shops. (Amended 4/7/93) 
7.  Catering, carry-out and delivery. 
8.  Church, temple or other place of worship. 
9.  Clinics. 
10.  Convalescent center/nursing/hospice. 
11.  Day care facilities. 
12.  Delicatessens. 
13.  Financial establishments. 
14.  Funeral homes. 
15.  Group residences. 
16.  Gymnasiums. 
17.  Hotels. 
18.  Health club/spa. (Added 2/7/01) 
19.  Laundromats. 
20.  Landscaping business, garden center. (Added 4/3/02) 
21.  Laundry and dry cleaning shops. 
22.  Lawn service businesses. 
23.  Libraries. 
24.  Communication services. 
25.  Millinery or similar trade whenever products are sold retail, exclusively on the site where produced. 
26.  Motels. 
27.  Museums. 
28.  Offices. 
29.  Parking garages/decks. 
30.  Parking lots. 
31.  Personal care homes. 
32.  Personal services including barber, beauty. 
33.  Pet grooming (no overnight stay). (Added 2/7/01) 
34.  Photography studios. 
35.  Plant nurseries. 
36.  Printing shops, convenience. 
37.  Repair shops not involving any manufacturing on the site. 
38.  Research laboratories. 
39.  Restaurants. 
40.  Retail stores or shops. 
41.  School of business, dance, music or similar schools. 
42.  Service stations except that repair and service offerings shall not include painting, body repair nor overhaul of major components, and no portion of the site shall be used for the display of cars for sale. 
43.  Stadiums. 
44.  Theaters. 
45.  Recycling centers, collecting. (Added 3/4/92) 
B.  Accessory uses. Structures and land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. Automobile and/or moving truck rental may be used in accessory to a permitted use. Not more than 45 percent of the floor area of a building or land may be devoted to storage incidental to primary uses. (Amended 2/7/01) 
(Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11) 
9.1.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: No structure shall exceed the higher of four stories or 60 feet in height except as approved pursuant to article XIX. 
B.  Minimum front yard: 40 feet. 
C.  Minimum side yard: 
— 25 feet for dwellings adjacent to interior lot lines. 
— None for all other buildings. See 4.23 for buffer and landscape requirements. 
— 40 feet for all buildings adjacent to streets. 
D.  Minimum rear yard: 
— 25 feet for dwellings adjacent to interior lot lines. 
— None for all other buildings. See section 4.23 for buffer and landscape requirements. 
E.  Minimum lot area: 
— Multifamily dwellings including a unit above or behind a commercial use: 2,500 s.f. 
— Single family: 18,000 s.f. 
— Two family: 18,000 s.f. 
— All other buildings: Zero s.f. 
F.  Minimum heated floor area per unit: 
Single family: 1,100 s.f. 
Two family: 800 s.f. 
Multifamily: 700 s.f. 
Efficiency: 450 s.f. 
G.  Minimum lot frontage: 35 feet adjoining a street. (Amended 11/3/93) 
H.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: 
Single family and two family uses: Accessory structures may be located in the rear yard only, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
Other use: Accessory structures shall not be located in the minimum front yard. 
9.1.4 Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the C-1 District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
Noise study report, Article 28.4.7 (Added 4/3/02) 
9.2 - C-2 Community Business District. 
9.2.1 C-2 District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the C-2 District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permits or use permits. The C-2 District is intended to provide locations in which community and regionally-oriented retail and service activities conclude a transition, or locations which compliment a transition into a more intense activity area. Complimentary noncommercial uses are also permitted. 
9.2.2 Use regulations. Within the C-2 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as permitted shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: (Amended 7/7/99) 
1.  Any use permitted in the C-1 District. 
2.  Automotive garage. (Amended 4/7/93) 
3.  Automobile and light truck sales/leasing. (Added 2/7/01) 
4.  Batting cage, outdoor. (Added 2/7/01) 
5.  Bowling alley. 
6.  Car wash. 
7.  Check cashing establishment. (Added 10/2/02) 
8.  Drive-in theater. 
9.  Garage, automotive repair. (Amended 4/7/93) 
10.  Landscaping business. 
11.  Lawn service business. 
12.  Laundry and/or dry cleaning plant distribution center. Not including processing, fabrication or manufacturing. 
13.  Pawn shop. (Added 10/2/02) 
14.  Plant nursery. 
15.  Plumbing shop associated with retail sales. 
16.  Radio and television stations. 
17.  Service establishments. 
18.  Skating rink. 
19.  Tinsmithing shop associated with retail sales. 
B.  Accessory uses. Structures and land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and dwellings may be used for a home occupation. 
(Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11) 
9.2.3 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: No structure shall exceed the higher of four stories or 60 feet in height except as approved pursuant to article XIX. 
B.  Minimum front yard: 40 feet. 
C.  Minimum side yard: 
— 25 feet for dwellings adjacent to interior lot lines. 
— None for all other buildings. See 4.23 for buffer and landscape requirements. 
— 40 feet for all buildings adjacent to streets. 
D.  Minimum rear yard: 
— 25 feet for dwellings adjacent to interior lot lines. 
— None for all other buildings. See 4.23 for buffer and landscape requirements. 
E.  Minimum lot area: 
— Multiple dwellings including a unit above or behind a commercial use: 2,500 s.f. 
Single family: 18,000 s.f. 
Two family: 18,000 s.f. 
All other buildings: Zero s.f. 
F.  Minimum heated floor area: 
Single family: 1,100 s.f. 
Two family: 800 s.f. 
Multifamily: 700 s.f. 
Efficiency: 450 s.f. 
G.  Minimum lot frontage: 35 feet adjoining a street. (Amended 11/3/93) 
H.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: 
Single family and two family uses: Accessory structures may be located in the rear yard only, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
Other use: Accessory structures shall not be located in the minimum front yard. 
9.2.4 Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the C-2 District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
Noise study report, Article 28.4.7 (Added 4/3/02) 
ARTICLE X. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Adopted by the board of commissioners, March 7, 1990. 

10.1 - M-1A Industrial Park District. 
10.1.1. M-1A District scope and intent . Regulations set forth in this Section are the M-1A District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permits or use permits. The M-1A District is intended to provide land areas for the development of industrial parks which meet the needs for manufacturing, fabricating, processing, warehousing, distributing, research, office and related uses in an attractive environment. (Amended 3/4/92) 
10.1.2. Use regulations . Within the M-1A District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any industrial use not specifically designated as prohibited or allowed with approval of a use permit shall be permitted. (Amended 04/04/07) 
A.  Prohibited uses . Structures and land shall be used for manufacturing, fabricating, processing, warehousing, distributing, research, office associated with industrial use and similar uses except as enumerated below or in article XIX. (Amended 3/4/92, 4/3/96, 04/04/07) (Added 18 -20 07/07/99) 
1.  Bone distillation 
2.  Dwelling 
3.  Fat rendering 
4.  Incinerator 
5.  Manufacturing of: 
Acetylene gas 
Acid 
Ammonia 
Asphalt 
Bleaching powder 
Brick 
Cement 
Chlorine gas 
Coal tar 
Explosives 
Fertilizers 
Glue 
Gypsum board 
Linoleum 
Mineral dye 
Oil 
Oilcloth 
Paint 
Paper 
Paper pulp 
Patent leather 
Petroleum products 
Plaster of paris 
Pottery 
Shellac 
Terra cotta 
Tile 
Turpentine 
Varnish 
Yeast 
6.  Mineral extraction 
7.  Slaughter house 
8.  Smelting 
9.  Stockyard 
10.  Storage of: 
Explosives 
Animal hides 
11.  Truck terminal 
12.  Blast furnace 
13.  Boiler works 
14.  Ore reduction 
15.  Rolling mill 
16.  Tanning 
17.  Tar distillation 
18.  Landfill, inert waste disposal 
19.  Landfill, solid waste disposal 
20.  Private correction facility 
21.  Truck stop (Added 05/05/10) 
B.  Accessory uses . Structures and land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
(Amd. No. 10-0497, 5-5-10) 
10.1.3. Development standards . 
A.  Height Regulations . No structure shall exceed the higher of four stories or sixty (60) feet in height except as approved pursuant to Article XIX. (Amended 5/6/92) 
B.  Minimum front yard: 30 feet 
C.  Minimum side yard: None. See section 4.23 for buffer and landscape requirements. 
D.  Minimum rear yard: None. See section 4.23 for buffer and landscape requirements. 
E.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Accessory structures shall not be located in the minimum front yard. 
F.  Rail access : Railroad spurs and service rails shall be permitted only within the side and rear yards. 
G.  Minimum lot frontage: 35 feet adjoining a street (Amended 11/30/93) 
H.  Maximum lot coverage: The area of the footprint of all buildings shall not exceed 70 percent of the total land area. 
10.1.4. Exterior building walls . No wood siding shall be permitted. Exposed exterior walls visible from a street shall be composed of the following maximum and minimum percentages of materials in each classification. The percentages apply to the siding on each exposed exterior wall of each building. (Amended 04/04/07) 

 
Type A materials consist of brick; stone with weathered, polished or fluted face; marble aggregate masonry block with fluted, split-face, or broken-face finish; tilt-up, poured-in-place or precast concrete either fluted or with exposed aggregate finish; insulated window wall panels of stainless steel, porcelain treated steel, anodized or other permanently finished aluminum, and stucco or synthetic stucco. 
Type B materials consist of metal panels with baked-on enamel or acrylic finish. 
Type C materials consist of plain reinforced concrete slabs. 
Type D materials consist of corrugated steel and aluminum, wood, and composite board. 
1.  Materials not listed may be presented to the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development and the Director of Public Works for classification. 
2.  Buildings having walls over 25 feet high may be given special material percentages by the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development and the Director of Public Works. 
10.1.5. Nuisance provisions. The following provisions are intended to promote compatibility of the M-1A District with surrounding areas. 
1.  No activity shall be permitted which is offensive or hazardous to the workers in the area, or produces smoke, odor, noises, fumes, vibrations or other objectionable elements or emanations that may be detrimental to the health and safety of the citizens of Fulton County. 
2.  Accepted smoke and odor abatement practices shall be followed to eliminate objectionable smoke and odor, in so far as possible. 
10.1.6. Other regulations . The headings below contain provisions applicable to the M-1A District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
10.1.7. Environmental impact report . In accordance with section 28.4.6, submit an Environmental Impact Report as required. (Amended 04/03/02) 
(Res. No. 07-0322, 4-4-07) 
M-1 Light - Industrial district 
10.2.1. M-1 District scope and intent . Regulations in this section are the M-1 District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permits or use permits. The M-1 District is intended to provide locations which meet the needs of processing, manufacturing, fabricating and warehousing, research and office uses, and related uses. 
10.2.2. Use regulations . Within the M-1 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any industrial use not specifically designated as prohibited or allowed with approval of a use permit shall be permitted. (Amended 04/04/07) 
Structures and land shall be used for manufacturing, fabricating, processing, warehousing, distributing, research, office associated with industrial use uses and similar uses except as enumerated below or in article XIX. (Amended 04/07/93, 04/04/07) 
A.  Prohibited use 
1.  Blast furnace 
2.  Boiler works 
3.  Bone distillation 
4.  Dwelling 
5.  Fat rendering 
6.  Incinerator 
7.  Manufacturing of: 
Acetylene gas 
Acid 
Ammonia 
Asphalt 
Bleaching powder 
Brick 
Chlorine gas 
Cement 
Coal tar 
Explosives 
Fertilizer 
Glue 
Gypsum board 
Linoleum 
Oil 
Oilcloth 
Mineral dye 
Paint 
Paper 
Paper pulp 
Patent leather 
Petroleum products 
Plaster of paris 
Pottery 
Shellac 
Terra cotta 
Tile 
Turpentine 
Varnish 
Yeast 
8.  Mineral extraction 
9.  Ore reduction 
10.  Rolling mill 
11.  Slaughter house 
12.  Smelting 
13.  Stockyard 
14.  Storage of: 
Explosives 
Animal hides 
15.  Tanning 
16.  Tar distillation 
17.  Truck stop (Added 05/05/10) 
18.  Truck terminal 
19.  Landfill, solid waste disposal (Added 07/07/99) 
B.  Accessory uses . Structures and land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
(Amd. No. 10-0497, 5-5-10) 
10.2.3. Development standards . 
A.  Height regulations . Whenever uses or structures permitted in the M-1 District adjoin a dwelling district, structures shall be set back at least 12 additional feet for each foot of height in excess of 50 feet. 
Otherwise, no structure shall exceed the higher of 8 stories or 100 feet in height. 
B.  Minimum front yard : 40 feet 
C.  Minimum side yard : None. See section 4.23 for buffer and landscape requirements. 
D.  Minimum rear yard : None. See section 4.23 for buffer and landscape requirements. 
E.  Minimum lot area : None 
F.  Minimum accessory structure requirements. Accessory structures shall not be located in the minimum front yard. 
G.  Minimum lot frontage : 35 feet adjoining a street (Amended 11/03/93) 
10.2.4. Other regulations . The headings below contain provisions applicable to the M-1 District. 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
10.2.5. Environmental impact report . In accordance with section 28.4.6, submit an Environmental Impact Report as required. (Amended 04/03/02) 
(Res. No. 07-0322, 4-4-07) 
10.3 M-2 - Heavy Industrial District 
10.3.1. M-2 District scope and intent . Regulations in this section are the M-2 District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permits or use permits. the M-2 District is intended to provide locations for a full range of manufacturing, processing, extraction, terminal and warehousing uses, and closely related uses. 
10.3.2. Use regulations . Within the M-2 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any industrial use not specifically designated as prohibited or allowed with approval of a Use Permit shall be permitted. (Amended 04/04/07) 
Structures and land shall be used for manufacturing, fabricating, processing, distributing, research, office associated with industrial use, extraction, terminal and warehousing and similar uses except as enumerated below or in Article XIX. (Amended 04/07/93, 04/04/07) 
A.  Prohibited use . Uses listed below are prohibited unless specifically approved by the Board of Commissioners in a rezoning resolution. 
1.  Blast furnace 
2.  Bone distillation 
3.  Dwelling 
4.  Explosives storage 
5.  Fat rendering 
6.  Incinerator 
7.  Manufacturing of: 
Acid 
Cement 
Explosives 
Fertilizer 
Glue 
Gypsum board 
Oil 
Paper 
Paper pulp 
Petroleum products 
Plaster of paris 
8.  Slaughter house 
9.  Smelting 
10.  Stockyard 
11.  Truck stop (Added 05/05/10) 
B.  Accessory uses . Structures and land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
(Amd. No. 10-0497, 5-5-10) 
10.3.3. Development standards . 
A.  Height regulations . Adjoining a Dwelling District, any part thereof shall be set back 12 feet from the required yard lines for each foot of height in excess of 50 feet. Otherwise, no structure shall exceed the higher of 8 stories or 100 feet in height. 
B.  Minimum front yard : 40 feet 
C.  Minimum side yard: None. See section 4.23 for buffer req. adjoining residential. 
D.  Minimum rear yard: None. See section 4.23 for buffer req. adjoining residential. 
E.  Minimum lot area: None 
F.  Minimum accessory structure requirements . Accessory structures shall not be located in the minimum front yard. 
G.  Minimum lot frontage : 35 feet adjoining a street (Amended 11/03/93) 
10.3.4. Other regulations . The headings below contain provisions applicable to uses allowed in the M-2 District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
10.3.5. Environmental impact report . In accordance with section 28.4.6, submit an Environmental Impact Report as required. (Amended 04/03/02) 
(Res. No. 07-0322, 4-4-07) 
ARTICLE XI. - PLANNED UNIT DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

11.1 - CUP Community Unit Plan District. 
11.1.1 CUP District scope and intent. Regulations in this section are the CUP District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permit or use permit. The CUP District identifies land areas for a variety of housing types within a planned community setting. (Amended 11/3/93) 
The CUP District is intended to: 
A.  Encourage the development of large tracts of land as planned communities. 
B.  Encourage flexible and creative concepts in site planning. 
C.  Preserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas. 
D.  Provide for an efficient use of land. 
E.  Provide a stable residential environment compatible with surrounding residential areas. 
F.  Protect neighboring properties by requiring larger peripheral lots adjacent to larger lot developments. 
11.1.2 Use regulations. Within the CUP District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by administrative permit or use permit shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses . Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
1.  Single family dwelling 
2.  Two family dwelling 
3.  Triplex (Added 04/05/06) 
4.  Quadruplex (Added 04/05/06) 
5.  Townhouse (Added 04/05/06) 
6.  Multi-family Residential 
7.  Day Care facility located in a Multi-family or community building, or place of worship 
8.  Golf, country club, pool and recreation court 
9.  Community facilities 
10.  Places of Worship 
B.  Accessory uses . A structure or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. Retail and service uses, and clubs accessory to recreation facilities are allowed subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Accessory retail and service uses shall be located wholly within a building with a majority of the floor area designed for recreation uses. No outdoor advertising is allowed. 
2.  Retail and service uses shall be limited to convenience retail and service establishments such as pro shops and personal services. Restaurants accessory to a club are allowed. 
11.1.3 Development plan. The development plan shall be the zoning control document for features depicted graphically. The site plan requirement applicable to rezoning requests shall be adhered to for CUP rezoning requests. Administrative guidelines for preparing site plans are available from the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development. A site plan shall become the development plan if the request to rezone is approved without changes or additions. If the approval by the board differs, in any way, from what is depicted on the site plan submitted for the purpose of seeking rezoning, a revised plan must be certified by the Department of Environment and Community Development before development related permits may be issued. A site plan or development plan shall not substitute for plans which are required as a prerequisite for applying for development related permits. The location of all use areas shall be shown on the development plan, and location on the ground shall be as shown on the development plan. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
11.1.4 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: No single family residential dwellings or accessory structures shall exceed 40 feet in height. The height of all other structures are as approved per the conditions of zoning. (Amended 2/7/96) 
B.  Minimum land area per unit: As specified in conditions. 
C.  Minimum lot area per unit: As specified in conditions. 
D.  Minimum CUP size: Ten contiguous acres. 
E.  Maximum density: 
— Multifamily: Nine units per gross acre. 
— Single family: Five units per gross acre. 
F.  Minimum lot width: None, unless specified in conditions. 
G.  Minimum CUP development frontage: 35 feet. 
H.  Minimum lot frontage: 20 feet adjoining a street. (Amended 11/3/93) 
I.  Minimum heated floor area per unit: As specified in conditions. 
J.  Minimum perimeter setback — Entire CUP development: As specified in conditions. 
K.  Minimum interior setbacks, single family lots: 
1.  Minimum front yard: As specified in conditions. 
2.  Minimum side yard: As specified in conditions. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: As specified in conditions. 
L.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: 
Single family and two family uses: Accessory structures may be located within the side or rear yards, subject to perimeter and minimum yard setbacks. 
Multifamily uses: Accessory structures may be located in the rear yard only, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
M.  Minimum building separation—More than one dwelling per lot. All building separations shall be as specified by the Standard Building Code. (Approved 06/02/04) 
N.  Other minimum standards: 
1.  Setbacks and roof lines shall be varied by at least two feet so that no more than three adjoining dwelling units within a single building shall have the same front setback or roof line. 
2.  Common outdoor area consisting of not less than 550 square feet per unit shall be provided for recreation in all developments of 20 or more acres. 
3.  Land area proposed for open space or recreation shall be allocated among the use areas in proportion to the ratio of a neighborhood population to the total CUP population so that acreage devoted to open space is reasonably accessible to all residents. 
4.  Multifamily uses shall not be located along the perimeter except adjacent to or across a street from an existing multifamily or more intense use. 
5.  Agreements, covenants, declarations and other contracts which govern the use, maintenance, and protection of a CUP development among its owners areas shall be part of the official zoning file, and changes thereto shall have no force and effect until a copy has been provided to the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
6.  Multifamily units shall not exceed 25 percent of the total number of dwelling units in a CUP. 
11.1.5 Other regulations. The headings below contain some additional, but not all, provisions applicable to the CUP District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations of the TR, A or 
A-L District shall apply, as corresponding. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
11.2 - NUP Neighborhood Unit Plan.(Amended 7/5/95) 
11.2.1 NUP District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the NUP District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permit or use permit. The NUP District is intended to provide land areas devoted to low to medium density single family residential uses of five or fewer units per acre consistent with the densities ranges suggested on the comprehensive plan land use map. The NUP District is intended to 1) encourage the development of medium sized tracts of land as planned neighborhoods or the development of vacant parcels of land with transitional densities in built-up areas, 2) encourage the preservation of trees and vegetation, and to 3) encourage innovative site planning. Land proposed for a NUP shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Provide a density that is consistent with the plan densities and surrounding properties. 
B.  Protect neighboring properties by requiring peripheral setbacks and development standards compatible with adjacent developments as required by the district standards and the conditions of zoning. 
11.2.2 Use regulations. Within the NUP District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by administrative permit or use permit shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
1.  Single family dwelling. 
2.  Recreation facilities associated with single family development. 
B.  Accessory uses. A structure or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
11.2.3 Development plan. The development plan shall be the zoning control document for features depicted graphically. The site plan requirement applicable to rezoning requests shall be adhered to for NUP rezoning requests. Administrative guidelines for preparing site plans are available from the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development. A site plan shall become the development plan if the request to rezone is approved without changes or additions. If the approval by the board differs, in any way, from what is depicted on the site plan submitted for the purpose of seeking rezoning, a revised plan must be certified by the Department of Environment and Community Development before development related permits may be issued. A site plan or development plan shall not substitute for plans which are required as a prerequisite for applying for development related permits. The location of all use areas shall be shown on the development plan, and location on the ground shall be as shown on the development plan. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
11.2.4 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. (Amended 2/7/96) 
B.  Minimum lot area per unit: 4,000 s.f. 
C.  NUP size: 
Minimum four contiguous acres. 
Maximum 12 contiguous acres 
D.  Maximum density: Five units per gross acre. 
E.  Minimum lot width: None unless specified in conditions. 
F.  Minimum development frontage: 35 feet. 
G.  Minimum lot frontage: 20 feet adjoining a street. 
H.  Minimum heated floor area per unit: 1,000 s.f. detached 
I.  Minimum perimeter setback for the entire NUP development: When adjacent to single family zoning/use or AG-1 zoned property, a 40-foot setback shall be provided around the periphery of the development including access drives serving more than one lot, principal and accessory structures and swimming pools. Other yard improvements and access/utility crossings are permitted. 
J.  Minimum interior setbacks: 
1.  Minimum front yard: As specified in conditions. 
2.  Minimum side yard: As specified in conditions. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: As specified in conditions. 
K.  Minimum interior building separations: To place a building along an interior side lot line at between zero and seven feet shall require an encroachment and maintenance easement allowing a minimum of seven feet of access to such buildings. A minimum building separation of 14 feet shall be maintained. 
L.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Accessory structures may be located in rear or side yards, but shall not be located within a minimum rear yard except that detached garages may locate along a rear lot line at between zero and seven feet with an encroachment and maintenance easement allowing a minimum of seven feet of access to the garage. 
11.2.5 Other regulations. The headings below contain some additional, but not all, provisions applicable to the NUP District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations of the TR district shall apply to townhouse development. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
11.3 - MHP Mobile Home Park District. 
11.3.1 Scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the MHP District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative permit or use permit. The MHP District is provides minimum design standards for mobile home parks. The MHP District is intended to: 
A.  Provide a desirable living environment. 
B.  Require the provision of usable open space and recreational areas, and 
C.  Be located in areas which are served by public sanitary sewer or be located in a drainage basin which is identified for sanitary sewer within two years. 
D.  Have access to an arterial street. 
E.  Be located on sites which have a high potential for tree retention and utilization of natural terrain. 
11.3.2 Use regulations. Within the MHP District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by administrative permit or use permit shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for: 
1.  Mobile Homes (Amended 04/05/06) 
2.  Grocery store with a maximum of 2,500 square feet when approved as part of the development plan. 
3.  Laundromat and coin operated dry cleaning when approved as part of the development plan. 
4.  Day care facility. 
B.  Accessory uses. A structure or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. The sale or display of mobile homes shall be accessory as long as each mobile home offered for sale is located on its individual lot and connected to all utilities. 
11.3.4 Application. Applications for rezoning to MHP shall, in addition to the required submittal routinely required by the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development, be supported by: (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
A.  A copy of the rules and regulations of the proposed mobile home park. 
B.  A copy of any proposed covenants. 
C.  A proposed maintenance plan for lawns, shrubbery, trees, recreation areas, and other natural areas. 
11.3.5 Development plan. The development plan shall be the zoning control document for features depicted graphically. The site plan requirement applicable to rezoning requests shall be adhered to for MHP rezoning requests. Administrative guidelines for preparing site plans are available from the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development. A site plan shall become the development plan if the request to rezone is approved without changes or additions. If the approval by the board differs, in any way, from what is depicted on the site plan submitted for the purpose of seeking rezoning, a revised plan must be certified by the Department of Environment and Community Development before development related permits may be issued. A site plan or development plan shall not substitute for plans which are required as a prerequisite for applying for development related permits. The location of all proposed structures (excluding mobile or modular homes) shall be as shown on the development plan, adopted at the time of zoning approval, and actual location on the ground shall be as shown on the development plan. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
11.3.6 Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: Structures shall be no higher than 35 feet or 2½ stories, whichever is higher. 
B.  Minimum land area: 20 contiguous acres. 
C.  Minimum MHP width: Not less than 400 feet throughout. 
D.  Minimum site area per unit: 4,000 s.f. 
E.  Minimum frontage for the entire MHP development: 200 feet on an arterial or a road within 600 feet of an arterial. (Amended 11/3/93) 
F.  Minimum perimeter buffers for the entire MHP: 
—Road frontage: 100 feet. 
—All other: 50 feet. 
G.  Maximum density: 5.5 units per gross acre plus additional density for features below: 

 
11.3.7 Requirements for individual unit locations. Each mobile home shall be located on a separate site which shall be identified by a marker at each corner. It is not required that individual sites be surveyed. Minimum requirements for individual sites are as follows: 
A.  Minimum width: 44 feet. 
B.  Minimum size: 4,000 square feet. 
C.  Minimum all weather patio: 300 square feet. 
D.  Minimum enclosed storage: 125 cubic feet. 
E.  Minimum interior street setback: 15 feet from pavement. 
F.  Minimum unit separation: 20 feet. 
11.3.8 Minimum improvements required. 
A.  Access, streets, drainage and walks. Each mobile home park shall have a minimum of two primary access streets which shall be paved to a minimum width of 30 feet. Other streets within a mobile home park shall be paved to a minimum width of 24 feet. 
B.  Walkways. All-weather pedestrian walks shall be provided throughout a mobile home park. 
C.  Construction standards. Streets and drainage structures shall be constructed in accordance with the minimum standards available from the Fulton County Department of Public Works. (Amended 11/3/93) 
D.  Underground utilities required. All utilities shall be placed underground. A central television antenna system shall be provided. 
E.  Lighting. Streets and walkways shall be lighted. 
F.  Unit refuse collection facilities. Each mobile home site shall be provided with water-tight and rodent proof refuse container(s) having a capacity of at least 50 gallons. 
G.  Common refuse collection facilities. Dumpsters or similar devices shall be provided for every 30 units or fraction thereof in excess of 15. Such central collection facilities shall be screened from view and shall not be located more than 400 feet from any mobile home served. 
H.  Water and wastewater. Each unit shall be served by public water and sanitary sewer. 
I.  Laundry facilities. Central laundry facilities shall be provided at the rate of one standard-size washing machine and dryer for each 25 units or fraction in excess of 11 units. Laundry facilities shall be located not more than 800 feet from the units served. 
J.  Public telephones. Public telephones shall be provided at convenient locations. 
K.  Fire protection. Fire hydrants shall be located throughout the park in accordance with standards of the fire marshal. Each unit shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher type approved by the Fire Marshal of Fulton County. 
L.  Landscaping. Each mobile home park shall be landscaped with shade trees, shrubs and grass. Landscaping shall be in accordance with a landscaping plan which has been approved by the Department of Environment and Community Development. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
M.  Recreation facilities. At a minimum, ten percent of the gross acreage of a mobile home park shall be provided for common open space and recreation for the residents of the mobile home park. 
11.3.9 Other minimum standards. 
A.  Within 30 days of being located in a mobile home park, the undercarriage shall be screened from view. 
B.  At least 400 square feet of common area shall be provided per unit for the storage of boats, travel trailers and other vehicles. This common storage area shall be enclosed by a fence and screened from view from all units and streets. 
11.3.10 MHP District subdivision. Individually divided lots are not allowed in the MHP District. All other divisions shall comply with the Subdivision Regulations of Fulton County. 
11.3.11 Other regulations. The headings below contain some additional, but not necessarily all, provisions applicable to the MHP District: 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
11.4 - SH Senior Housing District. 
11.4.1. SH District scope and intent. Regulations in this section are the SH District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The SH District is intended to provide land area devoted to senior housing consisting of single family and multi-family dwellings. The SH District is intended to: 
A.  Encourage senior housing opportunities throughout unincorporated Fulton County except in industrial areas. 
B.  Allow seniors the ability remain in their community. 
C.  Provide standards whereby senior housing is compatible with the surrounding area. 
11.4.2. Use regulations. Within the SH District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
A.  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
1.  Single-family dwelling 
2.  Two-family dwelling 
3.  Triplex 
4.  Quadruplex 
5.  Townhouse 
6.  Multi-family residential 
B.  Accessory uses. A structure or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
11.4.3. Development plan. The development plan shall be the zoning control document for features depicted graphically. The site plan requirement applicable to rezoning requests shall be adhered to for SH District rezoning requests. Administrative guidelines for preparing site plans are referenced in Article 28.5.2. A site plan shall become the development plan if the request to rezone is approved without changes or additions. If the approval by the board differs, in any way, from what is depicted on the site plan submitted for the purpose of seeking rezoning, a revised plan must be certified by the Environment and Community Development Department before development related permits may be issued. A site plan or development plan shall not substitute for plans which are required as a prerequisite for applying for development related permits. The location of all use areas shall be shown on the development plan, and location on the ground shall be as shown on the development plan. 
_____
11.4.4. Development standards. 
A.  Height regulations: No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. 
B.  Minimum lot area or land area per unit: As specified in conditions. 
C.  Maximum density: 

 
D.  Minimum lot width: 20 feet. 
E.  Minimum SH development frontage: 35 feet. 
F.  Minimum lot frontage: 20 feet adjoining a street except up to 35 feet may be required whenever the Director of Public Works requires the extra width to protect catch basins. 
G.  Minimum heated floor area per unit: 

 
H.  Minimum perimeter setback for the entire SH development: 
1.  Minimum front yard: 40 feet. 
2.  Minimum side yard: 
30 feet adjacent to interior line. 
40 feet adjacent to street. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: 35 feet. 
I.  Minimum interior setbacks when one building per lot: 
1.  Minimum front yard: 20 feet from right-of-way. 
2.  Minimum side yard: 
Seven feet adjacent to interior lot line, except that up to a seven-foot encroachment and maintenance easement may be provided on adjacent parcels, in combination with or in lieu of a side yard, such that a minimum building separation of 14 feet is maintained. 
Zero if units are attached, for example, townhouses on separate lots of record 
15 feet adjacent to street. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: 25 feet. 
J.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: 
Single-family and two-family uses: Accessory structures may be located within the side or rear yards but shall not be located within a minimum yard and are subject to perimeter and minimum yard setbacks. 
Multi-family uses: Accessory structures may be located in the rear yard only but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
K.  Minimum building separation—More than one dwelling per lot: All building separations shall be as specified by the Standard Building Code. 
L.  Other minimum standards: 
1.  Setbacks and roof lines shall be varied by at least two feet so that no more than three adjoining dwelling units within a single building shall have the same front setback or roof line. 
2.  Common outdoor area consisting of not less than 150 square feet per unit shall be provided for recreation in all developments. 
3.  Land area proposed for open space or recreation shall be allocated among the use areas in proportion to the ratio of a neighborhood's population to the total SH population so that acreage devoted to open space is reasonably accessible to all residents. 
4.  Provide a minimum 600 square foot heated and cooled community center with kitchen and media center facilities. If there is a management office associated with the development, the community center may be located within the confines of that office. 
5.  Agreements, covenants, declarations and other contracts which govern the use, maintenance, and protection of a SH development among its owners' areas shall be part of the official zoning file, and changes thereto shall have no force and effect until a copy has been provided to the Director of the Environment and Community Development Department. All SH developments shall have a mandatory agreement, covenant or contractual requirement that all sales or transfers of the property to subsequent owners shall be subject to the 100 percent occupancy requirement by residents aged 62 or older. 
6.  A 50-foot principal perimeter building setback shall be provided for the entire SH development when adjacent to single family residential districts and/or AG-1 districts. 
7.  Parking spaces shall be calculated as 1.4 spaces per dwelling unit. 
8.  No parking shall be allowed in the minimum front yard setback. 
9.  SH developments must be served by public water and sewer. 
10.  All SH developments shall provide a minimum 25-foot wide natural, undisturbed buffer with a ten-foot improvement setback or a minimum six-foot high earthen berm planted to landscape strip standards, with a maximum slope of 3 to 1 or combination thereof around the perimeter of the property. Said buffer and improvement setback or berm shall not be part of any residentially platted lot. All areas which are not part of an individual lot and held in common shall be accessible via dedicated roadways, easements, sidewalks, etc. and shall be maintained by a mandatory homeowners association, whose proposed documents of incorporation shall be submitted to the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development for review and approval prior to the recording of the first final plat. 
11.  Facility shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations and copies of any applicable permits shall be provided to the Department of Environment and Community Development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
12.  Projects are required to incorporate Easy Living and applicable accessibility standards (as administered and copyrighted by a coalition of Georgia citizens including AARP of Georgia, Atlanta Regional Commission, Concrete Change, Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Governor's Council on Developmental Disabilities, Home Builders Association of Georgia, Shepherd Center and the Statewide Independent Living Council of Georgia). 
13.  Senior housing shall be 100 percent occupied by persons who are 62 years of age or older which shall be verified per Housing and Urban Development (HUD) regulations regarding verification of occupancy. 
11.1.5. Other regulations. The headings below contain some additional, but not all, provisions applicable to the Senior Housing District: 
Development Regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain Management. Section 4.24 
Off Street Parking and Loading. Article XVIII 
Outside Storage. Section 4.2 
River Protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
(Amd. No. 11-0288, 5-4-11) 
ARTICLE XIIA. - [OVERLAY DISTRICTS][11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Adopted by the board of commissioners, February 7, 1996. 

12A.1 - Overlay district authority. 
12A.1.1 Declaration of purpose, scope, intent and public policy. The Fulton County Board of Commissioners finds that as a matter of public policy that the aesthetic, economic and functional qualities of unincorporated Fulton County are worthy of enhancement and preservation and are essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity, safety and general welfare of the existing and future residents of unincorporated Fulton County. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners authorizes each planning area to propose overlay districts and regulations, and, if desired, to request that the board appoint a design review board. The purpose of said design review board and overlay district regulations shall be: 
1.  To foster civic pride. 
2.  To promote attention to accepted design principles in areas of new development and redevelopment. 
3.  To raise the level of community understanding and expectation for quality in the built environment. 
4.  To implement the comprehensive plan. 
5.  To provide for the designation, protection, rehabilitation and redevelopment of properties within overlay districts and to participate in federal and state programs designed to do the same. 
6.  To protect and enhance local aesthetic and functional qualities and to stimulate business. 
7.  To enhance the opportunities for federal, state and local tax benefits under relevant federal, state and local laws. 
The Board of Commissioners further finds that the timely exercise of judgement in the public interest by a public body of proposed new development or redevelopment is desirable. Accordingly, the public policy objectives of this resolution are to guide certain aspects of development, such as: 
1.  The spatial relationships of structures and open spaces to each other, and 
2.  The appearance of buildings and open spaces as they contribute to the attractiveness, function, economy and character of an area. 
Planning area design standards are intended to be uniformly applied to evaluate the appropriateness of proposed changes to an overlay district in order to: 
1.  Protect and enhance the visual qualities and character of the district, 
2.  Provide guidance to design professionals, property and business owners undertaking construction in the district, 
3.  Recommend appropriate design approaches, and 
4.  Provide an objective basis for review, assuring consistency and fairness. 
12A.2 - Definitions. 
12A.2.1 Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given in article III of The Zoning Resolution of Fulton County, or, by Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory, and the words "may" and "should" are permissive. As used in this resolution, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Appearance. The outward aspect that is visible to the public. 
Appropriate. Fitting to the context of a site, neighborhood or community. 
Architectural concept. The basic aesthetic idea of a structure, or group of structures, including the site, signs, buildings and landscape development that produces the architectural character. 
Architectural feature. A significant element of a structure or site. 
Attractive. Having qualities that arouse satisfaction and pleasure in numerous, but not necessarily all, observers. 
Building. A building is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, including but not limited to, a house, store, barn, church, hotel. 
Certificate of endorsement (COE). A document evidencing support of a material change in the appearance of a property located within an overlay district by the person or board designated within an overlay district. 
Cohesiveness. Unity of composition among elements of a structure or among structures, and their landscape development. 
Compatibility. Harmony in appearance of architectural features in the same vicinity. 
Design review board (DRB). A panel which, when appointed by the Board of Commissioners, consists of seven members appointed to consider applications within a specific overlay district. 
Designation or designated. A decision by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, Georgia, wherein a property or district is declared an overlay district. 
External design feature. The general arrangement of any portion of structures or landscaping, including the type, and texture of the materials, the type of roof, windows, doors, lights, signs, and fixtures of portions which are open to the public view. 
Exterior architectural features. The architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a structure and site, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs, facade, landscaping and other architectural fixtures, features, details, or elements relative thereto. 
Geographic area. Land area subject to overlay district regulations. 
Harmony. A quality that represents an attractive arrangement of parts, as in an arrangement of various architectural elements. 
Landscape. Plant materials, topography and other physical elements combined in relation to one another and to structures including pavement. 
Logic of design. Widely accepted principles and criteria in the solution of design problems. 
Material change in appearance. A change in a structure or a parking lot within an overlay district that exceeds ordinary maintenance or repair (defined below), and requires either a sign permit, building permit or land disturbance permit such as, but not limited to: 
1.  The erection, alteration, restoration, addition or removal of any structure (including signs) or parking lot; 
2.  Relocation of a sign or building; 
3.  Commencement of excavation; or 
4.  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way. 
Ordinary maintenance or repair. Exempt from inclusion in "Material Change in Appearance" defined above. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior of any structure, parking lot or sign in or on an overlay district property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in outer design, material, or appearance thereof. Painting, reroofing, resurfacing, replacement of a broken sign face and other similar types of ordinary maintenance shall be deemed ordinary maintenance and repair. 
Overlay district. A geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration or linkage of sites, buildings, structures, objects or landscapes, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper treatment thereof, united by plan and/or physical development. An overlay district shall further mean an area designated by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners as such. 
Overlay property. An individual site, structure, object or landscape, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper continuity thereof, contained within an overlay district. 
Proportion. Balanced relationship of parts of a building, signs and other structures, and landscape to each other and to the whole. 
Scale. Proportional relationships of the size of parts to one another and to humans. 
Street hardware. Objects other than buildings that are part of the streetscape. Examples are: street light fixtures, utility poles, traffic lights and their fixtures, benches, litter containers, planting containers, fire hydrants, etc. 
Streetscape. The appearance and organization along a street of buildings, paving, plantings, street hardware and miscellaneous structures. 
12A.3 - Certificates of endorsement. 
12A.3.1 Approval of alterations or new construction. Applicants for a Fulton County land disturbance permit, sign permit or building permit shall obtain a certificate of endorsement (COE) for applicable properties. 
12A.3.2 Guidelines and criteria for certificates of endorsement. Issuance of certificates of endorsement (COE) shall be based on the criteria of the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County along with other criteria adopted by the Board of Commissioners. 
12A.3.3 Submission of plans. An application for a COE shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, material samples or plans as may be required pursuant to the overlay district provisions. 
12A.3.4 Interior alterations. Review of applications for endorsement shall not consider interiors or exterior features which are not visible from a public street. 
12A.3.5 Issuance of a certificate of endorsement. 
A.  A COE may be issued when the proposed material change(s) in the appearance or arrangement of the elements of the project is consistent with the overlay district provisions. 
B.  A copy of each final COE shall be maintained in the Department of Environment and Community Development. (Amended 2/7/01) 
12A.3.6 Exceptions. When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship due to the circumstances unique to the particular property in question, the Board of Zoning Appeals, in passing upon applications, shall consider and issue exceptions to said provisions so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship provided such exceptions shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the integrity or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. A hardship shall not qualify as an undue hardship if it is of a person's own making. 
In granting such exceptions, the Board of Zoning Appeals may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgement, best fulfill the purpose of this article. 
12A.3.7 Appeals. Appeals are to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Any appeal of a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals is to Fulton County Superior Court in accordance with article XX. 
12A.3.8 Deadline for consideration of application for COE. The DRB shall consider a completed application for a COE within 15 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of an overlay district property. If the application has not been acted upon within 15 days, an the application shall be considered to be approved as submitted. 
12A.3.9 Relationship of this article to other zoning provisions. The adoption of a resolution designating an overlay district, is an amendment to the existing Zoning Resolution. Designation of a zoning overlay district and shall be shown as such on the official zoning maps of Fulton County, Georgia. 
12A.4 - Maintenance of properties building code and zoning provisions. 
12A.4.1 Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior feature visible from a public street in or on an overlay district property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, does not require a building, sign, or land disturbance permit. 
12A.4.2 Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The owner or owners, or the owner's agent, of each designated overlay district property or site, shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of such property and site and all interior portions thereof which, if not maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior portion of such property or site to deteriorate, decay or become damaged or otherwise to fall into a state of disrepair. The Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development shall be responsible for the enforcement of the ordinary maintenance or repair provisions contained within this section. (Amended 2/7/01) 
12A.4.3 Affirmation of existing building codes and zoning. Nothing in this resolution shall be construed to exempt property and business owners from complying with other existing county regulations whenever this article does not apply. This resolution is an amendment to the Zoning Resolution and all other provisions of the Zoning Resolution shall remain in effect unless provisions in the overlay district conflict with other provisions of the Zoning Resolution, in which case, the stricter provisions of the overlay district shall apply. 
12A.5 - Interpretation, violations, enforcement and penalty provisions. 
12A.5.1 Violations. This article shall be governed by article XXIX, section 29.1 of this resolution. 
12A.5.2 Enforcement. This article shall be governed by section 26.3 of this resolution. 
12A.5.3 Penalty. Violation of this resolution shall be punished as provided for by section 21-1-8 of the Fulton County Code [section 1-8 of the Fulton County Code of Ordinances]. 
12A.5.4 Severability. In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this resolution shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
12A.5.5 Conflicts. If the provisions of this article conflict with this resolution, or other ordinances, resolutions or regulations, the provisions of this article shall govern or prevail to the extent of the conflict. 
12A.5.7 Interpretation. This article shall be governed by section 26.1 of this resolution. 
ARTICLE XIIC. - CASCADE CORRIDOR (CASCADE) DISTRICT[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Adopted by the Board of Commissioners on Feb. 7, 1996; amended Aug. 2, 2000, Feb. 7, 2001. Subsequently amended by the Board of Commissioners on May 7, 2003. 

12C.1 - Purpose and intent. 
The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, Georgia hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this Resolution to establish a uniform procedure for providing for the protection, enhancement, preservation, unity of design, and use of places, sites, buildings, structures, streets, neighborhoods, and landscape features in the Cascade Corridor District in accordance with the provisions herein. 
This Resolution is adopted as part of a strategy designed to promote the health, safety, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens of Fulton County through the regulation of design, aesthetics, location, bulk, size of buildings and structures, and the density and distribution of population. 
This Resolution also seeks to reduce congestion on the streets; to provide safety from fire, flood and other dangers; provide adequate light and open space; protect the natural environment and address other public requirements, in order to provide sustainable development that involves the simultaneous pursuit of economic prosperity, environmental protection and social quality. 
This Resolution also seeks, among other things, to promote accepted design principles in areas of new development and redevelopment, to raise the level of community understanding and expectation for quality in the built environment, to protect and enhance local aesthetic and functional qualities, and to stimulate business and promote economic development. 
In consideration of the character of the Cascade Corridor District, these regulations are to monitor the suitability for certain uses, construction and design, prevent functional and visual disunity, promote desirable conditions for community and commerce and protect property against blight and depreciation. 
12C.2 - Cascade Corridor Overlay District use regulations. 
The Cascade Corridor Overlay District applies to all properties zoned or developed for nonresidential and residential uses (except single family detached dwelling units) within 3,500 feet of the center line of Cascade Road in unincorporated Fulton County between the Atlanta City limits and Danforth Road (see attached map). 
Within the Cascade Corridor Overlay District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with the standards of the underlying district. 
Whenever provisions of this Article conflict with any other Article in the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County or any other Fulton County ordinances, regulations, or resolutions, these standards shall prevail. 
12C.3. - Development Standards. 
12C.3.A. Landscaping. 
1.  15-foot wide landscape strip along any public street when Article 4 of the Zoning Resolution otherwise specifies a smaller landscape strip. 
(a)  The landscape strip may be as specified by the Fulton County Tree Preservation Ordinance, or may be a combination of hardscape elements (plazas, planters, benches, fountains and tables, etc.), ground cover, shrubs, and the required number of hardwood trees as specified by the Tree Preservation Ordinance. 
(b)  Shrubs shall be a minimum height of 3 feet at time of planting. 
(c)  A minimum of one 3" caliper hardwood shade tree is required for every thirty (30) linear feet of landscape strip. 
2.  10-foot wide landscape strip along any interior property line adjacent to a nonresidential zoning and/or use. 
12C.3.B. Screening. 
1.  Refuse areas and receptacles shall be placed in the least visible location from public streets and shall be enclosed on 3 sides with opaque walls. The 4 th side shall be a self-closing gate made from noncombustible materials. Opaque walls shall be a minimum of 12 inches higher than the receptacle. Wall materials shall be noncombustible brick. Refuse receptacles shall not be placed within 50 feet of an existing residential or AG-1 (Agricultural) zoning district. 
2.  Accessory site features are prohibited in the front yard of any property. 
3.  Accessory site features located on the ground shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way, any residential use, or any residential or AG-1 zoning category by one of the following: placement behind the building, 100 percent opaque fencing, berm or vegetative screen planted to buffer standards. 
4.  Accessory site features on a roof shall be screened by a parapet or other architectural feature or as approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development. 
5.  Chain link fencing may be used along golf courses, play fields, and other recreational areas. All chain link fencing shall be black or hunter green vinyl coated. 
6.  When required, fencing material around detention/retention facilities shall be black or hunter green vinyl coated chain link fence. 
7.  Retaining walls shall be faced with or constructed of stone, brick, or decorative concrete modular block only. 
12C.3.C. Pedestrian Paths. 
1.  Sidewalks are required along all public and private road frontages. 
2.  Internal walkways (paths) are required from the public sidewalk to the main entrance of the principle use of the property and shall meet applicable Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards for slope, width, texture, level differences, and ramps. 
3.  Pedestrian paths may be constructed of either colored/textured materials or conventional sidewalk materials and shall be clearly identified. 
4.  Pedestrian paths shall be illustrated on the site plan submitted at the time of application for a Land Disturbance Permit 
5.  Paths shall be designed to minimize direct auto-pedestrian interaction. 
6.  Paths shall be connected to signalized crosswalks where applicable. 
7.  Paths shall be direct and convenient routes between points of origin (such as a bus stop) and destination (such as a shop, bank, etc). 
8.  Street furniture shall be located outside the specified width of any pedestrian path. 
9.  If a business is open after dark, the path shall be well-lit by a minimum of 0.9 foot-candles with an average to minimum uniformity ratio of 4:1. The lighting plan for pedestrian paths shall be included on the site plan submitted at the time of application for a Land Disturbance Permit. 
12C.3.D. Building Materials and Architectural Treatments. 
1.  Developments shall include architecture elements such as columns, arcades, covered entry-walkways, arches, facade offsets, windows, balconies, offset walls, clock towers, cupolas and/or courtyards. 
2.  The exterior finish of all buildings shall be at least 51 percent brick (or an equivalent alternative treatment approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development) per vertical wall plane. (Amended 07/02/03) 
3.  Accent building materials of nonreflective glass, natural stone, precast concrete, stucco, stucco-like material, glass block, Hardi-plank and tile (or an equivalent alternative treatment approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development) shall not exceed 49 percent per vertical wall plane. 
4.  The principle entry area of a building shall be articulated and express greater architectural detail than other portions of the building. 
5.  To the extent any rear or side of any building is visible from any public street or single family residence, architectural treatment shall continue through the rear or side. 
6.  Exterior finishes for accessory structures shall be consistent with the principle structure. 
7.  Permitted colors for exterior walls, building components, sign structures, accent and decorative elements shall be as specified by Table 12C or as approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development. 
Table 12C  Acceptable Color for Architectural  Treatment Elements  Pantone Matching System (PMS)  U denotes dull finish 

 
8.  Roof colors shall be black, gray, brown, or green. Reflective and metallic colors are prohibited. 
9.  Exposed concrete masonry unit (CMU) block, corrugated steel, aluminum siding, vinyl siding, wood siding, prefabricated metal, exposed plywood, and exposed pressboard are prohibited as exterior finishes. 
10.  Burglar bars, steel gates, metal awnings and steel-roll down curtains are prohibited on the exterior of a structure except at the structure's rear. Burglar bars are prohibited on the rear if visible from a public street. Burglar bars are also prohibited on the rear of an outparcel building if visible from the main structure. Roll-down security devices that allow visibility into the store when they are deployed, such as security shutters, are allowed if installed interior to the structure. Said interior security devices shall give the overall appearance of a uniform horizontal pattern, and shall be placed so that the pattern is at a uniform height across the entire business front, and shall match or compliment the color of the surrounding window frame. Said interior security device shall be rolled up (out of sight) during business operating hours and if business has vacated. Extraneous items shall not be attached to the security device. Preferred security device is QMI, Vision Profile Security Shutters, Style 51. 
Prior to the installation of all security devices the owner/leasee shall obtain a Letter of Appropriateness from the Director of Planning and Community Services Department. 
a.  Owner/Leasee shall provide the following in order to obtain the Letter of Appropriateness: 
A signed and notarized letter with attachments describing: 
1.  Building address where devices are to be installed. 
2.  Detailed information including site plan and elevation drawing showing location of security device in relation to building façade, windows, doors, etc. 
3.  Name of security product (provide manufacturer information). 
4.  Detailed information on the security product (color, material etc.). 
5.  Other information as may be requested to assure compliance with the security device standard. 
6.  Notarized letter from installer certifying that product shall be installed to manufacturer's specifications. 
b.  Planning and Zoning Staff will review the information for compliance with the security device standard and upon determination of compliance will provide a Letter of Appropriateness. 
11.  Neon lights outlining and/or detailing building features are prohibited. 
12.  Flat roofs and roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from the view of public and private streets by a parapet. No parapet shall be required to be greater than 4 feet above roof. 
13.  Vending machines, paper stands, and other similar devices must be located interior to the building structure. 
12C.3.E. Architectural Review Process. 
1.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall submit plans which include details of exterior materials, colors, design and architectural elements of proposed building(s) as specified by this Article. 
2.  Fulton County staff will review all requests for land disturbance, building (excluding interior renovations), and sign permits for compliance with this Article. Upon determination of compliance, a Certificate of Endorsement (CoE) will be provided in the form of signing the formally submitted plans and drawings. 
3.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the community will be allowed ten working days to review and comment. In no event shall a proposal which otherwise conforms to applicable codes and regulations be delayed issuance of a building permit for more than 10 working days due to this review and comment process. 
12C.3.F. Miscellaneous Provisions. (Amended 03/03/04) 
1.  Except as provided for in Article 19, the storage and/or sale of goods is prohibited in parking lots and other areas outside of the interior or permanently sheltered portions of a building. 
2.  Storage of shopping carts is allowed without a permit. 
(Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11; Res. No. 12-0555, 8-1-12) 
12C.4 - Signs. 
12C.4.A. Standards: 
1.  Base and framework of monument signs shall be made of the same brick as the principal structure. 
2.  The architecture color standards of the district apply only to the sign structure not to the sign face. 
12C.4.B. Prohibited Sign Types: 
1.  Window signs along the corridor are prohibited. 
12C.4.C. Sign Lighting: 
1.  Wall signs shall be internally illuminated. 
(Res. No. 08-0493, 6-4-08) 
12C.5. - Severability. 
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Article, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
12C.6. - Appeals. 
Any persons aggrieved by a final decision of the Department of Environment and Community Development relating to this article may appeal such final decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals by filing in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly why the final decision is contrary to law per the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision of the department is rendered. 
12C.7. - Adoption and effective date. 
Now, therefore be it resolved, the Fulton County Board of Commissioners does hereby ordain, resolve and enact the foregoing Article XIIC to the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County, Georgia. 
 Cascade Road Overlay District 
ARTICLE XIID. - OLD NATIONAL HIGHWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Adopted by the Board of Commissioners on Aug. 21, 96; amended Aug. 4, 1999; amended May 7, 2003. 

12D.1 - Purpose and intent. 
The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, Georgia hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this Resolution to establish a uniform procedure for providing for the protection, enhancement, preservation, unity of design, and use of places, sites, buildings, structures, streets, neighborhoods, and landscape features in the Old National Highway District in accordance with the provisions herein. 
This Resolution is adopted as part of a strategy designed to promote the health, safety, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens of Fulton County through the regulation of design, aesthetics, location, bulk, size of buildings and structures, and the density and distribution of population. 
This Resolution also seeks to reduce congestion on the streets; to provide safety from fire, flood and other dangers; provide adequate light and open space; protect the natural environment and address other public requirements, in order to provide sustainable development that involves the simultaneous pursuit of economic prosperity, environmental protection and social quality. 
This Resolution also seeks, among other things, to promote accepted design principles in areas of new development and redevelopment, to raise the level of community understanding and expectation for quality in the built environment, to protect and enhance local aesthetic and functional qualities, and to stimulate business and promote economic development. 
In consideration of the character of the Old National Highway District, these regulations are to monitor the suitability for certain uses, construction and design, prevent functional and visual disunity, promote desirable conditions for community and commerce and protect property against blight and depreciation. 
12D.2 - Old National Highway Overlay District regulations. 
The Old National Highway Overlay District applies to all properties zoned or developed for nonresidential and residential uses (except single family detached dwelling units) which have frontage on Old National Highway or have direct access to Old National Highway, or are located on streets that intersect Old National Highway in Fulton County between the City of College Park limits, Union City limits, and Fayette County (see attached map). Within the Old National Highway Overlay District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with the standards of the underlying district. 
Whenever provisions of this Article conflict with any other Article in the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County or any other Fulton County ordinances, regulations, or resolutions, these standards shall prevail. 
12D.3. - Development standards. 
12D.3.A. Landscaping. 
1.  15-foot wide landscape strip along any property line adjacent to a public street when Article 4 of the Zoning Resolution otherwise specifies a smaller landscape strip: 
(a)  The landscape strip may be as specified by the Fulton County Tree Preservation Ordinance, or may be a combination of hardscape elements (plazas, planters, benches, fountains and tables, etc.), ground cover, shrubs, and the required number of hardwood trees as specified by the Tree Preservation Ordinance. 
(b)  Shrubs shall be a minimum height of 3 feet at time of planting. 
(c)  A minimum of one 3" caliper hardwood shade tree is required for every thirty (30) linear feet of landscape strip. 
2.  10-foot wide landscape strip along any interior property line adjacent to a nonresidential zoning and/or use. 
3.  All landscaped areas shall be maintained by the property owner(s). 
4.  Landscape treatments shall not obscure street addresses. 
12D.3.B. Screening. 
1.  Refuse areas shall be enclosed on four (4) sides with opaque fencing, 12 inches higher than the receptacle, and constructed of the same material as the building structure. One side shall be a self-closing gate. Refuse receptacles shall not be placed within 50 feet of an existing residential or AG-1 (Agricultural) zoning district. 
2.  Accessory site features are prohibited in the front yard of any property. 
3.  Accessory site features located on the ground shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way, any residential use, or any residential or AG-1 zoning category by one of the following: placement behind the building, 100 percent opaque fencing, berm or vegetative screen planted to buffer standards. 
4.  Accessory site features on a roof shall be screened by a parapet or other architectural feature or as approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development. 
5.  When required, fencing material around detention/retention facilities shall be black or hunter green vinyl coated chain link fence. 
6.  Retaining walls shall be faced with or constructed of stone, brick, or decorative concrete modular block only. 
7.  Loading docks shall be screened by a continuous hedge of evergreen shrubs. Shrubbery shall be a minimum height of five (5) feet at time of planting. Shrubbery must be cared for under a continuous maintenance program. (Amended 07/02/03) 
12D.3.C. Pedestrian Paths. 
1.  Sidewalks are required along all public and private road frontages. 
2.  Internal walkways (paths) are required from the public sidewalk to the main entrance of the principle use of the property and shall meet applicable Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards for slope, width, texture, level differences, and ramps. 
3.  Pedestrian paths may be constructed of either colored/textured materials or conventional sidewalk materials and shall be clearly identified. 
4.  Pedestrian paths shall be illustrated on the site plan submitted at the time of application for a Land Disturbance Permit 
5.  Paths shall be designed to minimize direct auto-pedestrian interaction. 
6.  Paths shall be connected to signalized crosswalks where applicable. 
7.  Paths shall be direct and convenient routes between points of origin (such as a bus stop) and destination (such as a shop, bank, etc). 
8.  Street furniture shall be located outside the specified width of any pedestrian path. 
12D.3.D. Building Materials and Architectural Treatments. 
1.  Developments shall include architecture elements such as columns, arcades, covered entry-walkways, arches, facade offsets, windows, balconies, offset walls, clock towers, cupolas and/or courtyards. 
2.  All buildings shall be brick, precast concrete, natural stone, cementitious stucco, tinted glass or horizontal clapboard siding (or an equivalent alternative treatment approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development). Exterior metal siding is allowed in industrially zoned districts but only on non-street-facing façades. 
3.  The exterior wall materials of all structures except industrial buildings shall consist of a minimum of 60 percent (per vertical wall plane) of the following: horizontal clapboard siding, brick or stone (or an equivalent alternative treatment approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development). 
4.  Accent wall materials of glass, architecturally treated concrete masonry, precast stone, or stucco (or an equivalent alternative treatment approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development) shall not exceed 40 percent per vertical wall plane. 
5.  The principle entry area of a building shall be articulated and express greater architectural detail than other portions of the building. 
6.  Exterior finishes for accessory structures shall be consistent with the principle structure. 
7.  Permitted colors for exterior walls, building components, sign structures, accent and decorative elements shall be as specified by Table 12D or as approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development. 
Table 12D  Allowable Architectural Treatment, Accent and Trim Colors for the Old National Overlay District  (Reference Pantone Color Formula Guide) 

 
8.  Neon lights outlining and/or detailing building features are prohibited. 
9.  Roof colors shall be black, gray, brown, or green. Reflective and metallic colors are prohibited. 
10.  Cinder block, corrugated steel, wood siding, exposed plywood and exposed pressboard are prohibited as exterior finishes. 
11.  Flat roofs and roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from the view of public and private streets by a parapet. No parapet shall be required to be greater than 4 feet above roof. 
12.  Burglar bars, steel gates, metal awnings and steel-roll down curtains are prohibited on the exterior and interior of the structure except at the structure's rear. 
13.  Chain link fencing is prohibited except in retention/detention areas. All chain link fencing must be black or green vinyl clad. 
14.  Vending machines, paper stands, and other similar devices must be located inside a building. 
12D.3.E. Miscellaneous Provisions. (Amended 03/03/04) 
1.  Previously disturbed vacant lots shall not be paved unless it is a pre-existing condition. 
2.  Vacant lots shall not be overgrown (vegetative cover exceeding 6-inches in height) and must be maintained. The lot must remain free of trash and debris. 
3.  All openings of abandoned structures shall be secured from unauthorized entry. 
4.  All fabricated boards used to board up all openings of abandoned structures shall be painted on the exterior surface the same color as the building. 
5.  All garbage, trash, and other debris shall be removed from the interior and exterior of vacant premises. 
6.  A deadbolt shall be installed on the front exterior door above the existing lock of an abandoned structure. 
7.  Except as provided for in Article 19, the storage and/or sale of goods is prohibited in parking lots and other areas outside of the interior or permanently sheltered portions of a building. (Amended 03/03/04) 
8.  Shopping carts shall be stored inside the structure or in parking lot receptacles. 
12D.3.F. Architectural Review Process (Added 03/03/04) 
1.  At the time of application for rezoning and/or use permit, a land disturbance permit or a building permit, the applicant will be directed to the community for a review of Old National Overlay Design Standards. The community will be allowed ten working days to review and comment. An application which otherwise conforms to applicable codes and regulations shall not be delayed issuance of a permit for more than 10 working days due to this review and comment period. 
2.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall submit samples of exterior materials, colors, design and architectural details of proposed building(s) and demonstrate compliance with the architectural design standards set forth in this ordinance. 
3.  Fulton County staff will review land disturbance, exterior building and sign permit applications for compliance with the Old National Highway Overlay District. Upon determination of compliance, a Certificate of Endorsement (COE) will be provided in the form of signing the formally submitted plans and drawings. 
(Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11) 
12D.4. - Signs. 
1.  The architectural color standards of the overlay district apply to the sign structure and not the sign face. 
2.  Sign structures and faces constructed of wood or canvas materials are prohibited. 
3.  Window signs along the Old National Highway Corridor are prohibited. 
(Res. No. 08-0239, pt. II, 6-4-08) 
12D.5. - Streetscape standards. 
1.  A single decorative style light fixture and pole shall be used along the entire length of Old National highway and for a distance of 500 feet along the north and south sides of Flat Shoals Road where it intersects with Old National Highway. 
a.  Preferred light fixture is Cooper Lighting "Traditionaire" Post Top Fixture (Pictured below). Lighting source shall be the most energy efficient approved light source at the time of installation. 

b.  Preferred streetlight pole is the Hapco manufacturing "Grand Series/Granville" decorative pole. This pole is FHWA approved as a 'breakaway' pole (Pictured below). 

Pole shall include banner arms as well as GFCI outlets as required. 
2.  Lighting shall be installed behind the sidewalk at 80- to 100-foot intervals. 
3.  All sidewalks along Old National Highway shall be a minimum of eight feet wide. The sidewalk shall include two feet of brick pavers laid in a running bond course pattern adjacent to the back of the curb. (See illustration below) 
4.  All handicapped ramps shall be constructed per GDOT and Fulton County standards with a brick paver band installed as illustrated below. 

(Res. No. 08-0239, pt. I, 6-4-08; Amd. No. 08-0950, 2-4-09; Res. No. 12-0079, 2-1-12; Res. No. 12-0356, 5-16-12) 
12D.6. - Severability. 
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Article, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
(Res. No. 08-0239, pt. I, 6-4-08) 
12D.7. - Appeals. 
Any persons aggrieved by a final decision of the Department of Environment and Community Development relating to this article may appeal such final decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals by filing in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly why the final decision is contrary to law per the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision of the department is rendered. 
(Res. No. 08-0239, pt. I, 6-4-08) 
12D.8 - Adoption and effective date. 
Now, therefore be it resolved, the Fulton County Board of Commissioners does hereby ordain, resolve and enact the foregoing Article XIID to the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County, Georgia. 
(Res. No. 08-0239, pt. I, 6-4-08) 

ARTICLE XIIE. - RESERVED[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-0321, adopted April 4, 2007, repealed §§ 12E.1—12E.5, which pertained to the Northeast Fulton Overlay District and was adopted by the Board of Commissioners, Feb. 5, 1997; amended March 1, 2000; Aug. 2, 2000 and Sept. 6, 2000. Subsequently amended by the Board of Commissioners June 4, 2003. Subsequently amended by the Board of Commissioners May 5, 2004. 

12E.1.—12E.5 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIIF. - SANDTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— Adopted by the Board of Commissioners April 1, 1998; amended Aug. 2, 2000. Subsequently amended by the Board of Commissioners May 7, 2003. 

12F.1. - Purpose and intent. 
The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, Georgia hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this Resolution to establish a uniform procedure for providing for the protection, enhancement, preservation, unity of design, and use of places, sites, buildings, structures, streets, neighborhoods, and landscape features in the Sandtown District in accordance with the provisions herein. 
This Resolution is adopted as part of a strategy designed to promote the health, safety, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens of Fulton County through the regulation of design, aesthetics, location, bulk, size of buildings and structures, and the density and distribution of population. 
This Resolution also seeks to reduce congestion on the streets; to provide safety from fire, flood and other dangers; provide adequate light and open space; protect the natural environment and address other public requirements, in order to provide sustainable development that involves the simultaneous pursuit of economic prosperity, environmental protection and social quality. 
This Resolution also seeks, among other things, to promote accepted design principles in areas of new development and redevelopment, to raise the level of community understanding and expectation for quality in the built environment, to protect and enhance local aesthetic and functional qualities, and to stimulate business and promote economic development. 
In consideration of the character of the Sandtown District, these regulations are to monitor the suitability for certain uses, construction and design, prevent functional and visual disunity, promote desirable conditions for community and commerce and protect property against blight and depreciation. 
12F.2. - Sandtown Overlay District use regulations. 
The Sandtown Overlay District applies to all properties zoned or developed for nonresidential and residential uses as illustrated on the map below. Single-family developments are exempted except for compliance with section 12F.4.A. (Buffers and Landscaping). Single-family units not part of a subdivision are exempt from this ordinance. Within the Sandtown Overlay District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with the standards of the underlying district. 

Whenever provisions of this Article conflict with any other Article in the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County or any other Fulton County ordinances, regulations, or resolutions, these standards shall prevail. 
(Res. No. 08-0883, 11-5-08) 
12F.3. - Architectural review process. 
Prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit (LDP) or a building permit, the applicant shall submit details of exterior materials, colors, landscape strips, buffers, signage, lighting, parking, streets and paths, entrances, design and architectural features of the proposed site and building which demonstrate compliance with the design standards set forth herein. 
Prior to the issuance of an LDP or building permit, the community will be allowed ten working days to review the application. An application which otherwise conforms to applicable codes and regulations shall not be delayed issuance of an LDP or building permit for more than 10 working days due to this review and comment process. 
Fulton County staff will review all applications for land disturbance permits, building permits and sign permits for compliance with the standards of this Overlay District and upon determination of compliance will provide a Certificate of Endorsement (CoE) in the form of signing the formally submitted plans and drawings. 
(Res. No. 12-0079, 2-1-12) 
12F.4. - Development standards. 
12F.4.A. Buffers and Landscaping. 
1.  40-foot wide natural, undisturbed buffer except for approved access and utility crossings, improvements, and replantings where sparsely vegetated subject to the approval of the Fulton County Arborist, with a 10-foot improvement setback or as may be approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development, along Camp Creek Parkway. 
2.  All AG-1 and residential zonings or uses shall provide a minimum 25-foot wide natural undisturbed buffer with a ten-foot improvement setback or provide a minimum six-foot high earthen berm planted to landscape strip standards, with a maximum slope of 3 to 1 or combination thereof along all public streets. 
3.  All nonresidential (except AG-1) zonings or uses shall provide a minimum 25-foot wide landscape strip along all public streets. 
4.  Fifteen-foot wide landscape strip along any interior property line adjacent to a nonresidential zoning and/or use. 
12F.4.B. Screening. 
1.  Refuse areas and receptacles shall be placed in the least visible location from public streets and shall be enclosed on 3 sides with opaque walls. The 4th side shall be a self-closing gate made from noncombustible materials. Opaque walls shall be a minimum of 12 inches higher than the receptacle. Wall materials shall be noncombustible brick, stone, or split-faced concrete masonry block. Refuse receptacles shall not be placed within 50 feet of an existing residential or AG-1 (Agricultural) zoning district. 
2.  Accessory site features are prohibited in the front yard of any property. 
3.  Accessory site features located on the ground shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way, any residential use, or any residential or AG-1 zoning category by one of the following: placement behind the building, 100 percent opaque fencing, berm or vegetative screen planted to buffer standards. 
4.  Accessory site features on a roof shall be screened by a parapet or other architectural feature or as approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development. 
5.  Opaque fences are prohibited adjacent to public streets. 
6.  Fencing materials along public streets and side yards are restricted to stone, wrought iron, material designed to have the appearance of wrought iron, treated wood, or material designed to have the appearance of natural wood. 
7.  Chain link fencing may be used along golf courses, play fields, and other recreational areas. All chain link fencing shall be black or hunter green vinyl coated. 
8.  When required, fencing material around detention/retention facilities shall be black or hunter green vinyl coated chain link fence. 
9.  Retaining walls shall be faced with or constructed of stone, brick, or decorative concrete modular block only. 
10.  All parking and loading areas shall be screened from public streets by either a minimum 4-foot high berm and/or a continuous hedge of evergreen shrubs. 
12F.4.C. Pedestrian Paths. 
1.  Sidewalks are required along all public and private road frontages. 
2.  Except in truck loading and parking areas of industrial and warehouse-distribution uses, internal walkways (paths) are required from the public sidewalk to the main entrance of the principle use of the property and shall meet applicable Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards for slope, width, texture, level differences, and ramps. 
3.  Pedestrian paths may be constructed of either colored/textured materials or conventional sidewalk materials and shall be clearly identified. 
4.  Pedestrian paths shall be illustrated on the site plan submitted at the time of application for a Land Disturbance Permit 
5.  Paths shall be designed to minimize direct auto-pedestrian interaction. 
6.  Paths shall be connected to signalized crosswalks where applicable. 
7.  Paths shall be direct and convenient routes between points of origin (such as a bus stop) and destination (such as a shop, bank, etc). 
8.  Street furniture shall be located outside the specified width of any pedestrian path. 
12F.4.D. Lighting. 
1.  A lighting plan for open parking lots and pedestrian paths shall be submitted for approval prior to the issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit. 
2.  Any lighting fixture shall be a cutoff luminary whose source is completely concealed with an opaque housing. Fixtures shall be recessed in the opaque housing. Drop dish refractors are prohibited. The wattage shall not exceed 420 watts/480 V per light fixture. This provision includes lights on mounted poles as well as architectural display and decorative lighting visible from a street or highway. Wall pack lighting shall be cut-off down directional a maximum of 250 watts. Canopy lighting shall be cut-off down directional a maximum of 250 watts. Canopy lighting shall be cut-off luminaries with a maximum lamp wattage of 400 watts. 
3.  Light sources (lamps) shall be incandescent, fluorescent, metal halide, mercury vapor, natural gas, or color corrected high-pressure sodium (CRI of 60 or better). The same type must be used for the same or similar type of lighting on any one site. 
4.  Mounting fixtures must be modified in such a manner that the cone of the light is not directed at any property line. The minimum mounting height for a pole is12 feet. The maximum mounting for a pole is 28 feet. Any fixture and pole located within 20 feet of a residential zoning shall be a type four or forward throw distribution. 
5.  All site lighting shall be designed so that the illumination as measured in foot-candles at any one point meets the following standards: Minimum and maximum levels are measured at any one point. Average level is not to exceed the calculated value and is derived using only the area of the site included to receive illumination. Points of measure shall not include the area of the building or areas which do not lend themselves to pedestrian traffic. Also, if the major portion of the lighting design is to be in the front of a building, the average level should not be affected by adding a light or two in the back of the same building, which would raise the average of the intended area for lighting. 
6.  Future renovations, upgrades, or additions to existing facilities prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall not exceed existing illumination levels below. The entire site must be bought into conformance with this article should a renovation, upgrade, or addition occur that would require a land disturbance permit. 

 
7.  Historic period lighting shall be used. 
8.  Lights shall be architecturally decorative with a historic style (includes shepherds crook, pole top, and bollard). The same type of design must be used along pedestrian pathways and/or common areas. 
9.  Shoe box, cobra lighting fixtures, and neon lighting are prohibited. 
12F.4.E. Building Design Materials and Architectural Treatments. 
1.  Nonresidential buildings are limited to 35 feet in height. Residential buildings and mixed-use buildings that contain a residential component are limited to three stories. 
2.  Developments shall include architecture elements such as columns, arcades, covered entry-walkways, arches, facade offsets, windows, balconies, offset walls, clock towers, cupolas and/or courtyards. 
3.  The exterior of all industrial building facades shall be provided with an architectural treatment such as stucco, stone, brick, wood or an alternative treatment approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development. 
4.  The exterior wall materials of all nonresidential buildings except industrial buildings shall consist of a minimum of 60 percent (per vertical wall plane) of the following: solid wood siding, cementations siding, stucco, brick, stone or an alternative treatment approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development. 
5.  The exterior wall materials of all residential buildings shall consist of a minimum of 60 percent (per vertical wall plane) of the following: stucco, cementatious siding, solid wood siding, brick, stone or an alternative treatment approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development. 
6.  Accent wall materials on residential and nonresidential buildings shall consist of glass, architecturally treated concrete masonry, precast stone, stucco, material designed to have the appearance of stucco if installed a minimum of four feet above grade or combination thereof and shall not exceed 40 percent per vertical wall plane. 
7.  Any nonresidential building facade shall have a minimum of 255 fenestration or as may be approved by the director. 
8.  The principle entry area of a building shall be articulated and express greater architectural detail than other portions of the building. 
9.  To the extent any rear or side of any building is visible from any public street or single family residence, architectural treatment shall continue through the rear or side. 
10.  Exterior finishes for accessory structures shall be consistent with the principle structure. 
11.  Permitted colors for exterior walls, building components, sign structures, accent and decorative elements shall be as specified by Table 12F or as approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development. 
Permitted Colors for Exterior Walls, Building Components, Sign Structure,  Accent and Decorative Elements  The following numbers refer to the Pantone Matching System, an international color matching system 

 
12.  Burglar bars, steel gates, and steel-roll down curtains are prohibited on the exterior and interior of the structure except at the structure's rear. Security grilles are allowed if installed interior to the place of business. Grilles shall be of a grid or brick pattern and placed so that the grid or brick pattern is at a uniform height across the entire business front. 
13.  Neon lights outlining and/or detailing building features are prohibited. 
14.  Flat roofs and roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from the view of public and private streets by a parapet. No parapet shall be required to be greater than four feet above roof. 
15.  Prohibited building materials for exterior walls and accents: metal panel systems, vinyl siding, site-cast smooth concrete masonry or plain reinforced concrete slabs, aluminum siding, pressed-wood panels, plywood panels, mirrored glass, and corrugated steel (exceptions: mechanical penthouse and roof screens). 
16.  Allowable roof materials for pitched roofs are asphalt shingles, composition shingles, wood shingles, wood shake, slate, terra cotta or as may be approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development. 
17.  Roof colors shall be black, gray, brown, or green. Reflective and metallic colors are prohibited. 
18.  Permissible roofs are gable, pyramidal, and hip. Shed roofs are permitted over porches, additions, and accessory structures. Roof pitches shall be 5/12 to 12/12. 
19.  Vending machines, paper stands, and other similar devices must be located inside a building. 
(Res. No. 08-0883, 11-5-08) 
12F.4.F. Miscellaneous Provisions. (Amended 03/03/04) 
1.  Except as provided for in Article 19, the storage and/or sale of goods is prohibited in parking lots and other areas outside of the interior or permanently sheltered portions of a building. 
2.  Storage of shopping carts is allowed without a permit. 
12F.5. - Signs. 
12F.5.A. Standards: 
1.  Identification monuments (except for the sign face) shall be constructed of brick, granite, stone, marble or other material used in the principal building(s) on site. 
2.  Identification monuments (except for the sign face and/or logo or trade name) shall be earth tones not primary colors. 
3.  Changeable copy and reader board configurations are prohibited unless approved as a marquee sign. 
4.  Wall signs shall be internally illuminated only. 
5.  Door signs are allowed up to a maximum of 25% of the door area. 
12F.5.B. Prohibited Sign Types: 
1.  Window signs are prohibited. 
(Res. No. 08-0493, 6-4-08; Res. No. 08-0883, 11-5-08) 
12F.6. - Severability. 
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Article, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
12F.7. - Appeals. 
Any persons aggrieved by a final decision of the Department of Environment and Community Development relating to this article may appeal such final decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals by filing in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly why the final decision is contrary to law per the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision of the department is rendered. 
12F.8. - Adoption and effective date. 
Now, therefore be it resolved, the Fulton County Board of Commissioners does hereby ordain, resolve and enact the foregoing Article XIIF to the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County, Georgia. 

Sandtown Overlay District 
ARTICLE XIIG. - RESERVED[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-0321, adopted April 4, 2007, repealed §§ 12G.1—12G.8, which pertained to the State Route 9 Overlay District and derived from amendment of 10-1-03. 

12G.1.—12G.8 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIIH. - RESERVED[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-0321, adopted April 4, 2007, repealed §§ 12H.1—12H.7, which pertained to the Northwest Fulton Overlay Zoning District and derived from Res. No. RM 990493, adopted December 1, 1999. 

12H.1.—12H.7 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIIH(1). - RESERVED[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-0321, adopted April 4, 2007, repealed Art. XIIH(1), §§ 12H(1).1—12H(1).8, which pertained to the Crabapple Crossroads of the Northwest Fulton Overlay District, adopted by the board of commissioners on March 3, 2004 

12H(1).1.—12H(1).8. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIIH(2). - RESERVED[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-0321, adopted April 4, 2007, repealed Art. XIIH(2), §§ 12H(2).1—12H(2).7, which pertained to the Birmingham Crossroads of the Northwest Fulton Overlay District, adopted by the board of commissioners on March 3, 2004. 

12H(2).1.—12H(2).7. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII-I. - OPEN (Added 10/2/02) 
ARTICLE XIIJ. - RESERVED[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 08-0584, adopted July 2, 2008, repealed Art. XIIJ, §§ 12J.1—12J.9, which pertained to the Chattahoochee Hill Country Overlay District, adopted by the board of commissioners on Oct. 2, 2002, and amended on Sept. 7, 2005. 

12J.1—12J.9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIIK. - SOUTH FULTON PARKWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT (Added 9/3/03) 
A RESOLUTION TO ADD ARTICLE XII-K TO THE ZONING RESOLUTION OF FULTON COUNTY, GEORGIA; TO DELINEATE THE SOUTH FULTON PARKWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT IN UNINCORPORATED FULTON COUNTY; TO ESTABLISH DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 
BE IT RESOLVED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF FULTON COUNTY, GEORGIA. 

12K.1. - Purpose and intent. 
The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, Georgia hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this Resolution to establish a uniform procedure for providing for the protection, enhancement, preservation, unity of design, and use of places, sites, buildings, structures, streets, neighborhoods, and landscape features in the South Fulton Parkway District in accordance with the provisions herein. 
This Resolution is adopted as part of a strategy designed to promote the health, safety, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens of Fulton County through the regulation of design, aesthetics, location, bulk, size of buildings and structures, and the density and distribution of population. 
This Resolution also seeks to reduce congestion on the streets; to provide safety from fire, flood and other dangers; provide adequate light and open space; protect the natural environment and address other public requirements, in order to provide sustainable development that involves the simultaneous pursuit of economic prosperity, environmental protection and social quality. 
This Resolution also seeks, among other things, to promote accepted design principles in areas of new development and redevelopment, to raise the level of community understanding and expectation for quality in the built environment, to protect and enhance local aesthetic and functional qualities, and to stimulate business and promote economic development. 
In consideration of the character of the South Fulton Parkway District, these regulations are to monitor the suitability for certain uses, construction and design, prevent functional and visual disunity, promote desirable conditions for community and commerce and protect property against blight and depreciation. 
12K.2. - South Fulton Parkway Overlay District regulations. (Amended 12/03/03). 
Except as noted in Section 12.K.4.A.1., the South Fulton Parkway Overlay District applies to all properties zoned or developed for nonresidential and residential uses (except single family detached dwelling units), within 2,640 feet of the centerline of the South Fulton Parkway from its easterly origin beginning at Wolf Creek to Cascade-Palmetto Highway (SR 154). If any portion of a parcel and/or development is located in the defined boundary area, the entire parcel and/or development shall comply with the standards herein. Within the South Fulton Parkway Overlay District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with the standards of the underlying district. 
Whenever provisions of this Article conflict with any other Article in the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County or any other Fulton County ordinances, regulations, or resolutions, these standards shall prevail. 
12K.3. - Architectural review process. 
Prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit (LDP) or a building permit, the applicant shall submit details of exterior materials, colors, landscape strips, buffers, signage, lighting, parking, streets and paths, entrances, design and architectural features of the proposed site and building which demonstrate compliance with the design standards set forth herein. 
Prior to the issuance of an LDP or building permit, the community will be allowed ten working days to review the application. An application which otherwise conforms to applicable codes and regulations shall not be delayed issuance of an LDP or building permit for more than 10 working days due to this review and comment process. 
Fulton County staff will review all applications for land disturbance permits, building permits and sign permits for compliance with the standards of this Overlay District and upon determination of compliance will provide a Certificate of Endorsement (CoE) in the form of signing the formally submitted plans and drawings. 
(Res. No. 12-0079, 2-1-12) 
12K.4. - Development standards. 
12K.4.A. Buffers and landscaping. 
1.  All developments to include single family detached residential subdivisions shall provide a minimum 100-foot wide natural, undisturbed buffer (except for approved access and utility crossings, improvements, and replantings where sparsely vegetated subject to the approval of the Fulton County Arborist), with an additional ten-foot setback interior to the buffer, along the South Fulton Parkway and along the rights-of-way of public roads which intersect the Parkway for a distance of 300 feet measured from the intersection with the South Fulton Parkway. 
2.  A minimum 15-foot wide landscape strip along all public and private streets, except as noted in 12K.4.A.1., when Article 4 of the Zoning Resolution otherwise specifies a smaller landscape strip. 
3.  Subject to the approval of the director, street trees may be placed in public rights-of-way. 
4.  A minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip along any interior property line adjacent to a nonresidential zoning and/or use. 
5.  Hardwood shade trees, e.g., maples and oaks, a minimum of 2½" caliper, shall be planted in all landscape strips and minimally spaced as specified by the Tree Preservation Ordinance. 
12K.4.B. Screening. 
1.  Refuse areas and receptacles shall be placed in the least visible location from public streets and shall be enclosed on 3 sides with opaque walls. The 4th side shall be a self-closing gate made from non-combustible materials. Opaque walls shall be a minimum of 12 inches higher than the receptacle. Wall materials shall be non-combustible brick, stone, or split concrete masonry block. Refuse receptacles shall not be placed within 50 feet of an existing residential or AG-1 (Agricultural) zoning district. 
2.  Accessory site features located on the ground shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way and/or any residence, residential zoning category, or AG-1 zoning category by one of the following: placement behind the building, 100 percent opaque fencing, berm or vegetative screen planted to buffer standards. 
3.  Accessory structures on a roof shall be located to the rear of the roof and shall be screened by a parapet or other architectural feature as approved by the director. 
4.  Loading docks and bay doors fronting the South Fulton Parkway are prohibited. 
5.  Loading docks shall be screened by a continuous hedge of evergreen shrubs. Shrubbery shall be a minimum height of five feet at time of planting. 
6.  Vending machines shall be located inside a building or screened from the view of all public streets and residentially or AG-1 (Agricultural) zoned or developed properties. 
7.  Retaining walls shall be faced with or constructed of stone, brick, or decorative concrete modular block only. 
12K.4.C. Pedestrian paths. 
1.  Sidewalks are required along all public and private road frontages. 
2.  Pedestrian paths shall be illustrated on the site plan submitted at the time of application for a Land Disturbance Permit. 
3.  Except in truck loading and parking areas of industrial and warehouse-distribution uses, internal walkways (paths) are required from the public sidewalk to the main entrance of the principle use of the property and to adjacent buildings within the same development. 
4.  All sidewalks and pedestrian walkways (paths) shall meet applicable Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards. 
5.  Pedestrian paths may be constructed of either colored/textured materials or conventional sidewalk materials and shall be clearly identified. 
6.  Paths shall be designed to minimize direct auto-pedestrian interaction by such means as sidewalks, striping, and signs.. 
7.  Paths shall be connected to crosswalks at intersections where applicable. 
8.  Street furniture shall be located outside the specified width of any pedestrian path. 
9.  Paths and sidewalks shall be connected to green space and open space and connectivity shall be illustrated on the site plan submitted at the time of application for a Land Disturbance Permit. 
10.  Pedestrian paths shall be a minimum width of five feet. 
11.  Multi-use paths for bicycles and pedestrians may be substituted for the required sidewalks as approved by the Director and the Transportation Administrator when the path is part of the Fulton County Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan. 
12.  Multi-use paths designed for use by bicyclists and pedestrians shall be 12 feet wide. 
13.  Multi-use paths designed with separate paths for bicyclists and pedestrians shall be 15 feet wide, ten feet for bicycles and five feet for pedestrians. 
14.  Paths should be direct and convenient routes between points of origin (such as a bus stop) and destination (such as a shop, bank, etc). 
15.  Paths not visible from a public street shall be illuminated. 
12K.4.D. Lighting. 
1.  A photometric plan for open parking lots and paths shall be submitted at the time of application for a Land Disturbance Permit. 
2.  Any lighting fixture shall be a cutoff luminary whose source is completely concealed with an opaque housing. Fixtures shall be recessed in the opaque housing. Drop dish refractors are prohibited. The wattage shall not exceed 420 watts/480 V per light fixture. This provision includes lights on mounted poles as well as architectural display and decorative lighting visible from a street or highway. Wall pack lighting shall be cut-off down directional a maximum of 250 watts. Canopy lighting shall be cut-off down directional a maximum of 250 watts. Canopy lighting shall be cut-off luminaries with a maximum lamp wattage of 400 watts. 
3.  Light sources (lamps) shall be incandescent, fluorescent, metal halide, mercury vapor, natural gas, or color corrected high-pressure sodium (CRI of 60 or better). The same type must be used for the same or similar type of lighting on any one site. 
4.  Mounting fixtures must be modified in such a manner that the cone of the light is not directed at any property line. The minimum mounting height for a pole is 12 feet. The maximum mounting for a pole is 28 feet. Any fixture and pole located within 20 feet of a residential zoning shall be a type four or forward throw distribution. 
5.  All site lighting shall be designed so that the illumination as measured in foot-candles at any one point meets the following standards: Minimum and maximum levels are measured at any one point. Average level is not to exceed the calculated value and is derived using only the area of the site included to receive illumination. Points of measure shall not include the area of the building or areas which do not lend themselves to pedestrian traffic. Also, if the major portion of the lighting design is to be in the front of a building, the average level should not be affected by adding a light or two in the back of the same building, which would raise the average of the intended area for lighting. 
6.  Future renovations, upgrades, or additions to existing facilities prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall not exceed existing illumination levels below. The entire site must be bought into conformance with this article should a renovation, upgrade, or addition occur that would require a land disturbance permit. 

 
7.  Blue-white colors of florescent, mercury vapor lamps, metal halide, high-pressure sodium with CRI of less than 60 are prohibited. 
8.  Ground level, low wattage/voltage up-lights to accent features in landscape strips are permitted. 
9.  Low intensity, downward shielded lighting along pedestrian paths and in parking lots is required. 
10.  All site lighting shall be architecturally compatible with the buildings on a site. Lights shall be architecturally decorative with a historical style (includes shepherds crooks, pole top, and bollard). 
11.  Exterior wall-mounted lights shall be directed downward fully shielded to prevent spillage. The bottom of wall-mounted light fixtures shall be no higher than seven feet above grade. 
12.  Soffit mounted light fixtures shall be recessed into the soffit or otherwise fully shielded. 
13.  Ground mounted or other upward directional lighting is allowed to accent architectural features. 
14.  Unshielded floodlights, wall packs, NEMA head style fixtures, sag/convex lens mounted on shoebox fixtures, cobra, neon and dome lights are prohibited. 
12K.4.E. Building materials and architectural treatments. 
1.  Developments shall include architecture elements such as columns, arcades, covered entry-walkways, arches, facade offsets, windows, balconies, offset walls, clock towers, cupolas and/or courtyards. 
2.  The exterior wall materials of all nonresidential buildings shall consist of a minimum of 60 percent (per vertical wall plane) of the following: brick, precast concrete, natural or precast stone, or tinted glass (or an equivalent alternative treatment approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development). 
3.  The exterior wall materials of all residential buildings shall consist of a minimum of 60 percent (per vertical wall plane) of the following: brick, stone, stucco, Hardi-plank siding, solid plank, or cementitious plank (or an equivalent alternative treatment approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development). 
4.  Accent wall materials on residential and nonresidential buildings shall not exceed 40 percent per vertical wall plane. 
5.  Prohibited exterior finishes (except on mechanical penthouses and roof screens) are highly reflective, shiny, or mirror-like materials, exposed unfinished foundations, exposed plywood or particle board, unplastered, corrugated steel, exposed standard concrete masonry block, vinyl and aluminum siding. 
6.  To the extent the rear and/or side of a building is visible from a public street or an adjacent agriculturally or residentially zoned or developed property, architectural treatments shall continue through the rear and sides of the building. 
7.  The principle entry area of a building shall be articulated and express greater architectural detail than other portions of the building. 
8.  Outparcel buildings shall have architectural features consistent with the principal buildings. 
9.  Permitted colors for exterior walls, building components, sign structures, accent and decorative elements shall be as specified by Table 12K or as approved by the director. 
Table 12K  Permitted Colors for Exterior Walls, Building Components, Sign Structure,  Accent and Decorative Elements  The following numbers refer to the Pantone Matching System, an international color matching system 

 
10.  Flat roofs and roof-mounted equipment shall be screened by a parapet or other architectural feature as approved by the director from the view of public and private streets and adjacent agriculturally and residentially zoned and/or developed properties. 
11.  Sloped roofs shall be standing seam, metal, slate and concrete roof tiles and composition shingles. 
12.  Building components such as burglar bars, steel gates, metal awnings and steel roll-down curtains are prohibited if visible from a public street. 
13.  Vending machines, paper stands, and other similar devices must be located inside a building. 
12K.4.F. Streetscape features. 
1.  Benches, trash receptacles, drinking fountains, and other street furniture shall be compatible in material, color, finish and architectural style of the development. 
2.  Marketing signage in streetscape features is prohibited. 
12K.4.G. Parking. 
1.  All off-street parking for townhouses and multi-family buildings shall be located to the side, rear or enclosed. 
2.  A minimum of 50 percent of the required surface parking for out-parcels shall be located at the rear of the building. 
3.  The required number of off-street parking spaces may be reduced as approved by the director. 
4.  Shared parking shall be permitted as approved by the director. 
5.  Non-residential developments shall provide parking for bicycles. 
6.  Loading areas shall be located in the rear or side yards. 
12K.4.H. Miscellaneous provisions. (Amended 03/03/04) 
1.  Except as provided for in Article 19, the storage and/or sale of goods is prohibited in parking lots and other areas outside of the interior or permanently sheltered portions of a building. 
2.  Storage of shopping carts is allowed without a permit. 
(Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11) 
12K.5. - Signs. 
See Article 33. 
(Res. No. 08-0493, 6-4-08) 
12K.6. - Telecommunications, cell towers and water towers. 
1.  Telecommunications switchboards, power generators, and other telecommunication relay equipment rooms or floors housing such uses are limited to the following areas of a building: (a) subterranean levels, (b) first and second floors which are set back a minimum of 50 feet from the street, or (c) third and fourth floors. 
2.  Stealth design is required for all cell towers. 
3.  Height of towers shall not exceed 199 feet. 
4.  A wireless communications facility shall be disassembled and removed from the site within 90 days of the date its use for wireless telecommunications is discontinued. 
5.  Water towers shall be painted to blend with the landscape. 
6.  Except for safety purposes, water tower lighting shall be allowed only during maintenance periods. Each outdoor light that is not required for safety shall be fully shielded. The safety lighting shall use a type of shielding with a ten degree cut-off to provide lighting downward. 
12K.7. - Utilities. 
All utilities shall be underground or as approved by the director. 
12K.8. - Severability. 
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
12K.9. - Appeals. 
Any persons aggrieved by a final decision of the Department of Environment and Community Development relating to this article may appeal such final decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals by filing in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly why the final decision is contrary to law per the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision of the department is rendered. 
12K.10. - Adoption and effective date. 
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, the Fulton County Board of Commissioners does hereby ordain, resolve and enact the foregoing Article XIIK to the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County, Georgia. 
 South Fulton Parkway Overlay District Map 
ARTICLE XIIK  Design Guidelines for the South Fulton Parkway 
The purpose of these design guidelines is to help preserve the buffers along the South Fulton Parkway, the night sky, green space, vistas, the "Parkway" feel, and open space. These guidelines are encouraged but are not standards. Therefore, noncompliance does not necessitate variances. 
Site design: 
All design strategies shall minimize changes to the existing topography and loss of mature vegetation and water features. 
Minimize level grading. New developments should step with landforms and maximize preservation of existing vegetation and trees. Level grading of entire lots is to be avoided. 
Transitions at property lines should seem natural for the surrounding terrain. Where the existing terrain is generally level, avoid newly graded slopes greater than 1:3 at property lines. 
Cut and fill slopes should be rounded where they meet natural grade to blend with natural slope. 
Natural contouring and re-vegetation are encouraged. Retaining walls should be faced with indigenous rock, brick and/or constructed to blend with adjacent surroundings. 
Storm water retention for multiple sites should be combined into a lake as opposed to individual drainage ponds. 
Permanent conservation easements should be established to protect water sheds, view sheds, and rare habitats. 
Buildings, courtyards: 
Buildings should be oriented to avoid summer overheating. 
Locate courtyards for optimum southern exposure in winter and provide for shading in the summer. 
Locate buildings such that solar heat is naturally reduced on hot summer days by landscape strips and trees. 
Coordinate corner buildings with adjacent developments. Generally, the primary mass of a building on a corner should not be placed at an angle to the corner. Angled or sculpted building corners and open plazas should not be precluded from corners. 
Vertical focal points to visually anchor corners are encouraged. 
Street standards: 

 
Parking: 
On-street parking (parallel, diagonal, and head-in) is encouraged. 
All developments shall provide connectivity to adjacent developments to link buildings and open spaces together to minimize vehicular traffic and other impacts. 
Courtyards should include such features as sculptures or fountains as focal points, moveable seating and tables, sunny and shaded areas, several entrances into courtyards, variety of textures and colors for visual interest, landscaping, covered and uncovered outdoor passageways. 
Architectural features/enhancements: 
Trim to include eaves, corner boards, gable and eave boards, pediments, friezes, lintels, sills, quoins, belt courses, balustrades; 
Gables, dormers, pillars, posts, porches, recessed windows and doors, cupolas, bay windows; 
Half-rounded or quarter-rounded roof gutters and down spouts integrated with trim; 
Glass storefronts, transom windows, building wall offsets, projections, recesses, floor level changes, roof-line offsets; 
Architectural treatments of front facades shall continue major features around all visibly exposed sides of a building. 
Restaurants with outdoor seating should allow for ease of pedestrian circulation, adequate shade through the use of extended awnings, canopies, or large umbrellas, provide outdoor trash receptacles, and maintain clean and litter-free premises. 
View sheds: 
All development proposals should arrange buildings to preserve views from adjacent properties and streets. 
Locate courtyards, surface parking, and open spaces to align with view sheds from adjacent properties. 
Locate drives, parking, and open spaces on high points. Avoid placing buildings except churches or public buildings of high architectural quality on ridge lines. 
All new developments will be reviewed with respect to topography and existing landforms, existing vegetation and trees, soil properties and bed rock depth, existing watercourses, floodway and flood plain areas, drainage patterns, climatic factors, view sheds. 
All new developments will be reviewed for land use and site organization in relation to building form, character, and scale of existing and proposed development, sensitivity and nature of adjoining land uses, location of adjacent roads, rights-of-way, driveways, offstreet vehicular connections, pedestrian ways, access points, and easements, existing structures and other built improvements, prehistoric and historic sites, structures and routes, and any other features that may be impacted or impact the proposed new development. 
ARTICLE XIIL. - CLIFTONDALE OVERLAY DISTRICT (Added 04/07/04)[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Editor's note— Adopted by the board of commissioners on April 7, 2004 

12L.1. - Purpose and intent. 
The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, Georgia hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this Resolution to establish a uniform procedure for providing for the protection, enhancement, preservation, unity of design, and use of sites, buildings, structures, streets, neighborhoods, and landscape features in the Cliftondale Overlay District (District) in accordance with the provisions herein. 
This Resolution is adopted as part of a strategy designed to promote the health, safety, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens of Fulton County through the regulation of design, aesthetics, location, bulk, size of buildings and structures, and the density and distribution of population. 
This Resolution seeks to reduce congestion on the streets; to provide safety from fire, flood and other dangers; provide adequate light and open space; protect the natural environment and address other public requirements, in order to provide sustainable development that involves the simultaneous pursuit of economic prosperity, environmental protection and social quality. 
This Resolution also seeks to promote accepted design principles in areas of new development and redevelopment, to raise the level of community understanding and expectation for quality in the built environment, to protect and enhance local aesthetic and functional qualities, to stimulate business and promote economic development. 
In consideration of the character of the District, these regulations are to monitor the suitability for certain uses, construction and design, prevent functional and visual disunity, promote desirable conditions for community and commerce and protect property against blight and depreciation. 
12L.2. - Cliftondale overlay district use regulations. 
The District applies to all properties zoned or developed for nonresidential and residential uses (except single family detached dwelling units) and structures within the area illustrated on the following map. If any portion of a parcel and/or development is located in the defined boundary area, the entire parcel and/or development shall comply with the standards herein. The District also recognizes the Cliftondale Crossroads as designated on the 2015 South Fulton Land Use Map. 
 Cliftondale Overlay District 
Whenever provisions of this Article conflict with any other Article in the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County or any other Fulton County ordinances, regulations, or resolutions, these standards shall prevail. 
12L.3. - Architectural review process. 
Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall submit details of exterior materials, colors, design and architectural features of the proposed building which demonstrate compliance with the design standards set forth in this ordinance. 
Fulton County staff will review all applications for land disturbance permits, building permits and sign permits for compliance with the standards of this overlay district and upon determination of compliance will provide a Certificate of Endorsement (COE) in the form of signing the formally submitted plans and drawings. 
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the community will be allowed ten working days to review and comment. An application which otherwise conforms to applicable codes and regulations shall not be delayed issuance of a building permit for more than ten working days due to this review and comment process. 
12L.4. - Development standards. 
12L.4.A. Landscaping, Buffers and Street Trees. 
1.  All AG-1 and residentially zoned developments shall provide a minimum 50-foot wide natural, undisturbed buffer with a ten-foot improvement setback along all public streets. 
2.  All nonresidentially (except AG-1) zoned developments shall provide a minimum 50-foot wide landscape strip along all public streets. 
3.  A minimum 50-foot wide natural, undisturbed buffer with a ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided along any interior property line adjacent to a residential zoning and/or use. 
4.  A minimum 15-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided along any interior property line adjacent to a nonresidential zoning and/or use. 
5.  Large, overstory trees shall be planted 40 to 60 feet on center and are allowed along residential and commercial streets. 
6.  Small, understory trees shall be planted ten to 30 feet on center along residential streets. 
7.  Street trees shall be a minimum of three inches caliper. 
8.  Street trees shall be selected from Appendix E of the Fulton County Tree Preservation Ordinance and Administrative Guidelines or as may be approved by the Fulton County Arborist. 
12L.4.B. Screening. 
1.  Refuse areas and receptacles shall be placed in the least visible location from public streets and shall be enclosed on three sides with opaque walls. The 4th side shall be a self-closing gate made from noncombustible materials. Opaque walls shall be a minimum of 12 inches higher than the receptacle. Wall materials shall be noncombustible brick, stone, or split-faced concrete masonry block. Refuse receptacles shall not be placed within 50 feet of an existing residential or AG-1 (Agricultural) zoning district. 
2.  Accessory site features are prohibited in the front yard of any property. 
3.  Accessory site features located on the ground shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way, any residential use, or any residential or AG-1 zoning category by one of the following: placement behind the building, 100% opaque fencing, berm or vegetative screen planted to buffer standards. 
4.  Accessory site features on a roof shall be screened by a parapet or other architectural feature or as approved by the director. 
5.  Opaque fences are prohibited adjacent to public streets. 
6.  Fencing materials along public streets and side yards, golf courses, play fields and other recreational areas are restricted to decorative stone, iron, wrought iron, treated wood, white picket, and/or minimum three-rail horse fencing with posts. 
7.  When required, fencing material around detention/retention facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the Fulton County Subdivision Regulations or as approved by the Director. Vegetation shall be planted in accordance with Article 34 of the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. 
8.  Retaining walls shall be faced with or constructed of stone, brick, or decorative concrete modular block only. 
9.  All parking and loading areas shall be screened from public streets by either a minimum four-foot high berm and/or a continuous hedge of evergreen shrubs. 
12L.4.C. Sidewalks/Pedestrian Paths. 
1.  Sidewalks are required along all public and private road frontages (except alleys) and shall meet all applicable Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards. 
2.  Sidewalks and other paths (multi-purpose or pedestrian) shall be illustrated on the site plan submitted at the time of application for a Land Disturbance Permit. 
3.  Meandering sidewalks are permissible upon approval by the director. 
4.  Pedestrian paths shall be a minimum width of five feet. 
5.  Pedestrian paths may be constructed of either colored/textured materials or conventional sidewalk materials and shall be clearly identified. 
6.  Multi-use paths for bicycles and pedestrians may be substituted for the required sidewalks as approved by the director when the path is part of the Fulton County Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan. 
7.  Multi-use paths designed for use by bicyclists and pedestrians shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide; five feet for the pedestrian sidewalk and ten feet for the bicyclists. 
8.  Street furniture shall be located outside the specified width of any path. 
9.  Paths shall be connected to signalized crosswalks where applicable. 
10.  Paths shall be designed to minimize direct auto-pedestrian interaction. 
11.  Paths should be direct and convenient routes between points of origin (such as a bus stop) and destination (such as a shop, bank, etc). 
12.  Pedestrian access should be provided to all entrances including access from rear parking areas. 
12L.4.D. Lighting. 
1.  A lighting plan for open parking lots and pedestrian paths shall be submitted for approval prior to the issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit. 
2.  Open parking lots and walkways providing access thereto shall be provided with a maintained minimum two foot candles (a measure of illumination) of light measured at grade level. 
3.  The maximum to minimum foot candle level shall not exceed a twelve to one (12:1) ratio. 
4.  Shoe box, cobra lighting fixtures and neon lighting are prohibited. 
5.  Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of MORE than 1,800 lumens, and all flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of MORE than 900 lumens, shall not emit any direct light above a horizontal plane through the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire. 
6.  Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rate at a total of MORE than 1,800 lumens, and all flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of MORE than 900 lumens, shall be mounted at a height equal to or less than the value 3 + (D/3), where D is the distance in feet to the nearest property boundary. The maximum height of the luminaire may not exceed 25 feet. 
7.  Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of 1800 lumens or LESS, and all flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or lamps rated at 900 lumens or LESS, may be used without restriction to light distribution or mounting height, except that if any spot of flood luminaire rated 900 lumens or LESS is aimed, directed, or focused such as to cause direct light from the luminaire to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public ways, the luminaire shall be redirected or its light output controlled as necessary to eliminate such conditions. 
8.  Luminaires used for public-roadway illumination may be installed at a maximum height of 25 feet and may be positioned at that height up to the edge of any bordering property. 
9.  All temporary emergency lighting needed by the police or fire departments or other emergency services, as well as all vehicular luminaires, shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
10.  All hazard warning luminaires required by Federal regulatory agencies are exempt from the requirements of this article, except that all luminaries used must be red and must be shown to be as close as possible to the Federally required minimum lumen output requirement for the specific task. 
11.  Luminaires used primarily for sign illumination may be mounted at any height to a maximum of 25 feet, regardless of lumen rating. 
12.  Top Mounted Fixtures Required: Lighting fixtures used to illuminate an outdoor advertising sign shall be mounted on the top of the sign structure. All such fixtures shall comply with the shielding requirements of Section 1.10.3(A). Bottom-mounted outdoor advertising-sign lighting shall not be used. 
13.  Compliance Limit: Existing outdoor advertising structures shall be brought into conformance with this Code within ten years from the date of adoption of this provision. 
14.  The use of laser source light or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment, searchlights, permanent mounted exterior neon lights and back-lit awnings and roof mounted lights are prohibited. 
12L.4.E. Building Design. 
1.  Buildings shall include architecture elements such as columns, arcades, covered entry-walkways, arches, facade offsets, windows, balconies, offset walls, clock towers, cupolas and/or courtyards. 
2.  All buildings shall be oriented to face a street or a courtyard. 
3.  The principle entry area of a building shall be articulated and express greater architectural detail than other portions of the building. 
4.  All primary entrances shall face the street or courtyard. 
5.  All primary entrances which face a street shall be at street level. 
6.  Buildings are limited to 35 feet in height. 
7.  The exterior wall materials of all nonresidential buildings shall consist of a minimum of 60 percent (per vertical wall plane) of the following: brick, stone, or clapboard (or an equivalent alternative treatment approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development). 
8.  The exterior wall materials of all residential buildings shall consist of a minimum of 60 percent (per vertical wall plane) of the following: brick, stone, stucco, solid plank, cementitious plank, or horizontal clapboard siding (or an equivalent alternative treatment approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development). 
9.  Any nonresidential building facade shall have a minimum of 25 percent fenestration or as may be approved by the director. Black glass and/or tinted glass is prohibited. 
10.  Accent wall materials on residential and nonresidential buildings shall consist of glass, architecturally treated concrete masonry, precast stone, or stucco (or an equivalent alternative treatment approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development) and shall not exceed 40 percent per vertical wall plane. 
11.  To the extent any rear or side of any building is visible from any public street or single family residence, architectural treatment shall continue through the rear or side. 
12.  Exterior finishes for accessory structures shall be consistent with the principle structure. 
13.  Permitted colors for exterior walls, building components, sign structures, accent and decorative elements shall be a specified by Table 12L or as approved by the director. 
Table 12L  Allowable Accent/Trim Colors for the Cliftondale Overlay District  (Reference Pantone Color Formula Guide) 

 
14.  Fuel pumps, canopies and associated gasoline station service areas should be located at the rear of the structure, not between the building and the street, to allow the building to be the spatial edge of the streetscape. 

Spatial edge of streetscape 
15.  For large commercial/retail buildings, variations in facade, roofline and depth should be provided to lend the appearance of multi-tenant occupancy. 
16.  All building plans submitted as an application for a building permit should clearly indicate all of the proposed building materials and colors for each facade as described herein. The plans should clearly show the location and calculate the amount/percentages of all building materials per facade. 
12L.4.F. Roofs. 
1.  Allowable roof materials for pitched roofs are asphalt shingles, composition shingles, wood shingles, wood shake, slate, terra cotta or as may be approved by the Director. 
2.  Roof colors shall be black, gray, brown, or green. Reflective and metallic colors are prohibited. 
3.  Permissible roofs are gable, pyramidal, and hip. Shed roofs are permitted over porches, additions, and accessory structures. Roof pitches shall be 5/12 to 12/12. 
4.  Roof mounted flagpoles are prohibited. 
12L.4.G. Parking. 
1.  Off-street parking shall be located to the rear or side of the building. 
2.  Parallel and angle-in on-street parking is allowed subject to the approval of the Director. 
3.  For commercial and multi-family uses only, no more than 50 percent of the required parking spaces shall be located in the front and side of a building. 
4.  Shared parking within a multi-tenant development is required and shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article 18 of the Zoning Resolution. 
5.  No parking or loading area shall be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing or storing of any vehicle, equipment, materials or supplies. 
6.  Bicycle parking areas shall be provided for each nonresidential development. 
12L.4.H. Miscellaneous Provisions. 
1.  Utilities shall be installed underground. 
2.  Retention/detention shall comply with the requirements of the Fulton County Subdivision Regulations. 
3.  Stealth design is required for all cell towers. 
4.  Height of cell towers shall not exceed 199 feet. 
5.  Wireless communications facilities shall be disassembled and removed from the site within 90 days of the date its use for wireless telecommunications is discontinued. 
6.  Vending machines, paper stands, and other similar devices must be located inside a building. 
(Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11) 
12L.5. - Signs. 
1.  The architectural color standards shall apply to the sign structure and not the sign face. 
2.  Sign structures and faces constructed of wood or canvas materials are prohibited. 
3.  Window signs are prohibited. 
(Res. No. 08-0493, 6-4-08) 
12L.6. - Severability. 
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Article, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
12L.7. - Appeals. 
Any persons aggrieved by a final decision of the Department of Environment and Community Development relating to this article may appeal such final decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals by filing in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly why the final decision is contrary to law per the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision of the department is rendered. 
12L.8. - Adoption and effective date. 
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, the Fulton County Board of Commissioners does hereby ordain, resolve and enact the foregoing Article XII-L to the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County, Georgia. 
ARTICLE XIIM. - CEDAR GROVE OVERLAY DISTRICT (Added 02/04/04)[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
Editor's note— Adopted by the board of commissioners February 4, 2004 

12M.1. - Purpose and intent. 
The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County, Georgia hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this Resolution to establish a uniform procedure for providing for the protection, enhancement, preservation, unity of design, and use of places, sites, buildings, structures, streets, neighborhoods, and landscape features in the Cedar Grove Overlay District in accordance with the provisions herein. 
This Resolution is adopted as part of a strategy designed to promote the health, safety, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens of Fulton County through the regulation of design, aesthetics, location, bulk, size of buildings and structures, and the density and distribution of population. 
This Resolution also seeks to reduce congestion on the streets; to provide safety from fire, flood and other dangers; provide adequate light and open space; protect the natural environment and address other public requirements, in order to provide sustainable development that involves the simultaneous pursuit of economic prosperity, environmental protection and social quality. 
This Resolution also seeks, among other things, to promote accepted design principles in areas of new development and redevelopment, to raise the level of community understanding and expectation for quality in the built environment, to protect and enhance local aesthetic and functional qualities, and to stimulate business and promote economic development. 
In consideration of the rural character of the Cedar Grove Overlay District, these regulations are to define and monitor the suitability for certain uses, construction and design, prevent functional and visual disunity, promote desirable conditions for community and commerce and protect property against blight and depreciation. 
12M.2. - Cedar grove overlay district use regulations. 
The Cedar Grove Overlay District applies to all properties zoned or developed for nonresidential and residential uses (except single family detached dwelling units), within the area illustrated on the following map (excluding the South Fulton Parkway Overlay District). The District also recognizes the Cedar Grove Crossroads as designated on the 2015 South Fulton Land Use Map. 
 Cedar Grove Overlay District 
Within the Cedar Grove Overlay District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with the standards of the underlying district. 
Whenever provisions of this Article conflict with any other Article in the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County or any other Fulton County ordinances, regulations, or resolutions, these standards shall prevail. 
12M.3. - Architectural review process. 
Prior to issuance of a land disturbance permit (LDP) or a building permit, the applicant shall submit details of exterior materials, colors, landscape strips, buffers, signage, lighting, parking, streets and paths, entrances design and architectural features of the proposed site and building which demonstrate compliance with the design standards set forth herein. 
Prior to the issuance of an LDP or building permit, the community will be allowed ten working days to review the application. An application which otherwise conforms to applicable codes and regulations shall not be delayed issuance of an LDP or building permit for more than ten working days due to this review and comment process. 
Fulton County staff will review all applications for land disturbance permits, building permits and sign permits for compliance with the standards of this Overlay District and upon determination of compliance will provide a Certificate of Endorsement (COE) in the form of signing the formally submitted plans and drawings. 
12M.4. - Development standards. 
12M.4.A. Buffers and Landscaping. 
1.  All AG-1 and residentially zoned developments shall provide a minimum 50-foot wide natural, undisturbed buffer with a ten-foot improvement setback along all public streets. 
2.  All nonresidentially (except AG-1) zoned developments shall provide a minimum 50-foot wide landscape strip along all public streets. 
3.  A minimum 15-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided along any interior property line adjacent to a nonresidential zoning and/or use. 
4.  Large, overstory trees shall be planted 40 to 60 feet on center and shall be located along both sides of all public streets (except residential streets). 
5.  Small, understory trees shall be planted ten to 30 feet on center and shall be located along both sides of residential streets. 
6.  Street trees shall be a minimum three inch caliper. 
7.  Street trees shall be selected from Appendix E of the Fulton County Tree Preservation Ordinance and Administrative Guidelines or as may be approved by the Fulton County Arborist. 
12M.4.B. Screening. 
1.  Refuse areas and receptacles shall be placed in the least visible location from public streets and shall be enclosed on three sides with opaque walls. The 4th side shall be a self-closing gate made from noncombustible materials. Opaque walls shall be a minimum of 12 inches higher than the receptacle. Wall materials shall be noncombustible brick, stone, or split-faced concrete masonry block. Refuse receptacles shall not be placed within 100 feet of an existing residential or AG-1 (Agricultural) zoning district. 
2.  Screening walls shall be screened with a hedge of evergreen shrubbery, a minimum of two feet in height at planting. 
3.  Accessory site features are prohibited in the front yard of any property. 
4.  Accessory site features located on the ground shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way, any residential use, or any residential or AG-1 zoning category by one of the following: placement behind the building, 100% opaque fencing, berm or vegetative screen planted to buffer standards. 
5.  Accessory site features on a roof shall be screened by a parapet or other architectural feature or as approved by the director. 
6.  Fencing materials along public streets and side yards are restricted to brick, stone, iron, decorative wrought iron, and treated wood. 
7.  Chain link fencing may be used only along golf courses, play fields, and other recreational areas. All chain link fencing shall be black or hunter green vinyl coated. 
8.  When required, fencing material around detention/retention facilities shall be black or hunter green vinyl coated chain link fence. 
9.  Retaining walls shall be faced with or constructed of stone, brick, or decorative concrete modular block only. 
10.  All parking and loading areas shall be screened from public streets by either a minimum four-foot high berm and/or a continuous hedge of evergreen shrubs. 
12M.4.C. Sidewalks/Pedestrian Paths. 
1.  Sidewalks are required along all public and private road frontages (except alleys) and shall meet all applicable Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards. 
2.  Sidewalks and other paths (multi-purpose or pedestrian) shall be illustrated on the site plan submitted at the time of application for a Land Disturbance Permit. 
3.  Sidewalks shall be a minimum width of five feet. 
4.  Pedestrian paths may be constructed of either colored/textured materials or conventional sidewalk materials and shall be clearly identified. 
5.  Multi-use paths for bicycles and pedestrians may be substituted for the required sidewalks as approved by the director and the traffic engineer when the path is part of the Fulton County Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan. 
6.  Multi-use paths designed for use by bicyclists and pedestrians shall be 12 feet wide. 
7.  Multi-use paths designed with separate paths for bicyclists and pedestrians shall be 15 feet wide, ten feet for bicycles and five feet for pedestrians. 
8.  Street furniture shall be located outside the specified width of any path. 
9.  Sidewalks and paths shall be connected to signalized crosswalks where applicable. 
10.  Sidewalks and paths shall be designed to minimize direct auto-pedestrian interaction. 
11.  Sidewalks and paths should be direct and convenient routes between points of origin (such as a bus stop) and destination (such as a shop, bank, etc). 
12.  Pedestrian access should be provided to all entrances including access from rear parking areas. 
13.  Inter-parcel connectivity shall be required for multiuse, pedestrian paths and sidewalks. 
12.M.4.D. Lighting. 
1.  A lighting plan for open parking lots and pedestrian paths shall be submitted for approval prior to the issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit. 
2.  Street lights shall be installed on all interior streets within community crossroads, as identified in the 2015 South Fulton Comprehensive Amendment for the Cedar Grove Community Policies and Strategies. 
3.  Open parking lots and walkways providing access thereto shall be lighted at a minimum of two foot candles measured at grade level. 
4.  The maximum to minimum foot candle level shall not exceed a twelve to one (12:1) ratio. 
5.  Shoe box, cobra lighting fixtures and neon lighting are prohibited. 
6.  Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than 1,800 lumens, and all flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than 900 lumens, shall not emit any direct light above a horizontal plane through the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire. 
7.  Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than 1,800 lumens, and all flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than 900 lumens, shall be mounted at a height equal to or less than the value 3 + (D/3), where D is the distance in feet to the nearest property boundary. The maximum height of the luminaire may not exceed 20 feet. 
8.  Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of 1,800 lumens or less, and all flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or lamps rated at 900 lumens or less, may be used without restriction to light distribution or mounting height, except that if any spot of flood luminaire rated 900 lumens or less is aimed, directed, or focused such as to cause direct light from the luminaire to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public ways, the luminaire shall be redirected or its light output controlled as necessary to eliminate such conditions. 
9.  Luminaires used for public-roadway illumination may be installed at a maximum height of 25 feet and may be positioned at that height up to the edge of any bordering property. 
10.  All temporary emergency lighting needed by police, fire or other emergency services, as well as all emergency vehicular luminaires, shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
11.  All hazard warning luminaires required by federal regulatory agencies are exempt from the requirements of this article, except that all luminaries used must be red and must be shown to be as close as possible to the federally required minimum lumen output requirement for the specific task. 
12.  Luminaires used primarily for sign illumination may be mounted at any height to a maximum of 25 feet, regardless of lumen rating. 
13.  Lighting fixtures used to illuminate an outdoor advertising sign shall be mounted on the top of the sign structure. All such fixtures shall comply with the shielding requirements of Section 1.10.3(A). Bottom-mounted outdoor advertising-sign lighting is prohibited. 
14.  Existing outdoor advertising structures shall be brought into conformance with this code within five years from the date of adoption of this provision. 
15.  The use of laser source light or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment is prohibited. 
16.  The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes is prohibited. 
17.  Permanent mounted exterior neon lights are prohibited. 
18.  Back-lit awnings and roof mounted lights are prohibited. 
12M.4.E. Building Design. 
1.  Developments shall include architectural elements such as columns, arcades, covered entry-walkways, arches, facade offsets, windows, balconies, offset walls, clock towers, cupolas and/or courtyards. 
2.  The principle entry area of a building shall be articulated and express greater architectural detail than other portions of the building. 
3.  Shop front buildings shall utilize a parapet at all street frontages. 
4.  All buildings shall be oriented to face a street or a courtyard. 
5.  All primary entrances shall face the street or courtyard. 
6.  All primary entrances which face a street shall be at street level. 
7.  Buildings are limited to 35 feet in height. 
8.  The exterior wall materials of nonresidential buildings shall consist of a minimum of 60 percent (per vertical wall plane) of the following: brick, stone or clapboard (or an equivalent alternative treatment approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development). 
9.  The exterior wall materials of residential buildings shall consist of a minimum of 60 percent (per vertical wall plane) of the following: brick, stone, cement stucco, split-faced block natural treated wood and/or cement based artificial wood siding, solid plank, cementitious plank, or horizontal clapboard siding (or an equivalent alternative treatment approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development). 
10.  Any nonresidential building facade shall have a minimum of 25% fenestration or as may be approved by the director. Black glass and/or tinted glass is prohibited. 
11.  Accent wall materials on residential and nonresidential buildings shall consist of glass, architecturally treated concrete masonry, precast stone, or stucco (or an equivalent alternative treatment approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development) and shall not exceed 40 percent per vertical wall plane. 
12.  To the extent any rear or side of any building is visible from any public street or single family residence, architectural treatment shall continue through the rear or side. 
13.  Exterior finishes for accessory structures shall be consistent with the principle structure. 
14.  Fuel pumps, canopies and associated gasoline station service areas shall be located at the rear of the structure, not between the building and the street, to allow the building to be the spatial edge of the streetscape. 

 Spatial edge of streetscape 
15.  For large commercial/retail buildings variations in facade, roofline and depth shall be provided to lend the appearance of multi-tenant occupancy. 
16.  All building plans submitted as an application for a building permit shall clearly indicate all of the proposed building materials and colors for each facade as described herein. The plans should clearly show the location and calculate the amount/percentage of all building materials per facade. 
17.  Roof mounted flagpoles are prohibited 
12M.4.F. Permitted Colors. 
1.  Permitted colors for exterior walls, building components, sign structures, accent and decorative elements shall be as specified by Table 12M or as approved by the director. 
Table 12M  Permitted Colors for Exterior Walls, Building Components, Sign Structure,  Accent and Decorative Elements 
The following numbers refer to the Pantone Matching System, an International Color Matching System 

 
12M.3.G. Roofs. 
1.  Allowable roof materials for pitched roofs are asphalt shingles, composition shingles, natural wood shingles, wood shake, slate, terra cotta, or as may be approved by the director. 
2.  Roof colors shall be gray, brown, terra-cotta or green. Reflective and metallic colors are allowed only when not visible from a street. 
3.  Permissible roofs are gable, pyramidal, hip or decorative parapets. No parapet shall be required to be greater than four feet above the roof line. Shed roofs are permitted over porches, additions, and accessory structures. 
12M.4.H. Parking. 
1.  All off-street parking for townhouses and multi-family buildings shall be located to the side, rear or enclosed. 
2.  A minimum of 50% of the required surface parking for out-parcels shall be located at the rear of the building. 
3.  On-street parking is allowed subject to the approval of the director. 
4.  No parking or loading area shall be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing or storing of any vehicle, equipment, materials or supplies. 
5.  All developments must provide space for parking bicycles. This area may be within the parking lot or courtyard. A bike rack, permanently attached to the ground accommodating a bicycle lock or chain. 
12M.4.I. Miscellaneous Provisions. 
1.  All utilities shall be located underground. 
(Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11) 
12M.5. - Signs. 
1.  The architectural color standards of the overlay district apply to the sign structure and not the sign face. 
2.  Sign structures and faces constructed of wood or canvas materials are prohibited. 
3.  Window signs are prohibited. 
(Res. No. 08-0493, 6-4-08) 
12M.6. - Severability. 
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Article, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
12M.7. - Appeals. 
Any persons aggrieved by a final decision of the Department of Environment and Community Development relating to this article may appeal such final decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals by filing in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly why the final decision is contrary to law per the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision of the department is rendered. 
12M.8. - Adoption and effective date. 
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, the Fulton County Board of Commissioners does hereby ordain, resolve and enact the foregoing Article XII-M to the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County, Georgia. 
Design Guidelines for the Cedar Grove Community 
The purpose of these design guidelines is to help preserve the rural nature of the Cedar Grove Community, the night sky, green space, vistas, the "country" feel, and open space. These guidelines are encouraged but are not standards. Therefore, noncompliance does not necessitate variances. 
Site design: 
All design strategies shall minimize changes to the existing topography and loss of mature vegetation and water features. 
Minimize level grading. New developments should step with landforms and maximize preservation of existing vegetation and trees. Level grading of entire lots is to be avoided. 
Transitions at property lines should seem natural for the surrounding terrain. Where the existing terrain is generally level, avoid newly graded slopes greater than 1:3 at property lines. 
Cut and fill slopes should be rounded where they meet natural grade to blend with natural slope. 
Natural contouring and re-vegetation are encouraged. Retaining walls should be faced with indigenous rock, brick and/or constructed to blend with adjacent surroundings. 
Storm water retention for multiple sites should be combined into a lake as opposed to individual drainage ponds. 
Permanent conservation easements should be established to protect water sheds, view sheds, and rare habitats. 
Buildings, Courtyards: 
Buildings should be oriented to avoid summer overheating. 
Locate courtyards for optimum southern exposure in winter and provide for shading in the summer. 
Locate buildings so that solar heat is naturally reduced on hot summer days by landscape strips and trees. 
Coordinate corner buildings with adjacent developments. Generally, the primary mass of a building on a corner should not be placed at an angle to the corner. Angled or sculpted building corners and open plazas should not be precluded from corners. Vertical focal points to visually anchor corners are encouraged. 
Street Standards: 

 
Culs-de-sac are prohibited unless approved by the director. 
Parking: 
On-street parking (parallel, diagonal, and head-in) is encouraged. 
All developments shall provide connectivity to adjacent developments to link buildings and open spaces together to minimize vehicular traffic and other impacts. 
Courtyards should include such features as sculptures or fountains as focal points, moveable seating and tables, sunny and shaded areas, several entrances into courtyards, variety of textures and colors for visual interest, landscaping, covered and uncovered outdoor passageways. 
Architectural features/enhancements: 
Trim to include eaves, corner boards, gable and eave boards, pediments, friezes, lintels, sills, quoins, belt courses, balustrades; 
Gables, dormers, pillars, posts, porches, recessed windows and doors, cupolas, bay windows; 
Half-rounded or quarter-rounded roof gutters and down spouts integrated with trim; 
Glass storefronts, transom windows, building wall offsets, projections, recesses, floor level changes, roof-line offsets; 
Architectural treatments of front facades shall continue major features around all visibly exposed sides of a building. 
Restaurants with outdoor seating should allow for ease of pedestrian circulation, adequate shade through the use of extended awnings, canopies, or large umbrellas, provide outdoor trash receptacles, and maintain clean and litter-free premises. 
View Sheds: 
All development proposals should arrange buildings to preserve views from adjacent properties and streets. 
Locate courtyards, surface parking, and open spaces to align with view sheds from adjacent properties. 
Locate drives, parking, and open spaces on high points. Avoid placing buildings except churches or public buildings of high architectural quality on ridge lines. 
All new developments will be reviewed with respect to topography and existing landforms, existing vegetation and trees, soil properties and bed rock depth, existing watercourses, floodway and flood plain areas, drainage patterns, climatic factors and view sheds. 
All new developments will be reviewed for land use and site organization in relation to building form, character, and scale of existing and proposed development, sensitivity and nature of adjoining land uses, location of adjacent roads, rights-of-way, driveways, offstreet vehicular connections, pedestrian ways, access points, easements, existing structures and other built improvements, prehistoric and historic sites, structures and routes, and any other features that may be impacted or impact the proposed new development. 
ARTICLE XIIM(1). - CEDAR GROVE AGRICULTURAL OVERLAY DISTRICT (Added 12/5/07)[25] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Editor's note— Adopted by the board of commissioners December 5, 2007. 

12M(1).1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the Cedar Grove Agricultural Overlay District is to protect the natural areas and ensure responsibly planned economic and social growth. Within the Cedar Grove Agricultural Overlay District, the Mixed Use District (MIX-CGA) and the Community Unit Plan District (CUP-CGA) allow for developments with a mix of uses for residents to live, work and relax. To further protect the rural land and natural resources of the area, standards have been established to provide for green space and open space throughout the district. Agriculturally zoned properties and rural services will remain prevalent throughout the area. The Cedar Grove Agricultural District will ensure that mixed-use future growth occurs and that many types of housing for all incomes and ages will be provided. The developments will provide connectivity for pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists. 
(Res. No. 07-0934, 12-5-07) 
12M(1).2. - Cedar Grove agricultural overlay district regulations. 
The Cedar Grove Agricultural Overlay District applies to all properties located in that portion of South Fulton County bordered to the west by the Chattahoochee River, to the south by Coweta County, and to the east by Cascade-Palmetto Highway (SR 154) that are not within the municipal limits of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country except as noted in section 12M(1).7. 
(Res. No. 07-0934, 12-5-07) 
12M(1).3. - Architectural review process. 
Prior to issuance of a land disturbance permit (LDP) or a building permit, the applicant shall submit details of exterior materials, colors, landscape strips, buffers, signage, lighting, parking, streets and paths, entrances, design and architectural features of the proposed site and building which demonstrate compliance with the design standards set forth herein. 
Prior to the issuance of an LDP or building permit, the community will be allowed ten working days to review the application. An application which otherwise conforms to applicable codes and regulations shall not be delayed issuance of an LDP or building permit for more than ten working days due to this review and comment process. 
Fulton County staff will review all applications for land disturbance permits, building permits and sign permits for compliance with the standards of this overlay district and upon determination of compliance will provide a certificate of endorsement (CoE) in the form of signing the formally submitted plans and drawings. 
(Res. No. 07-0934, 12-5-07) 
12M(1).4. - Permitted uses in MIX-CGA and CUP-CGA districts. 
Within the MIX-CGA and CUP-CGA districts, land and structures may be used in accordance with the standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or allowed by administrative permit or use permit shall be prohibited. 
Accessory Uses. A building or lot may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
_____ 

 
(Res. No. 07-0934, 12-5-07) 
12M(1).5. - development standards for MIX-CGA and CUP-CGA districts. 

 
(Res. No. 07-0934, 12-5-07) 
12M(1).6. - Additional development standards for MIX-CGA and CUP-CGA districts. 
A.  Buildings. 
1.  All buildings shall be oriented to face the street and or courtyard. 
2.  Display windows shall be oriented to face the street and or courtyard, and be at street level. 
3.  All primary entrances be oriented to face the street and or courtyard, and be at street level. 
4.  Any nonresidential building facade shall have a minimum of 25 percent fenestration or as may be approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development. 
B.  Residential Uses. 
1.  All residential structures be oriented to face the street and or courtyard. 
2.  A street-facing door (excluding garage door) for each unit is required. 
3.  No front-loaded, attached garage shall protrude beyond the front facade of a building. 
4.  Fence height shall not exceed three feet in the front yard and six feet in the rear and side yards. 
5.  Front yard fences shall be non-opaque. Opaque fences are permitted in side and rear yards. Chain link fences (black or green vinyl-coated only) are permitted in rear yards only. 
6.  Gated communities are prohibited. 
C.  Gasoline Service Stations. 
1.  Fuel pumps, canopies and associated gasoline station service areas shall be located at the rear of the lot. and not between the building and the street. 
D.  Parking. 
1.  All off-street parking for non-residential buildings, townhouses, and multi-family buildings shall be located to the side or rear. 
2.  A minimum of 75 percent of the required surface parking shall be oriented to the rear of building. 
3.  No surface parking area shall be larger than 65,340 square feet unless separated by a street, lane, alley or building. 
4.  On-street surface parking spaces located adjacent to the front property line shall be counted toward the minimum number of parking spaces required for that lot. 
5.  The required number of off-street parking spaces may be reduced as approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development. 
6.  Shared parking shall be permitted as approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development. 
7.  When surface parking located to the rear is along a (side) street right-of-way, the parking may occur along such frontage for a maximum of 120 linear feet. 
8.  When surface parking abuts a street right-of-way, a minimum four-foot wide landscape area shall screen the parking. Within the landscape area, a continuous planting of evergreen shrubs is to be installed at a minimum height of two feet and maintained to a maximum height of three feet. Walls of the same height are also permitted with appropriate pedestrian access to the primary entrance. 
9.  Access lanes and additional curb cuts (other than the primary access drive) shall be located to the side or rear of the property. The maximum width of the access lane and/or driveway is 18 feet. 
10.  Parking decks must include a minimum of 25 percent occupied space (nonresidential) at ground level and the occupied space must be a minimum depth of 50 feet. 
1l.  Decks shall be constructed to conceal vehicles. 
12.  Decks shall include architectural detailing and finish compatible with surrounding buildings. 
13.  Non-residential developments shall provide parking for bicycles. 
14.  Loading areas shall be located in the rear or side yards. 
E.  Street Standards. Per Fulton County Subdivision Regulation Street Standards. 
F.  Block Standards. 
1.  The maximum length for a block is 600 linear feet with the total perimeter length not to exceed 1,680 linear feet. The total area of a block shall not exceed 3.30 acres. 
2.  Any block exceeding 400 feet in length shall include a dedicated alley or lane providing through access. 
G.  Bridges. 
1.  Bridges shall provide pedestrian and bicycle access. 
2.  Bridges shall contain architectural elements compatible with the surrounding area. 
H.  Sidewalks. 
1.  Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of all roads except alleys or lanes or as may be approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development. 
I.  Landscaping. 
1.  Street trees shall be planted on both sides of all roadways except alleys and lanes. 
2.  Except along greenways, a minimum four-foot wide landscape area shall be provided along ail roadways, except alleys and lanes, subject to the approval of the Director of Environment and Community Development. 
(Res. No. 07-0934, 12-5-07) 
12M(1).7. - Area wide development standards. 
The area wide development standards apply to all properties zoned or developed for nonresidential and residential uses including all single family platted subdivisions but excluding all properties zoned for MIX-CGA and CUP-CGA. Stand-alone single family detached dwelling units and minor subdivisions are excluded from these standards with the exception of the South Fulton Parkway buffer and setback requirements (12M(1).7.G.2). 
A.  Streetscape Features. 
1.  Lighting, signage, benches, recycling bins, trash receptacles, drinking fountains, and other street furniture shall be compatible in material, color, finish and architectural style of the surrounding area. 
B.  Lighting. 
1.  Cobra, shoebox light fixtures and neon lighting are prohibited. 
2.  Light fixtures shall be designed and located to minimize spillage onto adjoining properties. 
3.  Lighting shall use a type of shielding to direct lighting downward. 
C.  Telecommunications Uses. 
1.  Telecommunications switchboards, power generators, and other telecommunication relay equipment rooms or floors housing such uses are limited to the following areas of a building: 
(a)  Subterranean levels; 
(b)  First and second floors which are set back a minimum of 50 feet from the street; or 
(c)  Third and fourth floors. 
D.  Cellular Towers. 
1.  Alternative antenna support structures are required for all cell towers. Man-made trees are allowable. 
2.  Height of towers shall not exceed 199 feet. 
3.  The wireless communications facility shall be disassembled and removed from the site within 90 days of the date its use for wireless telecommunications is discontinued. 
E.  Water Towers. 
1.  Towers shall be constructed of natural materials or if metal painted to blend with the landscape. 
2.  Except for safety purposes, water tower lighting shall be allowed only during maintenance periods. Each outdoor light that is not required for safety shall be fully shielded. The safety lighting shall use a type of shielding to provide lighting downward. 
F.  Signage. 
1.  General provisions for all signs. 
a.  Internal illumination is not permitted. If illumination is used, the sign shall be externally illuminated. External lighting is limited to either top mounted fixtures where the fixture is mounted on the top of the sign structure and the light directed downward or ground mounted fixtures where the light fixture is screened from view with landscaping. 
b.  Freestanding and walls signs including both the sign structure and the sign face shall be made out of wood, material designed to have the appearance of natural wood, or metal. Plastic inserts are not allowed. 
c.  Identification pillar sign standards: (examples below) 
i.  Identification pillar signs shall be designed to have the appearance of a four-sided column and shall be constructed of natural stone, wood or materials designed to have the appearance of natural wood. 
ii.  Identification pillar sign faces shall be constructed of natural stone, metal, wood or materials designed to have the appearance of natural wood. Plastic inserts are not allowed. 

2.  Non-residential uses. 
a.  All freestanding signs shall be of shingle design. (examples below) 

b.  The maximum size of the sign face shall be 9 square feet. Sign copy is allowed on both sides of the sign face. 
c.  Wall signs shall be a maximum of 3% of the applicable wall area. 
3.  Residential uses. 
a.  One identification pillar sign or one freestanding sign is allowed per entrance. 
b.  The maximum size of an identification pillar sign structure is eight feet in height and three feet in width per side. 
c.  The maximum size of the sign face on identification pillar signs is nine square feet for each side. 
d.  The sign face shall be directly mounted on or in the identification pillar sign structure or can be mounted to hang perpendicular to the identification pillar sign structure in the manner of a shingle sign. 
e.  Freestanding signs shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
f.  The maximum size of the sign face on freestanding signs shall be nine square feet. Sign copy is allowed on both sides of the sign face. 
G.  Landscaping, Buffers and Setbacks. 
1.  Acceptable evergreen plant material and deciduous trees for undisturbed buffers within the bounds of the CGA Overlay District are limited to the following; Cherry Laurel, Eastern Red Cedar, Canadian Hemlock, Deodar Cedar, American Holly, Nellie R. Stevens Holly (cross between Chinese & English Hollies), Southern Magnolia, Virginia Pine, Red Maple, River Birch, American Hornbeam, Hickories, Sugar Hackherry, American Beech, Sweet Gum, Poplar, Black Gum, Oaks and Linden/Basswood. 
2.  Along the entire frontage of the South Fulton Parkway, a 100-foot natural, undisturbed buffer is required along the right-of-way with an additional ten-foot setback interior to the buffer (except for approved access and utility crossings, improvements and replantings where sparsely vegetated subject to the approval of the Fulton County Arborist). Only existing AG-1 (Agricultural) uses and pedestrian and bicycle paths are permitted in the setback. This standard applies to all properties with frontage on the South Fulton Parkway and along the rights-of-way of public roads which intersect the parkway for a distance of 300 feet measured from the intersection with the parkway, including stand-alone single family-detached dwelling units and minor subdivisions. When the undisturbed buffer is grassed or pasture, the applicant shall plant to county buffer standards or as approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development using materials listed in section 12M(l)7.G.1 of this overlay district. 
3.  Along the entire frontage of the South Fulton Scenic Byways, a 100-foot natural, undisturbed buffer is required along the right-of-way with an additional ten-foot setback interior to the buffer (except for approved access and utility crossings, improvements and replantings where sparsely vegetated subject to the approval of the Fulton County Arborist). Only existing AG-1 (Agricultural) uses and pedestrian and bicycle paths are permitted in the setback. This standard applies to all properties with frontage on a South Fulton Scenic Byway and along the rights-of-way of public roads which intersect a South Fulton Scenic Byway for a distance of 300 feet measured from the intersection with the South Fulton Scenic Byway. When the undisturbed buffer is grassed or pasture, the applicant shall plant to county buffer standards or as approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development using materials listed in section 12M(l)7.G.1 of this overlay district. 
4.  All residential uses except stand-alone single family detached dwelling units and minor subdivisions shall provide a minimum 100-foot wide natural undisturbed buffer along all property lines with an additional ten-foot setback interior to the buffer (except for approved access and utility crossings and replantings where sparsely vegetated). When the undisturbed buffer is grassed or pasture, the applicant shall plant to county buffer standards or as approved by the Director of Environment and Community Development using plant materials listed in section 12M(1)7.G.1 of this overlay district. 
H.  Fences and Walls. 
1.  Fence Standards. 
a.  Opaque fences along any road right-of-way are prohibited. 
b.  Chain link fences along any road right-of-way are prohibited except when constructed as part of recreational courts or recreational fields. 
c.  Allowable fence materials: wood, wire or materials designed to have the appearance of natural wood. 
d.  Allowable fencing types: split rail, 3-4 horizontal rail, crossbuck and horse wire (see examples below) or combination thereof. 

2.  Wall Standards. 
a.  Walls are limited to two feet in height. 
b.  Allowable wall materials: wood, stone or materials designed to have the appearance of natural wood (example below). 

I.  Street Standards. 
1.  All newly created lots shall derive access from internal subdivision streets. 
2.  All streets should follow existing contour with a minimum of cut and fill and shall be designed for interparcel pedestrian and vehicular access. 
J.  Additional Standards. 
1.  Amenity areas and recreational facilities shall be located interior to the subdivision. 
2.  All required detention/retention facilities shall be designed to meet the Fulton County alternative design standards that have the intent of making such facilities an attractive amenity or focal point for the subdivision per current Fulton County Subdivision Regulations. 
3.  Loading areas, dumpster areas, service yards, mechanical and electrical equipment and other utilities, including roof top equipment, shall be screened with evergreen plant material, opaque fences, or structural screens of materials matching the exterior building facade. 
(Res. No. 07-0934, 12-5-07; Res. No. 08-0493, 6-4-08) 
12M(1).8. - Appeals. 
Any persons aggrieved by a final decision of the Department of Environment and Community Development relating to this Article may appeal from such final decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals by filing in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly why the final decision is contrary to law. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision of the department is rendered. 
(Res. No. 07-0934, 12-5-07) 
12M(1).9. - Severability. 
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
(Res. No. 07-0934, 12-5-07) 
ARTICLE XIIN. - FULTON INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS DISTRICT OVERLAY DISTRICT 

12N.1. - Purpose and intent. 
The Board of Commissioners of Fulton County Georgia hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this Resolution to establish a uniform procedure for providing for the protection, enhancement, preservation, unity of design, and use of places, sites, buildings, structures, streets, and landscape features in the Fulton Industrial Business District in accordance with the provisions herein. 
This Resolution is adopted as part of a strategy designed to promote the health, safety, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens of Fulton County through the regulation of design, aesthetics, location, bulk, size of buildings and structure. 
This Resolution also seeks to reduce congestion on the streets; to provide safety from fire, flood and other dangers; provide adequate light and open space; protect the natural environment and address other public requirements, in order to provide sustainable development that involves the simultaneous pursuit of economic prosperity, environmental protection and social quality. 
This Resolution also seeks, among other things, to promote accepted design principles in areas of new development and redevelopment, to raise the level of community understanding and expectation for quality in the built environment, to protect and enhance local aesthetic and functional qualities, and to stimulate business and promote economic development. 
In consideration of the character of the Fulton Industrial Business District, these regulations are to monitor the suitability for certain uses, construction and design, prevent functional and visual disunity, promote desirable conditions for community and commerce and protect property against blight and depreciation. 
(Res. No. 12-0271, 4-4-12) 
12N.2. - Fulton industrial business district overlay district regulations. 
The Fulton Industrial Business District Overlay District applies to all properties zoned or developed for nonresidential uses and residential uses; except single family detached dwelling units within the Fulton Industrial Business District (see map on next page). Within the Fulton Industrial Business District Overlay District, all land and structures shall be used in accordance with the standards of the underlying district. For any parcel in which there is a question as to applicability of the overlay district standards, a final determination will be made by the Director of Planning and Community Services. 
Whenever provisions of this Article conflict with any other Article in the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County or any other Fulton County ordinances, regulations, or resolutions, these standards shall prevail. 

Fulton Industrial Business District Overlay District
(Res. No. 12-0271, 4-4-12) 
12N.3. - All properties within the Fulton industrial business district. 
A.  Development Standards. 
1.  Refuse Areas and Receptacles: 
a)  Refuse areas and receptacles shall be identified on site plans. 
b)  Refuse areas and receptacles shall be placed in the least visible location from the public right-of-way. 
c)  Refuse areas and receptacles shall not be placed within 50 feet of existing residential zoning or use. 
d)  Refuse areas shall be enclosed on three sides with opaque walls. The fourth side shall be a self-closing gate made of non-combustible materials. 
e)  Opaque walls shall be 12 inches higher than the receptacles. 
f)  Opaque walls shall be constructed of same materials and colors as that of the primary building. If primary building material is not a masonry material, the opaque walls shall be constructed of non-combustible brick, stone, split concrete masonry block or other similar material as approved by the Director of Planning and Community Services. 
g)  Where a nonconforming refuse area and receptacle exists on the adoption date of this Article and is visible from a public right-of-way, such refuse area and receptacle shall be brought into conformance with this Article or removed within 24 months of this Article adoption date. 
2.  Retaining Walls: 
a)  Retaining walls, when visible from a public right-of-way, are to be faced with or constructed of stone, brick, decorative concrete modular block or other similar material as approved by the Director of Planning and Community Services 
3.  Sidewalks: 
a)  Sidewalks shall be connected to signalized crosswalks and bus stops where applicable. 
b)  Street furniture shall be located outside the specified width of any sidewalk. 
4.  Building Materials and Architectural Treatments: 
a)  Variations shall be incorporated into all facades visible from the public right-of-way and shall include architecture elements such as columns, arcades, covered entry-walkways, arches, façade offsets, windows, balconies, offset walls, clock towers, cupolas and/or courtyards. 
b)  The principle entry area of a building shall be articulated and express greater architectural detail than other portions of the building. 
c)  The office portion of industrial buildings shall be located in the front portion of buildings, facing the public right-of-way. 
d)  The office portion of industrial buildings shall be designed with a minimum of 40% of their exterior facade as windows. 
e)  Accessory structures/buildings, when visible from a public right-of-way, shall have architectural features consistent with the principle buildings. 
B.  Sign Standards. 
1.  Sign Materials: 
a)  Sign structures and faces constructed of wood or canvas materials are prohibited on all permanent signs. 
(Res. No. 12-0271, 4-4-12) 
12N.4. - Additional standards for all properties designated as industrial on the 2030 Future Development Map with frontage on Fulton Industrial Boulevard. 
A.  Development Standards. 
1.  Buffers and Landscaping: 
a)  A minimum 15-foot wide landscape strip is required along all frontages on Fulton Industrial Boulevard. 
2.  Outside Storage and Display: 
a)  All outside storage is to be screened when visible from Fulton Industrial Boulevard. 
b)  Screening shall be accomplished by a wall or fence of at least 50% opacity in the same colors of the primary building or by a 10 foot landscape strip planted to buffer standards. Lattice style screening and fences and walls constructed out of wood are prohibited. 
3.  Nonresidential Building Materials: 
a)  All exterior walls visible from Fulton Industrial Boulevard shall meet the standards for Exterior Building Walls prescribed for the M1-A Industrial Park District. 
4.  Fence Materials: 
a)  Wood fencing is prohibited. 
B.  Sign Standards. 
1.  Sign Materials: 
a)  Free Standing Sign structures shall be constructed of brick, granite, stone, marble or other material used in the primary building and be in the same colors as the primary building. If primary building materials are non-conforming, the free standing signs shall be constructed of materials prescribed for the M1-A Industrial Park District or other material as approved by the Director of Planning and Community Services. 
(Res. No. 12-0271, 4-4-12) 
12N.5. - All properties designated as industrial marketplace on the 2030 Future Development Map within the Fulton industrial business district. 
A.  Development Standards. 
1.  Accessory Site Features: Other (See 12N.3.A.1 for refuse areas and receptacles) 
a)  Accessory site features are prohibited in the front yard. 
b)  Accessory site features located on the ground shall be screened from view from any street, and any residential zoning or use by one of the following: placement behind the building, 100% opaque fence or wall, berm or vegetative screen planted to buffer standards. 
c)  Accessory site features on a roof shall be screened by a parapet or other architectural feature or as approved by the Director of Planning and Community Services. 
2.  Building Design and Materials: 
a)  Nonresidential Building Materials: 
i)  Industrially zoned buildings: All exterior walls visible from the public right-of-way shall consist of the following: stucco, stone, brick, or other similar alternative building material approved by the Director of Planning and Community Services. 
ii)  Commercially zoned and/or commercially used buildings: All exterior walls shall consist of a minimum of 60% (per vertical plane) of the following: stucco, brick, or stone. Accent wall materials shall consist of glass, architecturally treated concrete masonry or precast stone. Alternative treatments and building materials may be approved by the Director of Planning and Community Services. 
b)  Burglar Bars, Steel gates and Steel Roll Down Curtains: 
i)  Burglar bars, steel gates, and steel roll down curtains are prohibited on the exterior and interior of the structure except at the structures rear. Security grilles are allowed if installed interior to the place of business. Grilles should be of a grid or brick pattern and placed so that the grid is at a uniform height across the business front. Where a nonconforming burglar bar, steel gate or steel roll curtain exists on the adoption date of this Article, such burglar bar, steel gate or steel roll down curtain shall be brought into conformance with this Article or removed within 24 months of this Article adoption date. 
3.  Fence Materials: 
a)  Wood privacy fencing is prohibited. 
B.  Sign Standards. 
1.  Prohibited Signs: 
a)  Window signs are prohibited. 
2.  Sign Materials: 
a)  Free Standing Sign structures shall be constructed of brick, granite, stone, marble or other material used in the primary building and be in the same colors as the primary building. If primary building materials are non-conforming, the free standing signs shall be constructed of materials prescribed for the M1-A Industrial Park District or other material as approved by the Director of Planning and Community Services. 
C.  Sidewalks and Pedestrian Paths. 
1.  Sidewalks: 
a)  All sidewalks are to be a minimum 8 feet wide, of which 2 feet shall be a stamped brick pattern adjacent to the back of the curb. 
b)  All handicap ramps shall be constructed per GDOT and Fulton County standards. 
2.  Pedestrian Paths: 
a)  Pedestrian paths shall be designed to minimize direct auto-pedestrian interaction by such means as striping, elevated walkways and signs. 
E.  Miscellaneous Provisions. 
1.  Outside Storage/Sales: 
a)  Except for provided for in Article 19, the storage and/or sale of goods is prohibited in parking lots and other outside areas outside of the interior or permanently sheltered portions of a building. This standard does not apply to fuel pumps and ATMs. 
(Res. No. 12-0271, 4-4-12) 
12N.7[6]. - Architectural review process. 
Prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit (LDP) or a building permit, the applicant shall submit details of exterior materials, colors, landscape strips, buffers, signage, lighting, parking, streets and paths, entrances, design and architectural features of the proposed site and building which demonstrate compliance with the design standards set forth herein. 
Prior to the issuance of an LDP or building permit, the community will be allowed ten working days to review the application. An application which otherwise conforms to applicable codes and regulations shall not be delayed issuance of an LDP or building permit for more than 10 working days due to this review and comment process. 
Fulton County staff will review all applications for land disturbance permits, building permits and sign permits for compliance with the standards of this Overlay District and upon determination of compliance will provide a Certificate of Endorsement (CoE) in the form of signing the formally submitted plans and drawings. 
(Res. No. 12-0271, 4-4-12) 
12N.8[7]. - Severability. 
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Article, which shall remain in full for and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
(Res. No. 12-0271, 4-4-12) 
12N.9[8]. - Appeals. 
Any persons aggrieved by a final decision of the Department of Planning and Community Services relating to this article may appeal such final decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals by filing in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly, why the final decision is contrary to law per the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision of the department is rendered. 
(Res. No. 12-0271, 4-4-12) 
ARTICLE XVIII. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Editor's note— Adopted by the board of commissioners, April 5, 1989 with subsequent amendments. 

18.1 - Scope. 
The location, design and quantity of off-street parking and loading facilities for every use located in unincorporated Fulton County shall comply with requirements herein. 
18.2 - Parking spaces required. 
Every use shall be served by off-street parking spaces as specified below. Parking spaces shall serve only the designated use and shall be located on the same lot as the use unless another location is authorized in accordance with other provisions of this Zoning Resolution. 
18.2.1 Basic off-street parking requirements. Parking requirements shall be calculated based on the proportion that each use contributes to the total. All areas are expressed in gross square feet of building area unless ground area or some other measure is specified. Any fraction of one-half or larger shall constitute a whole. A bench seat shall consist of 18 inches. 

 

 
18.2.2 Shared parking. (Added 10/4/89) The standards for shared parking may be utilized for any of the combinations of uses shown below on any number of properties when approval is reflected in the conditions of zoning for each such property. Similar provisions are provided under off-site and shared parking requirements in the use permits article for those uses which were not zoned concurrently or as part of a multiple use project. The conditions of zoning or use permit, as applicable, establish the limits of parking requirements among uses and properties, and Fulton County shall not require any contractual relationship among property owners. 
The standards for determining parking requirements in a multiple use development are: 
A.  Determine the minimum amount of parking required for each separate use. 
B.  Multiply each parking requirement by the corresponding percentage for each of the time periods given below. 
C.  Calculate the column total parking requirement for each time period. 
D.  The largest column total is the shared parking requirement. 

 
Example: 
Properties proposed for individual uses would require the following number of parking spaces: 
Office ..... 300 spaces 
Retail ..... 280 spaces 
Entertainment ..... 100 spaces 
Total ..... 680 spaces 
Properties proposed for multiple uses under the provisions for shared parking would require the following number of parking spaces: 

 
Thus, 508 spaces would be needed for this development, a reduction of 172 spaces or 25 percent. 
_____
18.2.3 Reduction of the basic requirement. (Changed 7/5/89) A reduction of the basic off-street parking requirement will be allowed for nonresidential and multifamily developments that locate within 1500 feet of a MARTA rail station which is complete or scheduled for completion within three years. A reduction will be allowed on the following scale whenever pedestrian access is provided between the use and the MARTA rail station as approved by the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 

 
18.2.4 Administrative reduction of spaces constructed. The Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development may authorize a reduction in the total number of parking spaces constructed on a site to no less than 90 percent of the basic requirement when all of following conditions are met: (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
A.  The request for reduction in parking shall show that the reduction is justified on the basis of characteristics unique to the specific proposed use of the property in contrast to the characteristics of other uses within the same category. 
B.  Adequate land area for meeting the basic parking requirement is located on and designed for the site whether at grade or in parking decks. The unconstructed portion of the parking shall be clearly delineated and labeled "Future Parking" on the site plan. 
C.  Prior to granting the reduction in total parking spaces constructed, the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development shall conclude that the reduction is justified, and shall approve, in whole or in part, or deny the request stating the reasons therefore in the report. (Amended 2/7/01) 
D.  If the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development finds that the parking reduction is no longer justified, the director shall notify the owner to construct the number of parking spaces necessary to meet the required level. (Amended 2/7/01) 
E.  Prior to any change in ownership or use, the owner must apply to the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development for an evaluation and confirmation of the reduction. (Amended 2/7/01) 
18.3 - Acceptable locations for off-street parking. 
18.3.1 Parking and loading locations. Note: The minimums required in this subsection may be less than the requirements necessary to accommodate a landscape area or buffer requirement of section 4.23. At a minimum, all required parking spaces must be located on an all weather surface as defined in article III. (Amended 10/4/89, 3/6/91) 
A.  Single family districts. Within single family dwelling districts and the AG-1 District when utilized for a single family dwelling, the parking or storage of vehicles shall be prohibited except on parking spaces as defined in article III. Off-site location of required parking spaces is prohibited. Unenclosed parking spaces may occupy a side yard, and no more than 50 percent of a required rear yard. A maximum of two spaces may be permitted adjoining the entrance to a front entry garage or carport, or adjoining the end of a driveway whenever no garage or carport exists. Garage and carport spaces may count toward the minimum required spaces in single family districts. 
Within the AG-1 and single family districts when utilized for other than a single family dwelling, the parking or storage of vehicles shall be located in accordance with the O-I District requirements stated in (E) below. (Amended 4/5/95) 
The visible storage or parking of more than four vehicles at a single family residence shall be unlawful. Parking or storage of a junk or salvage vehicle shall constitute an unlawful use except that no more than two such vehicles shall be permitted if parked or stored in a garage or carport not visible from a street or adjacent residential property. 
B.  TR, Townhouse Residential District. Individually subdivided parcels shall adhere to single family district standards except that no off-street parking or driveways shall be located within ten feet of any perimeter lot line. Garage carport spaces count toward the minimum required spaces in the TR District. 
C.  A, Apartment Dwelling District. No off-street parking shall be permitted within the required setback for the front yard and the side corner yard. Driveways shall not be located nearer than ten feet to any side or rear property line. No off-street parking space shall be located within 25 feet of any side or rear property line adjacent to a single family dwelling district or use, nor within ten feet of any other property line. TR District requirements shall apply to single family detached units constructed within the A District. 
D.  A-L, Apartment Limited Dwelling District. No off-street parking shall be permitted within the required setback for the front yard and the side corner yard. Driveways shall not be located nearer than ten feet to any side or rear property line. No off-street parking space shall be located within 25 feet of any side or rear property line adjacent to a single family dwelling district or use, nor within ten feet of any other property line. 
E.  O-I, Office/Institutional Districts. No off-street parking shall be permitted within the required setback for the front yard and the side corner yard. No off-street parking shall be permitted within 25 feet of any property line which adjoins a single family residential district or use. 
Off-street loading areas shall be provided in the rear or interior side yards. 
F.  C-1 and C-2, Commercial Districts. The off-street parking location regulations for dwellings, schools, institutions and similar uses are the same as for those uses in the A District. 
Uses permitted in commercial districts other than those devoted to dwellings, schools, institutions, and similar uses shall provide no off-street parking within 25 feet of any property line that adjoins a residential district or use. 
Off-street loading areas shall be provided in the rear or interior side yards. Minimums required in this subsection may be less than the requirements necessary to accommodate a landscape area or buffer required in section 4.23. 
G.  M-1, M-1A and M-2, Industrial Districts. The off-street parking location regulations for dwellings, schools, institutions and similar uses are the same as for those uses in the A District. 
Uses devoted to manufacturing, warehousing, commercial and other uses permitted in industrial districts shall provide no off-street parking within 25 feet of any property line which adjoins a residential use or district. 
18.3.2 Limitation on trucks. (Changed 7/5/89) Except for trucks used in farming the property on which they are located, or trucks used in conjunction with a permitted use, trucks and/or trailers exceeding four tons empty weight shall not be stored or parked in any agricultural or residential zoning district unless engaged in moving household goods or making deliveries. 
18.3.3 Shared driveways. Driveways may be shared in all districts. 
18.3.4 Off-site location of required parking. An administrative permit for off-site parking may be considered in accordance with the provisions of article XIX. 
18.3.5 Landscape areas and buffers. No required parking shall be permitted in any required landscape area or buffer. (See 4.23) 
18.3.6 Vehicles at automotive repair and specialty shops. Vehicles at automotive repair and specialty shops must be serviced and stored within the footprint of the building or at the rear of the structure but outside of any minimum yard. Vehicles must be totally screened from all property lines by a 100 percent opaque fence or wall together with landscape strips and buffers as specified by Article 4.23.1. (Added 06/04/03) 
18.4 - Off-street parking design requirements. 
18.4.1 Angled or parallel parking. Aisles serving off-street parking shall be no fewer than 22 feet in width, except that aisles designed for one-way circulation systems shall be no fewer than 14 feet in width for zero—45-degree parking, 18 feet in width for 46-to-60-degree parking and 22 feet in width for 61-to-90-degree parking. A standard parking space shall measure no fewer than 153 square feet, and shall be no fewer than 8.5 feet wide. Twenty percent of the total parking spaces may be designated as compact car spaces. A compact space shall measure a minimum of 120 square feet with a minimum width of eight feet. Each compact space shall be clearly marked. No part of a vehicle shall overhang into a landscaped portion of a required landscape area. (Amended 3/6/91, 4/5/95) 
18.4.2 Landscape islands. Landscape islands shall be provided throughout parking lots in accordance with the requirements of section 4.23 of this resolution. 
18.4.3 Handicapped parking. Parking spaces designed for handicap persons shall be provided in accordance [with] Georgia law. 
18.5 - Parking for specialized vehicles.(Amended 5/6/92, 03/03/04). 
Specialized vehicles such as earth moving equipment, tractors or other heavy construction vehicles are only to be stored in residential, Agricultural districts and non-residential districts except M-l and M-2 industrial districts during construction under an active building permit and/or land disturbance permit. Other specialized vehicles such as recreational vehicles, campers, buses (including school buses), trailers, mobile home coaches, boats, boat trailers, and limousines used for commercial purposes may be parked or stored in all residential districts under the following conditions: (Also See 18.3.2 for trucks) 
A.  That such vehicles are not used as living quarters. 
B.  That the location of the parking or storage area shall be in the buildable area of the lot and shall not be in front of the principal structure. 
(Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11) 
_____
18.6 - Off-street loading. 
18.6.1 Loading spaces required. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as follows: 

 
18.6.2 Design and arrangement of off-street loading areas. The following standards shall apply to off-street loading areas: 
A.  A loading space shall measure no less than 12 feet by 35 feet and have 14 feet of vertical clearance. 
B.  For any use required to furnish three or more loading spaces, at least one in every three shall measure no less than 12 feet by 55 feet. 
C.  Maneuvering space shall not include required parking spaces or any portion of a public right-of-way. 
18.6.3 Off-street loading location limitations. Off-street loading spaces and maneuvering areas shall be located only in those portions of a lot where off-street parking areas are allowed with the following additional limitations: 
A.  Industrial zoning districts: If the loading and maneuvering areas are across from, or adjacent to, any nonindustrial zoning district, a 50-foot landscaped strip shall be established, behind which the maneuvering and berth space may be located. 
B.  Nonindustrial zoning districts: In the event that spaces and maneuvering areas are to be located in a yard adjacent to any established residential use, a 50-foot landscaped strip shall be established behind which the berths and maneuvering spaces may be located. 
ARTICLE XIX. - ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS AND USE PERMITS (Revised 7/7/99)[27] 

Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
Editor's note— Adopted by the Board of Commissioners, October 5, 1988 and amended 7/7/99. 

19.1 - Scope and intent. 
This article specifies uses which are not classified as permitted uses in zoning districts, and are therefore only allowed through the approval of an administrative permit or a use permit. The standards which apply to each use are enumerated and must be met in order for an application to be granted. 
In the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, the Board of Commissioners may exercise limited discretion in evaluating the site proposed for a use which requires a use permit. In exercising such discretion pertaining to the subject use, the Board of Commissioners may consider: (Amended 12/4/91, 2/7/96) 
(1)  Whether the proposed use is consistent with the land use or economic development plans adopted by the Board of Commissioners; 
(2)  Whether the proposed use violates statutes, ordinances or regulations governing land development, such as, but not limited to, the Fulton County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance [Code ch. 26, art. II] and the Metropolitan River Protection Act; 
(3)  The effect of the proposed activity on traffic flow along adjoining streets; 
(4)  The location of off-street parking; 
(5)  The number, size and type of signs proposed for the site; 
(6)  The amount and location of open space; 
(7)  Protective screening; 
(8)  Hours and manner of operation of the proposed use; 
(9)  Outdoor lighting; 
(10)  Ingress and egress to the property; 
(11)  Compatibility with surrounding land use. 
In granting such permits, conditions may be attached as are deemed necessary in the particular case for the protection or benefit of neighbors to ameliorate the effects of the proposed development. 
19.2 - Application and approval. 
Uses allowable with an "administrative permit" and the minimum standards for such uses are listed in section 19.3 of this article. 
Uses allowable with a "use permit" and the minimum standards for such uses are listed in section 19.4 of this article. 
19.2.1 Application of regulations. (Amended 7/7/99) Uses enumerated herein may be authorized by administrative permit or use permit, as specified. The regulations contained in this article shall not apply to any permitted use in any zoning district. 
19.2.2 Administrative permits. (Amended 7/7/99) Any use authorized by administrative permit shall be approved and permitted by the Director of the Environment and Community Development Department whenever the proposed use complies fully with the requirements of the subject property's zoning district and standards as set forth in section 19.3. Each requested use for which an administrative permit is required shall be assigned an administrative permit number and charged a fee. Said permit shall be posted on site prior to commencement of use. Variances to administrative permit standards may be requested by petition to the Board of Zoning Appeals. In certain cases, conditions are imposed by the Director of the Public Works Department with respect to roadway, water, sewer and/or other infrastructure improvements, and rights-of-way dedications which must be met. 
19.2.3 Use permits. Any use authorized by use permit may be approved by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with standards enumerated under each use (section 19.2.4) provided: (Amended 11/3/93, 4/5/95, 7/7/99) 
A.  The subject use is allowable in the subject property's zoning district, 
B.  The standards for the use permit as specified in article 19 can be met, as well as use permit considerations pursuant to section 19.2.4, (Amended 04/05/95) 
C.  A public hearing has been held in relation to the use permit before the Fulton County Planning Commission and the Fulton County Board of Commissioners in conformance with notice standards outlined in article XXVIII, 
D.  Recommendations have been received from the Fulton County Environment and Community Development Department staff and the Fulton County Planning Commission, and 
E.  Conditions imposed with respect to right-of-way dedication and roadway, water, sewer and/or other infrastructure improvements are met. 
1.  Applications. Use permit requests shall require a separate application when included with a petition for rezoning. Each requested use for which a use permit is required shall be charged a standard use permit fee and assigned a use permit number which will be listed on the petition for rezoning. A public hearing, notice and evaluation shall be provided in accordance with article XXVIII for each requested use permit. Each request shall be voted on separately, and each use permit request submitted as part of a rezoning petition shall be treated independently in the minutes of the Board of Commissioners meeting. 
2.  Expiration. All use permits shall expire within three years from the date of approval by the Board of Commissioners or as otherwise conditioned unless a land disturbance permit, building permit, business license or certificate of occupancy has been issued. Requests for extensions shall be made in accordance with the standards for extensions contained in article XXVIII. (Amended 6/5/91) 
3.  Re-application. The same or substantially similar petition for a use permit which has been denied by the Board of Commissioners shall not be resubmitted to the Environment and Community Development Department for a period of six months from the date of the denial. 
4.  Variances. Variances to use permit standards contained in section 19.4 for receiving a use permit may be considered by the board of commissioners concurrently with a use permit petition if submitted with such petition. Such a variance request shall not require a separate variance application, but shall be assigned a variance number, charged a standard variance fee and be listed on the use permit petition as a concurrent variance in accordance with article XXII, Appeals, section 22.9. 
F.  Accessory uses. Structures and land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any approved use. (Added 4/3/02) 
19.2.4 Use permit considerations. In the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, the board of commissioners may exercise limited discretion in evaluating the site proposed for a use which requires a use permit. In exercising such discretion pertaining to the subject use, the board of commissioners shall consider each of the following: (Amended 12/04/91, 04/05/95, 02/07/96, 07/07/99) 
(1)  Whether the proposed use is consistent with the comprehensive land use plan and/or revitalization plans adopted by the board of commissioners; 
(2)  Compatibility with land uses and zoning districts in the vicinity of the property for which the use permit is proposed; 
(3)  Whether the proposed use may violate local, state and/or federal statutes, ordinances or regulations governing land development; 
(4)  The effect of the proposed use on traffic flow, vehicular and pedestrian, along adjoining streets; 
(5)  The location and number of off-street parking spaces; 
(6)  The amount and location of open space; 
(7)  Protective screening; 
(8)  Hours and manner of operation; 
(9)  Outdoor lighting; and 
(10)  Ingress and egress to the property. 
In granting such permits, conditions may be attached as are deemed necessary in the particular case for the protection or benefit of neighbors to ameliorate the effects of the proposed development/use. 
19.2.4.5 Additional restrictions. Any use authorized by administrative permit or use permit shall comply with all other county regulations, zoning district regulations, conditions of zoning approval and other regulations contained herein. All buffers required shall have a ten-foot improvement setback in accordance with section 4.2.3. The reduction of said setback shall be subject to the approval of the department of environment and community development in accordance with article 22. Whenever a standard contained in this section is in conflict with another provision of this resolution, the more restrictive provision shall prevail. 
Unless otherwise specified, standards, conditions and stipulations attached to a use permit by the board of commissioners shall supersede conflicting zoning conditions approved on the same site. 
(Amended 7/7/99) 
19.3 - Minimum administrative permit standards. 
19.3.1. Alternative Antenna Support Structure To Exceed The District Height (Added 03/5/97, Amended 05/17/06) 
Intent. Pursuant to Section 704(a) of the Federal Telecommunications Policy Act of 1996, it is not the intent of this section to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services in unincorporated Fulton County. It is the intent of this Section to address the aesthetic effect of telecommunication facilities on our landscapes, our citizens' demands for these services, and the needs of service providers. 
A.  Required Districts: All 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Alternative structures are not allowed as an accessory to a single family use or as a principal use in a single family district. 
2.  Alternative structures must be set back a distance equal to the height of the structure adjacent to residential and/or AG-1 zoned property unless said structure is proposed to be located on an existing building. 
3.  Above ground equipment shelters shall be surrounded by a minimum 10-foot wide landscape strip planted to buffer standards unless the Fulton County Arborist determines that existing plant materials are adequate. 
4.  Roof top antennas and associated structures shall not project more than 10 feet above roof line. 
5.  Height shall not exceed 130 feet measured from the finished grade of the base structure. 
6.  The alternative structure shall comply with applicable state and local statutes and ordinances, including, but not limited to, building and safety codes. Alternative structures which have become unsafe or dilapidated shall be repaired or removed pursuant to applicable state and local statutes and ordinances. 
7.  Facilities shall not be artificially lighted except to assure human safety or as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
8.  Communication towers shall be designed and constructed to ensure that the structural failure or collapse of the tower will not create a safety hazard to adjoining properties, according to applicable Federal Standards which may be amended from time to time. 
9.  Telecommunications facilities shall not be used for advertising purposes and shall not contain any signs for the purpose of advertising. 
10.  Any telecommunications facility may co-locate on any existing tower, pole or other structure as long as there is no increase in height to the existing facility. 
11.  A telecommunication facility that ceases operation for a period of 12 consecutive months shall be determined to have terminated and shall be removed within 90 days of termination at the property owner's expense. It shall be the duty of both the property owner and the tower owner to notify the county in writing of any intent to abandon the use of the tower. 
12.  An application for a telecommunications facility shall be submitted in accordance with the Department's Plan Review submittal requirements. 
13.  An application for a telecommunication facility shall include a certification from a registered engineer that the structure will meet the applicable design standards for wind loads. 
14.  Communications facilities shall not be located in 100-year flood plain or delineated wetlands. 
19.3.1(1) Amateur radio antenna to exceed the district height. (See Use Permit 19.4.5) (Added 7-7-93) 
Intent. It is the intent of this article to regulate the placement of amateur towers in a manner that does not impose on public health, safety, or general welfare. The following regulations on design, location, placement, and height limits of antennas in residential districts implements Fulton County's governmental interests in land planning, aesthetics and public safety by requiring the following standards: 
A.  Required districts: All 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Antennas shall be located in the rear yard. 
2.  The maximum height shall be 90 feet. Any request to exceed the maximum height shall require a use permit (See 19.4.5). 
3.  All antennas shall be set back from all property lines one-third the height of the antenna or the district setback requirements, whichever is greater. The antenna must be located a distance equal to or greater than the antenna height from the nearest residential dwelling, excluding the owner's primary dwelling or structure. 
4.  Antennas shall not be lighted. 
5.  All antennas must be constructed with an anti-climbing device. 
6.  Antennas shall be painted in a neutral color identical or closely compatible with surroundings. 
7.  All guy wires must be anchored on site and outside of right-of-way. 
19.3.1(2) Antenna, Tower, and Associated Structures (Radio, T.V., Microwave Broadcasting, Etc.), to Exceed the District Height (Title amended 3-6-91, amended 3-5-97, 5-17-06) 
Intent. Pursuant to Section 704(a) of the Federal Telecommunications Policy Act of 1996, it is not the intent of this section to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services in unincorporated Fulton County. It is the intent of this Section to address the aesthetic effect of telecommunication facilities on our landscapes, our citizens' demands for these services, and the needs of service providers. 
The following regulations on design, location, placement, and height limits of antennas implement Fulton County's governmental interest in land planning, aesthetics and public safety by requiring the following Administrative Permit Standards: 
A.  Required Districts: O-I, C-1, C-2, M-1A, M-1, M-2 (See Use Permit, Section 19.4.7, for use in residential and AG-1 districts.) 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Tower/accessory structures must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower adjacent to residential and/or AG-1 zoned property. 
2.  Tower and/or associated facilities shall be enclosed by fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
3.  A minimum 10-foot wide landscape strip planted to buffer standards shall be required around the facility exterior to any fence or wall unless the Fulton County Arborist determines that existing plant materials are adequate. 
4.  Height shall not exceed 200 feet measured from the finished grade of the base structure. 
5.  The tower shall comply with applicable state and local statutes and ordinances, including, but not limited to, building and safety codes. Towers which have become unsafe or dilapidated shall be repaired or removed pursuant to applicable state and local statutes and ordinances. 
6.  Facilities shall not be artificially lighted except to assure human safety or as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
7.  Communication towers shall be designed and constructed to ensure that the structural failure or collapse of the tower will not create a safety hazard to adjoining properties, according to applicable Federal Standards which may be amended from time to time. 
8.  Telecommunications facilities shall not be used for advertising purposes and shall not contain any signs for the purpose of advertising. 
9.  Any telecommunications facility may co-locate on any existing tower, pole or other structure as long as there is no increase in height to the existing facility. 
10.  A commercial telecommunication facility that ceases operation for a period of 12 consecutive months shall be determined to have terminated and shall be removed within 90 days of termination at the property owner's expense. It shall be the duty of both the property owner and the tower owner to notify the county in writing of any intent to abandon the use of the tower. 
11.  Communication facilities not requiring FAA painting/marking shall have either a galvanized finish or [be] painted a dull blue, gray, or black finish. 
12.  An application for a telecommunications facility shall be submitted in accordance with the Department's Plan Review submittal requirements. 
13.  An application for a telecommunication facility shall include a certification from a registered engineer that the structure will meet the applicable design standards for wind loads. 
14.  Communications facilities shall not be located in 100-year flood plain or delineated wetlands. 
19.3.2 Club. 
A.  Required districts: O-I, MIX, C-1, C-2, M-1A, M-1, M-2. 
B.  Standards: 
1.  All buildings and accessory uses other than parking shall be located at least 50 feet from all property lines of any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single-family. 
2.  Permitted curb cut access shall not be from a local street. 
3.  Outdoor facilities within 200 feet of any residential district or dwelling shall limit the hours of operation from 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
4.  Outdoor recreational facilities shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines of any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single-family, except as otherwise permitted with an administrative permit for recreational court or swimming pool. 
19.3.3. Event, Special Indoor/Outdoor. (Amended 9-4-91, 7-7-93, 6-1-94, 4-5-95, 8-6-03, 4-5-06) As applicable, special events are subject to the requirements of other Fulton County Departments, such as Emergency Medical Services Plans, Emergency Planning and Preparedness Plans, tent permits, pyrotechnics permits, food service permits, etc. 
A.  Required Districts: O-I, MIX, C-1, C-2, M-1A, M-1, M-2, AG-1 and residential districts in conjunction with an institutional use, such as a place of worship or a school, or for the benefit of charity such as tours of homes, show houses, and the like. Event is local in nature and marketed only to the local community. Organizer anticipates less than 250 attendees at any one time. 
B.  Standards: 
1.  No more than two Administrative Permits shall be granted per year and no permit shall be effective for more than 14 consecutive days for a single event on the same property. An application for said permit shall be made no less than 14 days prior to the event. Said permit must be posted on site such that it is visible from the street. 
2.  The hours of operation shall be 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday and 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Friday through Saturday. 
3.  Two copies of a drawing, no larger in size than 11" x 17", with dimensions (distances in feet) of the activity's location from the site's property lines and other minimum distance requirements as specified by this Section shall be submitted to the Department of Environment and Community Department for approval. Said drawing shall also depict north arrow, curb cuts and traffic patterns. 
4.  The applicant shall provide a notarized written permission statement of the property owner or lease holder of the subject site to the Department of Environment and Community Development. A 24-hour contact number of the property owner or lease holder shall be provided along with permit application. 
5.  The entire property shall comply with the zoning district's setback requirements. 
6.  No temporary sanitary facility or trash receptacle may be located within 100 feet of a property line of any residential use. 
7.  No tent, table or other temporary structure shall be located within 250 feet of a residential structure. 
8.  Sales from vehicles are prohibited. 
9.  The entire property shall comply with Fulton County's parking requirements. 
10.  No equipment, vehicle, display or sales activity shall block access to a public facility such as a telephone booth, mail box, parking meter, fire hydrant, fire alarm box, traffic control box, driveway or other access point. 
11.  A sound level of 65 dBA shall not be exceeded at adjacent property lines of any residential use. 
12.  Signage shall be in accordance with Article 33, Section 33.4.12.A.10. (16-0363, pts. 2, 3, 5-4-16) 
19.3.3(1) Food truck. As applicable, Food Trucks are subject to the requirements of the Fulton County Board of Health and/or Fulton County Departments, such as the Tax Assessors, etc. 
A.  Required Districts: O-I, MIX, C-1, C-2, M-1A, M-1, M-2. 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Food Trucks shall not conduct business or operate under this Article in the public right-of-way. 
2.  The allowable dimensions of a Food Truck (including all attachments, except hinged canopies that open to reveal food serving areas) shall be up to 18.5 feet long, 10.5 feet tall, and 8 feet wide. 
3.  The Food Truck use permit shall be valid for a period of 1-year after issuance and applicable to the approved site only. 
4.  The Food Truck use permit shall be limited to no more than 4 days per week (Monday-Sunday) at the approved site. 
5.  The hours of operation for Food Trucks shall be 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday and 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Friday through Saturday. 
6.  Food Trucks shall not operate on any private property without the prior consent of the property owner(s). The applicant shall provide a notarized written permission statement of the property owner(s) as they appear on the current tax records of Fulton County as retrieved by the County's Geographic Information System (GIS). If the current ownership has recently changed and does not match the GIS record the applicant may provide a copy of the new deed as proof of ownership. A 24-hour contact number of the property owner(s) shall be provided along with permit application. 
7.  All Food Trucks shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any eating establishment and 100 feet from any retail store that sell food unless both the property owner(s) (as they appear on the current tax records of Fulton County as retrieved by the County's Geographic Information System (GIS) or if the current ownership has recently changed and does not match the GIS record the applicant may provide a copy of the new deed as proof of ownership) and lease holder(s) of said eating establishment/retail store grant written notarized permission for the Food Truck to be located closer than this minimum setback. 
8.  Food Truck vendors shall not be located within 25 feet of any right-of-way, entryway, curb-cut or driveway. 
9.  Food Trucks shall provide a minimum of 6 parking spaces adjacent to the vending area for the exclusive use of the Food Truck and shall not occupy the minimum required parking spaces for any other use on site. 
10.  Food Trucks shall be required to park on all-weather surfaces. 
11.  After hours parking of the Food Truck shall comply with Article 18.3, acceptable locations for off street parking, of the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. 
12.  Two copies of a drawing, no larger in size than 11" x 17", with dimensions (distances in feet) of the Food Truck's location from the site's property lines and other minimum distance requirements as specified by this Article shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Community Services for approval. Said drawing shall also depict north arrow, parking area, table/chair/canopy areas as applicable, curb-cuts and traffic patterns. 
13.  Food Trucks shall not emit sounds, outcry, speaker, amplifier or announcements while traveling on the public right-of-way or when stationary. 
14.  Food Trucks shall maintain all Fulton County, State of Georgia, and Federal licenses and shall follow all laws of the State and the Fulton County Board of Health, or any other applicable laws. 
15.  The permit under which a Food Truck is operating shall be firmly attached and visible on the Food Truck at all times. 
16.  Any condition of zoning or provision of the Fulton County Zoning Resolution that prohibits a Food Truck use on a property shall supersede this Article. 
17.  Food Trucks and any accessory items shall not be left unattended or stored for any period of time on the permitted site when vending is not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. 
18.  Food Trucks are responsible for the proper disposal of waste and trash associated with the operation. Food Trucks shall remove all generated waste and trash from their approved location at the end of each day or as needed to maintain the public health and safety. No liquid waste or grease is to be disposed of in tree pits, storm drains or onto the sidewalks, streets or other public or private space. 
19.  Food Trucks must have an adequate supply of fresh water (through the means of an on-truck fresh water tank) to maintain the operation of the food service in a safe and sanitary manner. (Res. No. 12-0356, pt. 1, 5-16-12) 
19.3.4 Golf course. 
A.  Required districts: All 
B.  Standards: 
1.  A minimum 100-foot setback for all buildings and parking areas shall be provided adjacent to any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single-family. 
2.  Driving range, tees, greens and fairways shall be required to have a 100-foot setback from minor, arterial, and major collector roads. 
3.  Permitted curb cut access shall be from a major thoroughfare unless shown on the approved preliminary plat of a single-family subdivision. 
4.  When located outside a golf course/subdivision development, a minimum 50-foot wide buffer and a ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjacent to all buildings and parking areas when said facilities are located adjacent to any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
5.  A minimum 25-foot buffer and a ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjoining any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single-family located outside the golf course development or any associated development. 
6.  When located adjacent to any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single-family, the hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
19.3.5 Guest house. (Amended 11-1-89, 5-6-92, 2-7-96) 
A.  Required districts: Suburban A, Suburban B, Suburban C, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-4A, R-5, R-5A, R-6, NUP, CUP, TR, A, A-L, AG-1, O-1 and MIX when accessory to a single-family dwelling. 
B.  Standards: 
1.  No more than one guest house structure per lot may be used for occupancy by relatives, guest(s) or employees that work on the property without payment for rent. 
2.  A separate kitchen facility shall be allowed. 
3.  Heated floor area shall be a minimum of 650 square feet and a maximum of 1500 square feet. 
4.  Principal building setbacks shall apply. 
5.  The location shall be limited to the rear yard. 
19.3.5(1) Open. 
19.3.6 Mobile home - while residence is being built. 
A.  Required districts: Suburban A, Suburban B, Suburban C, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-4A, R-5, R-5A, R-6, NUP, CUP, TR, A, A-L, AG-1, O-1 and MIX. 
B.  Standards: 
1.  The building permit for the principal structure must have been issued and remain valid during the period that the mobile home is on the property. 
2.  The mobile home must be located on the same parcel as the principal structure being constructed and comply with all district setbacks. 
3.  The administrative permit shall expire 12 months after issuance or upon occupancy of the principal structure, whichever occurs first. Only one renewal for a one year period may be issued. 
4.  The mobile home must be occupied by the owner of the principal residence under construction. 
19.3.6(1) Parking, off-site and shared. Whenever parking as required in article 18 cannot be accomplished, shared parking in accordance with section 18.2.2 may be approved via an administrative permit provided: (Added 7-7-99) 
A.  Required districts: O-I, C-1, C-2, MIX, M-1, M-1A and M-2. 
B.  If the off-site parking is committed for a specified period of time, the duration of the administrative permit shall be limited to the period of time stipulated therein. 
C.  No more than 20 percent of the total parking requirement may be provided off-site via this administrative permit. 
D.  The property must be located no more than 300 feet from the principal use with pedestrian access provided between the sites as may be required by the Environment and Community Development Department. 
19.3.7 Rapid rail transportation station. (Added 5-6-92) 
A.  Required districts: All 
B.  Refer to the MARTA rearrangement cooperative agreement administered by the Department of Public Works. 
19.3.8 Recreational court, private. (Amended 3-6-91, 4-7-93, 6-1-94, 4-5-95, 2-7-96, 3-3-04) 
A.  Required districts: All districts except C-1, C-2, M-1, M-1A, M-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Detached Dwellings. Recreational courts serving single family detached dwellings shall be located in side or rear yards but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
2.  Multi-family. Recreational courts, accessory structures, and fencing shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any residential building, adjoining property line or street. 
3.  Neighborhood. Recreational courts serving a neighborhood must be located within the limits of the underlying zoning. 
a.  Use of the recreational courts shall be limited to residents and guests of the neighborhood in which they are located. 
b.  Recreational courts, accessory structures, fencing, and parking shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all adjoining property lines. 
c.  Landscape strips and buffer requirements shall be as specified by Article 4.23.1. 
d.  A maximum 4-square foot sign identifying the future use of the property for a recreational court shall be posted adjoining the lot's frontage until a Certificate of Occupancy is issued for the facility. 
e.  Sources of exterior illumination shall be directed away from adjoining residences and shall not exceed 1.2 foot candles along an adjoining residential property line. Outdoor lighting of recreation facilities in or adjoining residential districts or uses shall be allowed only between dusk and 11:00 p.m. 
f.  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines adjacent to single family residential uses. 
19.3.9 Recreational courts, public. Recreational courts operated as a club (except those serving residential developments), or courts operated as a business are defined herein as public courts. 
A.  Required districts: O-I, MIX, C-1, C-2, M-1, M-1A, M-2 
B.  Standards: 
a.  Recreational courts, accessory structures, fencing, and parking shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines which abut single family residential uses. Adjacent to all other zonings and uses, the district setback requirements shall apply. 
b.  Landscape strips and buffer requirements shall be as specified by Section 4.23.1. 
c.  Sources of exterior illumination shall be directed away from adjoining residences and shall not exceed 1.2 foot candles along an adjoining residential property line. Outdoor lighting of recreation facilities in or adjoining residential districts or uses shall be used only between dusk and 11:00 p.m. 
d.  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines of adjacent residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
19.3.10 Relocated residential structure. (Added 7-7-99, Moved from 19.4.36, Amended 2-7-01) 
A.  Required districts: Suburban A, Suburban B, Suburban C, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-4A, R-5, R-5A, R-6, NUP, CUP, TR, A, A-L, AG-1, O-1 and MIX 
B.  Standards: 
1.  The applicant shall include the following with the application for the administrative permit: 
a.  The address from which the structure is being relocated. 
b.  A photograph of the structure prior to its relocation. 
c.  The total heated floor area of both the existing structure and the renovated structure. 
2.  The location of the structure and the heated floor area of the structure shall be in compliance with the minimum standards of the zoning district and/or conditions of zoning. 
3.  The residential structure shall be affixed to a permanent foundation within six months of the date of the house moving permit, and the certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until such improvements are completed. 
4.  All standards of this resolution (except 2. above) and other applicable regulations shall be met within one year from the date of this permit issuance. 
5.  A house moving permit shall be obtained from the Environment and Community Development Department in conjunction with this Administrative Permit. 
6.  A building permit for the repair and construction of said structure shall be obtained within 30 days of this Administrative Permit issuance. 
7.  The exterior of the structure shall be brought into compliance with the Fulton County Housing Code within six months of the issuance of this Administrative Permit. 
8.  Prior to occupancy, a certificate of occupancy must be obtained from the Department of Environment and Community Development. 
19.3.10(1) Revival tent. 
A.  Required districts: O-I, MIX, C-1, C-2, M-1A, M-1 and M-2. 
In an AG-1 (Agricultural) or a residential district, a revival tent may be placed only on property occupied by an existing building used as a place of worship. 
B.  Standards: 
1.  A permit may be granted a maximum of 14 days in a calendar year. 
2.  The revival tent or any area used for assembly shall be located at least 200 feet from a property line of any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single-family. 
3.  No temporary, sanitary facility or trash receptacle may be located within 200 feet of an existing dwelling, and no tent shall be located within 250 feet of an existing dwelling. 
4.  Provide one parking space per four seats. 
5.  A drawing to scale shall accompany the application and shall accurately depict the number of seats and the standards of this section. 
6.  The hours of operation shall be no earlier than 8:00 a.m. nor later than 11:00 p.m. 
19.3.11. Roadside Produce Stands. (Amended 5-6-92, 7-7-93, 4-6-94, 8-6-03, 4-5-06) 
A.  Required Districts: C-1, C-2, M-1, M-2 and AG-1 
B.  Standards: 
1.  No more than four Administrative Permits shall be granted per year and no single permit shall be effective for more than 30 consecutive days; however, 2 or more permits, not to exceed 4, may be combined for a duration of 60 days, 90 days or a maximum of 120 days. An application for said permit(s) shall be made no less than 14 days prior to the event. Said permit must be posted on site such that it is visible from the street. 
2.  The hours of operation shall be 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
3.  Two copies of a drawing, no larger in size than 11" x 17", with dimensions (distances in feet) of the activity's location from the site's property lines and other minimum distance requirements as specified by this Section shall be submitted to the Department of Environment and Community Department for approval. Said drawing shall also depict north arrow, curb cuts and traffic patterns. 
4.  The applicant shall provide a notarized written permission statement of the property owner or lease holder of the subject site to the Department of Environment and Community Development. A 24-hour contact number of the property owner or lease holder shall be provided along with permit application. 
5.  The property on which the roadside vendor is permitted must be located at least 1500 feet from a permanent business or another vendor which offers the same or similar merchandise as that of the vendor. Vendor shall provide names of all established businesses which sell similar or the same merchandise within 1500 feet of the proposed vendor site. 
6.  Any activity or structure shall maintain a minimum 20-foot setback from the right-of-way and not be located within a required landscape strip or buffer. Said activity or structure shall also maintain a minimum setback of 10 feet from any internal drive or permitted curb cut. 
7.  A minimum of 6 parking spaces shall be provided for the exclusive use of the roadside produce stand and shall not occupy the minimum required parking spaces for any other use on site. 
8.  No temporary sanitary facility or trash receptacle may be located within 100 feet of a property line of a residential use. 
9.  No tent, table or other temporary structure shall be located within 100 feet of a residential structure. 
10.  No equipment, vehicle, display or sales activity shall block access to a public facility such as a telephone booth, mail box, parking meter, fire hydrant, fire alarm box, traffic control box, driveway or other access point. 
11.  A sound level of 65 dBA shall not be exceeded at adjacent property lines of any residential use. 
12.  Signage shall be in accordance with Article 33, Section 33.4.12.B.19. (16-0363, pt. 2, 5-4-16) 
19.3.11(1) Roadside Vending. (Added 7-7-93, Amended 4-6-94, 2-7-01, 8-6-03, 4-5-06) 
A.  Required Districts: C-1, C-2, M-1 and M-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  No more than two Administrative Permits shall be granted per year and no permit shall be effective for more than 9 consecutive days. An application for said permit shall be made no less than 14 days prior to the event. Said permit must be posted on site such that it is visible from the street. 
2.  The hours of operation shall be 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
3.  Two copies of a drawing, no larger in size than 11" x 17", with dimensions (distances in feet) of the activity's location from the site's property lines and other minimum distance requirements as specified by this Section shall be submitted to the Department of Environment and Community Department for approval. Said drawing shall also depict north arrow, curb cuts and traffic patterns. 
4.  The applicant shall provide a notarized written permission statement of the property owner or lease holder of the subject site to the Department of Environment and Community Development. A 24-hour contact number of the property owner or lease holder shall be provided along with permit application. 
5.  The property on which the roadside vendor is permitted must be located at least 1500 feet from a permanent business or another vendor which offers the same or similar merchandise as that of the vendor. Vendor shall provide names of all established businesses which sell similar or the same merchandise within 1500 feet of the proposed vendor site. 
6.  Any vending displays or activity shall maintain a minimum 20-foot setback from the right-of-way and not be located within a required landscape strip or buffer. Said displays or activities shall also maintain a minimum setback of 10 feet from any internal drive or permitted curb cut. 
7.  A minimum of 6 parking spaces shall be provided adjacent to the vending area for the exclusive use of the roadside vending and shall not occupy the minimum required parking spaces for any other use on site. 
8.  No temporary sanitary facility or trash receptacle may be located within 100 feet of a property line of a residential use. 
9.  No table or cart shall be located within 250 feet of a residential structure. Tents and tarps are prohibited. Sales from vehicles are prohibited. 
10.  No equipment, vehicle, display or sales activity shall block access to a public facility such as a telephone booth, mail box, parking meter, fire hydrant, fire alarm box, traffic control box, driveway or other access point. 
11.  A sound level of 65 dBA shall not be exceeded at adjacent property lines of any residential use. 
12.  Signage advertising the vending operation is prohibited. 
19.3.11(2) Seasonal Business Use. (Amended 12-4-91, 5-6-92, 7-7-93, 4-6-94, 7-7-99, 3-3-04, 4-5-06) 
A.  Required Districts: CUP (with a commercial component), MIX (with a commercial component), C-1, C-2, M-1A, M-1, and M-2. Allowable in AG-1 and residentially zoned districts only when the property is occupied by a church, school, lodge/retreat, farm, plant nursery, etc., existing as a conforming or a lawful non-conforming nonresidential use. The issuance of this permit does not constitute an expansion or extension of a non-conforming use. 
B.  Standards: 
1.  An Administrative Permit shall not be issued for the same seasonal business use more than once in any calendar year. Said seasonal business use must correlate to a calendar holiday or event. Said permit shall not exceed a total of 30 consecutive days for each use. Said permit must be posted on site such that it is visible from the street. An application for said permit shall be made no less than 14 days prior to the event. Example: One permit may be issued for the sale of Christmas trees for a maximum of 30 consecutive days. A second permit may be issued for the sale of pumpkins for a maximum of 30 consecutive days. 
2.  The hours of operation shall be 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday and 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Friday through Saturday. 
3.  Two copies of a drawing, no larger in size than 11" x 17", with dimensions (distances in feet) of the activity's location from the site's property lines and other minimum distance requirements as specified by this Section shall be submitted to the Department of Environment and Community Department for approval. Said drawing shall also depict north arrow, curb cuts and traffic patterns. 
4.  The applicant shall provide a notarized written permission statement of the property owner or lease holder of the subject site to the Department of Environment and Community Development. A 24-hour contact number of the property owner or lease holder shall be provided along with permit application. 
5.  The property on which the roadside vendor is permitted must be located at least 1500 feet from a permanent business or another vendor which offers the same or similar merchandise as that of the vendor. Vendor shall provide names of all established businesses which sell similar or the same merchandise within 1500 feet of the proposed vendor site. 
6.  Any display or sales activity shall maintain a minimum 20-foot setback from the right-of-way and shall not be located within a required landscape strip or buffer. Said displays shall also maintain a minimum setback of 10 feet from any internal drive or permitted curb cut. 
7.  A minimum of 6 parking spaces shall be provided for the exclusive use of the seasonal business and shall not occupy the minimum required parking spaces for any other use on site. 
8.  No temporary sanitary facility or trash receptacle may be located within 100 feet of a property line of a residential use. 
9.  No tent, table or other temporary structure shall be located within 100 feet of a residential structure. Sales from vehicles are prohibited. 
10.  No equipment, vehicle, display or sales activity shall block access to a public facility such as a telephone booth, mail box, parking meter, fire hydrant, fire alarm box, traffic control box, driveway or other access point. 
11.  A sound level of 65 dBA shall not be exceeded at adjacent property lines of any residential use. 
12.  Signage shall be in accordance with Article 33, Section 33.4.12.B.19. (16-0363, pt. 2, 5-4-16) 
19.3.12 Swimming pool, private. (Amended 3-6-91, 5-6-92, 6-1-94, 2-7-96, 7-7-99, 12-1-99, 3-3-04, 4-5-06) 
A.  Required districts: All districts except C-1, C-2, M-1, M-1A, M-2 
B.  Standards: All swimming pools shall be completely surrounded by an enclosure. Such enclosure shall be a fence, wall, or building, to prevent access to the pool by unsupervised children and/or animals. The enclosure shall be an effective fence or wall not less than five feet high with self-closing, positive-latching gates provided on the outer side of the deck area. The enclosure entrance shall be locked when the pool is not open for use and all surrounding objects or structures must have a separation of five feet from the enclosure to provide an unclimbable space. The enclosure shall be in place prior to pool completion. Materials and construction shall comply with the regulations administered by the Fulton County Board of Health. 
1.  Detached Dwellings. Swimming pools shall be allowed in side and rear yards of single family dwellings in any district and may also be allowed at the back of the house on a double frontage single family residential lot as approved by the Department. Pools, pool equipment, and their decks must be a minimum of 10 feet from all property lines, except that when perimeter setbacks are required, for example in NUP and TR zoned districts, pools, pool equipment, and decks cannot be located in perimeter setbacks. 
2.  Neighborhood. Swimming pools serving a neighborhood must be located within the limits of the underlying zoning. 
a.  Use of swimming pools shall be limited to residents and guests of the neighborhood in which they are located. 
b.  Pools, pool equipment, and decks must be located at least 100 feet from all adjoining property lines. 
c.  Landscape strips and buffer requirements shall be as specified by Article 4.23.1. 
d.  A maximum four-square foot sign identifying the future use of the property for a swimming pool shall be posted adjoining the lot's frontage until a Certificate of Occupancy is issued for the facility. 
e.  Sources of exterior illumination shall be directed away from adjoining residences and shall not exceed 1.2 foot candles along the an adjoining residential property line. Outdoor lighting of recreation facilities in or adjoining residential districts or uses shall be allowed only between dusk and 11:00 p.m. 
f.  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines adjacent to single family residential uses. 
3.  Multi-family. Swimming pools, pool equipment, accessory structures, and fencing shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any residential building, adjoining property line or street. 
19.3.13 Swimming pool, public. Pools operated as a club (except clubs serving residential developments) or pools operated as a business are defined herein as public pools. (Amended 11-3-93; Amended 3-3-04) 
A.  Required districts: O-I, MIX, C-1, C-2, M-1A, M-1 and M-2. 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Pools, pool equipment, decks, and parking shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines which abut single family residential uses. Adjacent to all other zonings and uses, the district setback requirements shall be provided. 
2.  Landscape strips and buffer requirements shall be as specified by Article 4.23.1. 
3.  Sources of exterior illumination shall be directed away from adjoining residences and shall not exceed 1.2 foot candles along the an adjoining residential property line. Outdoor lighting of recreation facilities in or adjoining residential districts or uses shall be allowed only between dusk and 11:00 p.m. 
4.  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines adjacent to single family residential uses. 
19.3.14 Temporary classroom. (Amended 11/03/93) 
A.  Required districts: All 
B.  Standards: 
1.  The structure must be constructed for use as a temporary classroom and certified as such by the environment and community development department. 
2.  The principal use must exist prior to the issuance of the permit. 
3.  The temporary classroom shall not be used to increase the capacity or enrollment as conditioned by zoning, or as limited by other use permit conditions. 
4.  An administrative permit for a temporary classroom shall expire three years from the date of approval at which time the structure shall be removed unless a new administrative permit is obtained within 30 days of the expiration date. (Amended 11/03/04) 
5.  The structure shall not be located within any principal building setbacks or within any required landscape strips or buffers. 
6.  Two copies of a drawing showing dimensions shall accompany the application and shall accurately depict the proposed location of temporary structures, the traffic patterns and curb cuts and compliance with this section and all other applicable standards of this resolution. 
19.3.15 Temporary structures. (Amended 07/07/93, 11/03/93) 
A.  Required districts: All, except emission inspection stations shall be permitted only in nonresidential districts except AG-1. 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Temporary structures (whether tents, site-built, mobile or manufactured structures) utilized for construction offices, ticket booths, security guard shelters, storage structures in association with construction, emission inspection stations, portable toilets and other similar uses may be permitted by the environment and community development department in any district. 
2.  Temporary structures shall be located outside of any required buffers and landscape areas, and shall maintain the principal building setback of the district except portable toilets must maintain a 200-foot setback from existing dwelling(s). 
3.  Temporary structures must be removed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or within five days of completion of the temporary event or activity for which the structure was approved. 
4.  Temporary structures used in conjunction with other permitted administrative and use permits shall not be required to obtain a separate administrative permit. 
5.  An administrative permit for a temporary structure shall expire three years from the date of approval at which time the structure shall be removed unless a new administrative permit is obtained within 30 days of the expiration date. (Added 11/03/04) 
19.3.16 Temporary use of existing dwelling while residence is being built. (Added, 3/6/91) 
A.  Required districts: All but M-1, M-1A, & M-2. 
B.  Standards: 
1.  The building permit for the new principal structure shall be issued concurrently with this administrative permit. 
2.  The administrative permit shall expire 90 days after issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the new principal structure or one year after issuance of a building permit, whichever occurs first. 
19.3.17 Open. 
19.3.18 Utility substations (telephone, electric, or gas, etc.) (Amended 5/1/91, 11/3/93) 
A.  Required districts: All 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Utility substations measuring less than 35 square feet and less than five feet in height from finished grade are exempt from these regulations. 
2.  All substation structures shall be contained within the boundaries of the subject parcel and meet the minimum development standards of the district unless otherwise required in this article section. 
3.  Minimum setback of all utility structures from a residential structure shall be: 
a.  Electric — 200 feet. 
b.  Gas and telephone — the applicable minimum setback for the district in which located. 
4.  A minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip planted to buffer standards shall be required around the perimeter of all utility sites except along lines where buffers are required. 
5.  For electric substations provide a minimum 50-foot wide replanted or natural buffer adjacent to the property lines of any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single-family. 
6.  Interior to landscape strips or buffers that do not accomplish 100 percent visual screening as defined in the tree preservation ordinance, provide an eight-foot high opaque fence or, masonry wall, a minimum four-foot high landscaped earthen berm, a vegetative screen or some combination thereof, subject to the approval of the environment and community development department. 
19.3.19 Veterinary clinic/hospital or kennel. (See 19.4.24 for kennel or outside animal facilities) 
A.  Required districts: O-I, MIX, C-1, C-2, M-1A, M-1, M-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  All of the activities directly associated with animal treatment shall occur entirely within a completely enclosed soundproof structure. 
(Ord. No. 97-0328, 3-5-97; Ord. No. 97-0568, 5-7-97; Amended 7/7/99; Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
19.4 - Minimum use permit standards. 
19.4.1 Adult book store. (Added 06/05/96, Amended 07/07/99, Amended 07/02/03) 
Intent and findings. It is the intent of this article to regulate the place of operation of adult book stores as defined in this resolution. The board of commissioners finds, based upon an October, 1980, study by the Minnesota Crime Prevention Center, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota, entitled "An Analysis of the Relationship Between Adult Entertainment Establishments, Crime, and Housing Values", that adult book stores are significantly related to diminishing market values of neighboring residential areas, that adult book stores should not be located in residential areas, and that adult book stores should be permitted only in locations that are at least 1/10 mile, or approximately 500 feet, from residential areas. 
The board further finds, based upon a June, 1978, study by the Division of Planning of the St. Paul, Minnesota, Department of Planning and Economic Development and the Community Crime Prevention Project of the Minnesota Crime Control Planning Board entitled "Effects on Surrounding Area of Adult Entertainment Businesses in Saint Paul", that the presence of adult book stores correlates with a decreasing market value of neighboring residential areas, that adult book stores tend to locate in areas of poorer residential condition, tend to be followed by a relative worsening of the residential condition, and that more than two adult entertainment businesses in an immediate area is associated with a statistically significant decrease in residential property market value, and that such a concentration of adult entertainment businesses in a given area should be discouraged. The board also finds that such worsening of residential conditions will adversely affect uses found in residential areas or in the proximity of residential areas, such as public recreational facilities, public or private institutional uses, churches, schools, universities, colleges, trade-schools, libraries, and day care centers. 
The board further finds, based upon a May 19, 1986, land use study conducted in Austin, Texas, that an adult book store within one block of a residential area decreases the market value of homes, that adult book stores are considered a sign of decline by lenders, making underwriters hesitant to approve the 90—95 percent financing many home buyers require, and that patrons of adult book stores tend to be from outside the immediate neighborhood in which the adult book store is located. 
The board further finds, based upon a March 3, 1986, study conducted by the Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, Community Development Department entitled "Adult Entertainment Businesses in Oklahoma City - A Survey of Real Estate Appraisers", that an adult bookstore will have a negative effect on residential property market values if it is located closer than one block to residential uses. 
The board further finds that the proposed amendment to the zoning resolution regarding regulation of adult book stores has been carefully considered by a workgroup of county staff drawn from the areas of law enforcement, land use, land planning, and law; by the community zoning board at public meetings where public comment was available; and by a committee of citizens with expertise in law, real estate, land use, and other disciplines, who have reviewed the amendment particularly with respect to its provisions relating to the effects of adult book stores on market values of residential and other property, and that the information gathered and results of this informal study support the need for these development standards. 
This section is intended to be a carefully tailored regulation to minimize the adverse land use impacts caused by the undesirable secondary effects of adult bookstores, and the board of commissioners finds that restricting adult book stores to industrially zoned areas and imposing development standards can legitimately regulate adult book stores by establishing zones where adult book stores are most compatible with other uses or the surrounding neighborhood, and by requiring minimum distances to be maintained between adult bookstore uses and other uses so as to afford the most protection to residential uses. 
It is not the intent of the board of commissioners, in enacting this amendment to the zoning resolution, to deny to any person rights to speech protected by the United States or Georgia Constitutions, nor is it the intent to impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the contents of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented films, videotapes, books, or other materials; further, in the adoption of this amendment to the zoning resolution, the board of commissioners does not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain or view any sexually oriented materials protected by the United States or Georgia Constitutions, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of such sexually oriented materials may have to sell, distribute, or exhibit such constitutionally protected materials; finally, in the enactment of this ordinance, the board of commissioners intends to adopt a content neutral measure to address the secondary effects of adult bookstores. 
A.  Required Districts: M-1 and M-2 (Industrial) 
B.  Standards: 
1.  All boundary lines of the property included within the use permit as filed must be located at least 1,000 feet from the properties listed below: 
a.  The property line of Suburban A, Suburban B, Suburban C, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4A, R-4, R-5, R-5A, R-6, NUP, CUP, TR, A, A-L, AG-1 zoned property or property conditioned or used for residential purposes. 
b.  The property line of any public recreational facilities, public or private institutional uses, including but not limited to churches, schools, universities, colleges, trade-schools, libraries, day care centers and other training facilities where minors are the primary patrons. 
2.  The boundary line of the use permit must be located at least 1,500 feet from the property line of any other adult entertainment establishment or adult book store. 
3.  Submit with the application for a use permit, a certified boundary survey by a licensed surveyor of the site and the property lines of surrounding properties identifying the use of properties at or within 1,000 feet of the boundary lines of the subject property and adult entertainment establishments or adult bookstores within 1,500 feet of the boundary line of the subject property. 
4.  If the adult book store is to be located in an existing structure where a land disturbance permit is not required, an existing building permit review application must be filed and determined by the environment and community development department to be in compliance with the terms of this resolution prior to any occupancy. 
5.  Permitted curb cut access shall be from a major thoroughfare. 
6.  No depiction of anatomical areas or sexual activities specified in the definition of "adult entertainment" shall be visible from outside the structure or on signage outside the structure. 
7.  The minimum landscape areas required for the O-I zoning district as specified in section 4.23 shall be required. Where buffers are required, the underlying zoning district buffer standards shall apply. 
C.  Permit Issuance (Added 07/02/03): Notwithstanding the provisions of 19.2.3 and 19.2.4, any applicant meeting the above requirements and standards shall be entitled to the issuance of a use permit. 
D.  Permit Applications (Added 07/02/03): Notwithstanding any other provision herein, any material omission or untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an application for a use permit shall be grounds for denial of said permit. 
E.  Permit Processing (Added 07/02/03): The county shall have 120 days (unless the application is suspended by failure of the applicant to provide data, information or records as reasonably requested by the county and required by this code, to complete the investigation) from receipt of a completed application for a use permit to make a decision in which to grant or deny a use permit. The department of environment and community development and community zoning board shall make recommendations to the board of commissioners regarding the approval or denial of the use permit and the board shall make the final decision after a public hearing regarding the same. In the event the board of commissioners has not granted or denied the application within 120 days (unless the application is suspended by failure of the applicant to provide data, information or records as reasonably requested by the county to complete the investigation), the use permit shall automatically issue. 
F.  Denial of Use Permit (Added 07/02/03): In the event an application for a use permit is denied by the board of commissioners, the applicant shall be notified in writing of such denial within ten business days by U.S. Mail. A decision by the board of commissioners regarding the denial of said permit is a final action; therefore, any appeal of such decision shall be pursued by application for writ of certiorari filed with the Superior Court of Fulton County within 30 days of the decision. This appeal shall in no way preclude an applicant from seeking any other remedies available at law or equity. 
G.  Permit Application (Added 07/02/03): Nothing in this section shall allow for the conducting or zoning of any business or entity which would otherwise be illegal. 
19.4.2 Adult entertainment establishments. (Added 7/1/92, Amended 11/03/93, 07/07/99, 02/07/01, 07/02/03) 
Intent. It is the intent of this section to regulate the place and manner of the operation of businesses or facilities that offer adult entertainment as defined in this ordinance. It is well established and has been the experience of other communities in Georgia and throughout the United States that adult entertainment, which includes public nudity, has been associated with and may encourage disorderly conduct, prostitution and sexual assault. This section advances the substantial government interest in promoting and protecting public health, safety, and general welfare, maintaining law and order and prohibiting public nudity. The section is narrowly constructed to protect the First Amendment rights of citizens of Fulton County while furthering the substantial governmental interest of combating the secondary effects of public nudity and adult entertainment from areas and uses of the community which are incompatible. Areas and uses which are to be protected from adult entertainment include but are not limited to residential, churches, day care centers, libraries, recreational facilities, and schools. 
A.  Required Districts: M-1 (Light Industrial) and M-2 (Heavy Industrial) 
B.  Standards: 
1.  All boundary lines of the property included within the use permit must be located at least 1,000 feet from the properties listed below: 
a.  The property line of Suburban A, Suburban B, Suburban C, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4A, R-4, R-5, R-5A, R-6, NUP, CUP, TR, A, A-L, AG-1 zoned property or property conditioned or used for residential purposes. 
b.  The property line of any public recreational facilities, public or private institutional uses, including but not limited to churches, schools, universities, colleges, trade-schools, libraries, day care centers and other training facilities where minors are the primary patrons. 
2.  The boundary line of the use permit must be located at least 1,500 feet from the property line of any other adult entertainment establishment or adult bookstore. 
3.  Submit with the application for a use permit, a certified boundary survey of the site and the property lines of surrounding properties identifying the use of properties at or within 1,000 feet of the boundary lines of the subject property and adult entertainment establishments and/or adult bookstores within 1,500 feet of the boundary line of the subject property. 
4.  No final land disturbance permit, building permit, certificate of occupancy, or building permit review certificate may by issued until the approved Fulton County Adult Entertainment Business License is filed with the director of the environment and community development department. 
5.  If the adult entertainment business is to be located in an existing structure where a land disturbance permit is not required, an existing building permit review application must be filed and approved in the environment and community development department prior to any occupancy. 
6.  Building shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines. 
7.  Parking spaces at a ratio of ten per 1,000 gross square feet of floor space shall be provided. 
8.  Permitted curb cut access shall be directly from a major thoroughfare. 
9.  On-premise signs shall not display lewd or graphic depictions of body parts or acts which are defined in article and subsection 3.3.1. 
10.  No adult entertainment shall be visible from outside the structure. 
11.  The minimum landscape areas required for the O-I zoning district as specified in section 4.23 shall be required. Where buffers are required, the underlying zoning district buffer standards shall apply. 
C.  Permit Issuance (Added 07/02/03): Notwithstanding the provisions of 19.2.3 and 19.2.4, any applicant meeting the above requirements and standards shall be entitled to the issuance of a use permit. 
D.  Permit Applications (Added 07/02/03): Notwithstanding any other provision herein, any material omission or untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an application for a use permit shall be grounds for denial of said permit. 
E.  Permit Processing (Added 07/02/03): The county shall have 120 days (unless the application is suspended by failure of the applicant to provide data, information or records as reasonably requested by the county and required by this code, to complete the investigation) from receipt of a completed application for a use permit to make a decision in which to grant or deny a use permit. The department of environment and community development and community zoning board shall make recommendations to the board of commissioners regarding the approval or denial of the use permit and the board shall make the final decision after a public hearing regarding the same. In the event the board of commissioners has not granted or denied the application within 120 days (unless the application is suspended by failure of the applicant to provide data, information or records as reasonably requested by the county to complete the investigation), the use permit shall automatically issue. 
F.  Denial of Use Permit (Added 07/02/03): In the event an application for a use permit is denied by the board of commissioners, the applicant shall be notified in writing of such denial within ten business days by U.S. Mail. A decision by the board of commissioners regarding the denial of said permit is a final action; therefore, any appeal of such decision shall be pursued by application for writ of certiorari filed with the Superior Court of Fulton County within 30 days of the decision. This appeal shall in no way preclude an applicant from seeking any other remedies available at law or equity. 
G.  Permit Application (Added 07/02/03): Nothing in this section shall allow for the conducting or zoning of any business or entity which would otherwise be illegal. 
19.4.3 Agricultural-related activities. (Added 07/07/99) 
Intent. It is the intent of this article to allow certain agricultural-related activities with a use permit in compliance with the development standards below to preserve the nature of agricultural areas. Such uses shall include, but not be limited to, petting zoo, educational tours, dude ranches, picnicking, and pay fishing. 
A.  Required District: AG-1 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Minimum lot size shall be five acres. 
2.  Permitted curb cut access shall not be from a local street. 
3.  Food services may be provided. 
4.  A minimum of 100-foot setback is required from all property lines for activity areas, including parking. 
5.  All structures housing animals shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines. 
6.  All parking and access areas must be of an all weather surface per article 18, Festivals, Outdoor. 
7.  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines of adjacent residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
8.  Hours of operation shall commence no earlier than 6:00 a.m. and cease by 10:00 p.m. 
9.  If located adjacent to any residential district or an AG-1 district used for single family, the minimum buffers and landscape strips required for the O-I district as specified in section 4.23 shall be required. 
10.  Sanitary facilities or trash receptacles shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from a property line of any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
19.4.4 Aircraft landing area. (Amended 3/6/91) 
A.  Required Districts: All 
B.  Standards: 
1.  For fixed wing aircraft, a 1,000-foot clear zone extending from the end of all runways shall be secured through ownership or easement, but in no case shall the end of a runway be closer than 200 feet from any property line. 
2.  For both fixed and rotary-wing aircraft, neither the landing area nor any building, structure or navigational aid shall be located within 400 feet of a property line adjacent to any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
3.  Landing areas for fixed wing and rotary wing aircraft shall be designed to comply with the Airport Design Guide of the Federal Aviation Administration. 
4.  If located within or adjacent to a residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family, the hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
5.  A use permit for an aircraft landing area shall have no force and effect except for requesting a land disturbance permit prior to filing a satisfactory FAA airspace analysis with the director of the environment and community development department. 
6.  In accordance with section 28.4.3.2, submit an environmental impact report as required. (Amended 04/03/02) 
19.4.5 Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height (See also Administrative Permit 19.3.1(1)). (Added 07/07/93) 
Intent. It is the intent of this article to regulate the placement of amateur radio towers in a manner that does not impose on public health, safety, general welfare. The following regulations on design, location, placement, and height limits of antennas in residential districts implements Fulton County's governmental interest in land planning, aesthetics and public safety by requiring the following use permit standards: 
A.  Required Districts: All 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Antennas shall be located in the rear yard. 
2.  The request to exceed the height of 90 feet shall be accompanied by a written justification of its intent by the licensee. Under no circumstances shall an antenna exceed 200 feet in height. 
3.  All antennas shall be set back from the property line one-third the height of the antenna or the district setback requirements, whichever is greater. However, the antenna must be located a distance equal to or greater than the antenna height from the nearest residential dwelling, excluding the primary dwelling or structure which is located on the same lot as the antenna. 
4.  Antennas shall not be lighted. 
5.  All antennas must be constructed with an anti-climbing device. 
6.  Antennas shall be painted in a neutral color identical or closely compatible with surroundings. 
7.  All guy wires must be anchored on site and outside of right-of-way. 
19.4.6 Amphitheaters. 
A.  Required Districts: AG-1, O-I, MIX, C-1, C-2, M-1A, M-1, and M-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Lot area shall be a minimum of ten acres. 
2.  The stage shall be located a minimum of 600 feet from adjacent properties zoned for residential use and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
3.  Permitted curb cut access shall be only from an arterial street. 
4.  A minimum 100-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjacent to residential districts, property zoned for residential use zoning or development or AG-1 districts when used for single family. 
5.  A minimum 50-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjacent to non-residential districts zoning or development. 
6.  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at the property lines of adjacent residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
7.  Eight-foot high fencing shall be provided adjacent to properties zoned for residential use or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
8.  The hours of operation of the facility shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. when adjacent to properties zoned for residential use and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
9.  Facilities must be served by public sewer when gravity flow sewer is available within 1,000 feet of the property. 
10.  Provide per the following chart a minimum distance separation between the nearest property line of the proposed amphitheater and the nearest property line of an amphitheater with frontage on the same road(s) as the proposed facility. 

 
*Source: The Department of Transportation Division of Planning, Data, and Intermodel Development Office of Transportation Data in cooperation with U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration as of 08/07/2007. 
19.4.7 Antenna tower, and associated structure (radio, TV, microwave broadcasting, etc.), to exceed the district height. (Titled Changed 3/6/91, Amended 3/5/97, 05/17/06) 
Intent. Pursuant to Section 704(a) of the Federal Telecommunications Policy Act of 1996, it is not the intent of this section to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services in unincorporated Fulton County. It is the intent of this section to address the aesthetic effect of telecommunication facilities on our landscapes, our citizens' demands for these services, and the needs of service providers. 
The following regulations on design, location, placement, and height limits of antennas in residential and AG-1 zoned districts implements Fulton County's governmental interest in land planning, aesthetics and public safety by requiring the following use permit standards: 
A.  Required Districts: Residential districts, MIX and AG-1 (See same heading in section 19.3, for other non-residential districts.) 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Towers must be set back a distance equal to 1½ times the height of the tower adjacent to residential and/or AG-1 zoned property. 
2.  Height shall not exceed 200 feet from existing grade. 
3.  Tower and associated facilities shall be enclosed by fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
4.  A minimum ten-foot landscape strip planted to buffer standards shall be required surrounding the facility exterior to the required fence unless the Fulton County Arborist determines that existing plant materials are adequate. 
5.  Antennas or towers shall not have lights unless required by federal or state law. 
6.  Towers shall not be located within one-half mile from any existing telecommunication tower above the district height, excluding alternative structures. 
7.  The tower shall comply with applicable state and local statutes and ordinances, including, but not limited to, building and safety codes. Towers which have become unsafe or dilapidated shall be repaired or removed pursuant to applicable state and local statutes and ordinances. 
8.  Facilities shall not be artificially lighted except to assure human safety or as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
9.  Communication towers shall be designed and constructed to ensure that the structural failure or collapse of the tower will not create a safety hazard to adjoining properties, according to applicable federal standards which may be amended from time to time. 
10.  Telecommunications facilities shall not be used for advertising purposes and shall not contain any signs for the purpose of advertising. 
11.  Any telecommunications facility may co-locate on any existing tower, pole or other structure as long as there is no increase in height to the existing facility. 
12.  A commercial telecommunication facility that ceases operation for a period of 12 consecutive months shall be determined to have terminated and shall be removed within 90 days of termination at the property owner's expense. It shall be the duty of both the property owner and the tower owner to notify the county in writing of any intent to abandon the use of the tower. 
13.  Communication facilities not requiring FAA painting/marking shall have either a galvanized finish or [be] painted a dull blue, gray, or black finish or shall be screened through fencing and landscaping. 
14.  An application for a telecommunications facility shall be submitted in accordance with the department's plan review submittal requirements. 
15.  An application for a telecommunication facility shall include a certification from a registered engineer that the structure will meet the applicable design standards for wind loads. 
16.  Communications facilities shall not be located in 100-year flood plain or delineated wetlands. 
19.4.8 Bed and breakfast. (Added 06/01/94) 
A.  Required Districts: AG-1 (Agricultural), R-6, and TR (Townhouse Residential) 
B.  Standards: 
1.  A minimum of two guest rooms and a maximum of five guest rooms are permitted. 
2.  No parking in the minimum front yard. 
3.  The bed and breakfast shall be owner occupied. 
4.  Permitted curb cut access shall not be from a local street. 
5.  The minimum landscape and buffer areas hall be required as specified in section 4.23 for AG-1 Agricultural district. 
6.  Parking requirements shall be the same as hotel/motel as specified in article 18. 
7.  Identification or advertising signs shall be limited to four square feet in surface area and four feet in height. 
19.4.9 Cemetery and/or mausoleum (human or pet). 
A.  Required Districts: All 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Permitted curb cut access shall be only from a major thoroughfare, unless in conjunction with a place of worship. 
2.  No building shall be located within 50 feet of a residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
3.  All structures, including graves, shall be inside meet the minimum yard setbacks or ten feet, whichever is greater. 
4.  If located adjacent to a single family dwelling district and/or AG-1 district used for single family, the minimum buffers and landscape strips required for the O-I district as specified in section 4.23 shall be required. 
19.4.10 Church, temple or place of worship. (Amended 3/6/91, 4/7/93, 04/03/02) 
A.  Required Districts: Suburban A, Suburban B, Suburban C, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4A, R-4, R-5, R-5A, R-6, R-6, TR, NUP, A, A-L, and AG-1. 
B.  Standards: 
1.  All buildings and use areas/structures other than parking and pedestrian walkways shall be located at least 100 feet from any adjoining residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
2.  No parking shall be located within the minimum front yard setback. 
3.  Any associated day care centers, private schools, recreational fields or other uses requiring a use permit or administrative permit shall be allowed only under a separate approved use permit or administrative permit for each use. 
4.  The minimum buffers and landscape strips required for the O-I zoning district as specified in section 4.23 shall be required. 
5.  Facilities must be served by public sewer when gravity flow sewer is available within 1,000 feet of the property. 
6.  Provide a 300-foot distance separation measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground between any church building and any business that is licensed for the sale or consumption of liquor, wine or malt beverages. 
19.4.11 Commercial amusement, outdoor including but not limited to amusement parks, bungee jumping parks, skateboard parks, ski slopes, batting cages, miniature golf, drive-in theaters, etc. (See also 19.4.17 DRIVING RANGES) (Name Change, 03/07/90) 
A.  Required Districts: C-2, M1-A, M-1 and M-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Permitted curb cut access shall be derived only from arterial streets. 
2.  A minimum 100-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjacent to residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
3.  A minimum 50-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjacent to non-residential zoning or development districts. 
4.  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines of adjacent residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
5.  Eigh-foot high fencing shall be provided adjacent to any residential district and/or AG-1 district when used for single family and interior to any required landscape strips or buffers. 
6.  The hours of operation of the facility shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. adjacent to residential districts and/or AG-1 when used for single family. 
7.  All recreational structures and activities shall maintain a minimum setback of 100 feet from any public right-of-way. 
8.  The height limits of the zoning district shall apply to all recreational structures unless a use permit to exceed the height is granted. (See section 19.4.21). 
9.  Facilities must be served by public sewer when gravity flow sewer is available within 1,000 feet of the property. 
10.  Provide per the following chart a minimum distance separation between the nearest property line of the proposed outdoor commercial amusement and the nearest property line of an outdoor commercial amusement with frontage on the same road(s) as the proposed facility. 

 
*Source: The Department of Transportation Division of Planning, Data, and Intermodel Development Office of Transportation Data in cooperation with U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration as of 08/07/2007. 
19.4.12 Composting. (Added 11/03/93) 
A.  Required Districts: AG-1 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Lot area shall be a minimum of five acres. 
2.  Permitted curb cut access shall be derived from an arterial or major collector. 
3.  The hours of operation shall be between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
4.  All operations shall maintain a minimum setback of 100 feet from all property lines. 
5.  The minimum buffers required are as specified for the M-1 District. (See section 4.23) 
6.  On-site traffic shall be limited to an all-weather surfaced area. 
7.  Stored materials shall be contained in such a manner as to prevent the blowing of any materials onto any surrounding property or roadway. 
8.  The composting facility shall obtain all necessary permits from the Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
9.  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines of adjacent residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
10.  In accordance with section 28.4.3.2., submit an environmental impact report as required. (Amended 04/03/02) 
19.4.13 Convalescent center/nursing home/hospice. (Added as a permitted use in O-I, MIX, A, A-L, C-1 and C-2) 
A.  Required Districts: R-6 and TR 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Facilities shall be for five persons or more. 
2.  Permitted curb cut access shall be from an arterial or a major collector. 
3.  Provide the minimum landscape strips and buffers as required for the O-I zoning district as specified in section 4.23. 
4.  Provide a 50-foot building setback from all single family districts or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
5.  No parking allowed within the minimum front yard setback. 
6.  Rooms or suites of rooms may be designed with separate kitchen facilities. 
7.  Facility shall comply with applicable local, state, and federal regulations. 
8.  In accordance with Article 28.4.6, submit a Noise Study Report as required. (Added 04/03/02) 
9.  Facilities must be served by public sewer when gravity flow sewer is available within 1,000 feet of the property. 
10.  Provide per the following chart a minimum distance separation between the nearest property line of the proposed convalescent center, nursing home/hospice and the nearest property line of a convalescent center, nursing home/hospice with frontage on the same road(s) as the proposed facility. 

 
*Source: The Department of Transportation Division of Planning, Data, and Intermodel Development Office of Transportation Data in cooperation with U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration as of 08/07/2007. 
19.4.14 Country inn. 
A.  Required Districts: AG-1 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Lot area shall be a minimum of 5 acres. 
2.  A minimum of six guest rooms and a maximum of 30 rooms are permitted. (See article 19.4.8, Bed and Breakfast, for less than six guest rooms). 
3.  The country inn shall be owner occupied. 
4.  Permitted curb cut access shall be from a minor collector or higher road classification. 
5.  The establishment may provide meal services to guests. 
6.  Parking shall not be permitted within the minimum front yard setback. 
7.  The minimum landscape strip and buffer requirements for the O-I district as specified in section 4.23 shall be required. 
8.  Identification or advertising signs shall be limited to one sign of not more than nine square feet and no more than four feet in height. 
9.  Parking requirements shall be the same as hotel/motel as specified in Article 18. 
19.4.15 Day care facility. (Amended 04/03/02, 03/03/04) (Allowed as a permitted use in CUP, O-I, MIX, C-1 & C-2 Districts) 
A.  Required Districts: R-6, TR, A, and A-L. May be allowed in single family districts and AG-1 in conjunction with an institutional use such as a church, temple, place of worship, school or a hospital. 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Facility shall be for seven or more persons, excluding staff. 
2.  Provide minimum landscape strips, buffers and improvement setbacks as specified for the O-I district in section 4.23.1. 
3.  Provide a minimum six-foot high opaque fence interior to any required landscape strips and/or buffers around the periphery of the yard used for the play area. 
4.  Play areas shall be located within the rear or side yards. 
5.  The hours of operation shall be limited to Monday through Friday from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
6.  No parking allowed in the minimum front yard setback. 
7.  Driveway design shall permit vehicles to exit the property in a forward direction. 
8.  In accordance with article 28.4.6, submit a noise study report as required. (Added 4-3-02) 
9.  Facilities must be served by public sewer when gravity flow sewer is available within 1,000 feet of the property. 
10.  Provide per the following chart a minimum distance separation between the nearest property line of the proposed day care and the nearest property line of a day care with frontage on the same road(s) as the proposed facility. 

 
*Source: The Department of Transportation Division of Planning, Data, and Intermodel Development Office of Transportation Data in cooperation with U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration as of 08/07/2007. 
19.4.16 Open. 
19.4.17 Driving range. (not associated with a golf course) 
A.  Required Districts: AG-1, O-I, MIX, C-1, C-2, and M-1A 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Lot area shall be a minimum of ten acres. 
2.  Permitted curb cut access shall be from a major collector or arterial. 
3.  Loudspeakers/paging systems are prohibited adjacent to residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
4.  The hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. adjacent to residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
19.4.17(1) Open. 
19.4.18 Equine garment fabrication. 
A.  Required Districts: AG-1 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Limited to the fabrication and wholesale distribution of blankets, saddles, halters, and other similar garments. 
2.  All fabrication and storage associated with the permitted use shall occur entirely within a completely enclosed building. 
19.4.19 Festivals or events, outdoor/indoor including but not limited to horse shows, carnivals, dog shows, arts and crafts shows, music festivals, etc. (Name Changed 3-7-90, Amended 7-7-93, 6-1-94) Event is marketed to populations outside the local community. Organizer expects 250 attendees or more at any one time (or see administrative permit (Article 19.3.3. Event, Special Indoor/Outdoor) for special events local in nature and less than 250 attendees at any one time). 
A.  Required Districts: AG-1, O-I, MIX, C-1, C-2, M-1A, M-1, and M-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Permitted curb cut access shall be from local streets. 
2.  Eight-foot high 100 percent opaque fencing shall be provided adjacent to residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
3.  Hours of operation shall be between 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. when adjacent to residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
4.  Activity areas, including parking, shall be at least 100 feet from a residential district and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
5.  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines of adjacent to land which is used for residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family purposes. (Added 7/5/89) 
6.  The festival or event shall be limited to a three-year period from the date of the board of commissioners approval not to exceed a total of 180 consecutive days in a calendar year. 
(16-0363, pt. 3, 5-4-16) 
19.4.20. Group residence. (Amended 4-3-02) (Allowed as a permitted use in A, A-L, O-I, MIX, C-1 & C-2 districts) 
A.  Required Districts: R-6 and TR 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Facilities shall be for five persons or more. 
2.  Permitted curb cut access shall not be allowed from a local street. 
3.  The minimum landscape strips and buffers required for the O-I district as specified in section 4.23 shall be provided. 
4.  Parking shall not be permitted within the minimum front yard. 
5.  Facility shall comply with applicable local, state, and federal regulations and provide department of environment and community development with the applicable permit prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
6.  Facility shall not be located closer than a quarter mile to the nearest property line of another group residence. (Added 4-5-06) 
7.  Facilities must be served by public sewer when gravity flow sewer is available within 1,000 feet of property. 
19.4.20(1) Group residence for children (five to eight children). (Added 11-3-04, Required Districts Amended 4-5-06) 
A.  Required Districts: AG-1, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-4A, R-5, R-5A, SUB-A, SUB-B, SUB-C, NUP, CUP 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Facility shall be for no more than eight children. 
2.  Parking shall comply with the requirements of article 18 for dwellings. 
3.  Copies of applicable local, state, and federal permits shall be provided to the department of environment and community development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
4.  Facility shall not be located closer than a quarter mile to the nearest property line of another group residence. (Added 4-5-06) 
5.  Facilities must be served by public sewer when available within 1,000 feet of a utilized gravity flow. 
19.4.20(2) Group residence for children (nine to 15 children). (Added 11/03/04) 
A.  Required Districts: R-6 and TR 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Facility shall be for no more than 15 children. 
2.  Parking shall comply with the requirements of article 18 for dwelling. 
3.  Copies of applicable local, state, and federal permits shall be provided to the department of environment and community development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
4.  Facility shall not be located closer than a quarter mile to the nearest property line of another group residence. (Added 04/05/06) 
5.  Facilities must be served by public sewer when gravity flow sewer is available within 1,000 feet of property line. 
19.4.21 Height—To exceed district maximum. (Amended 12/6/89) 
A.  Required Districts: O-I, A, A-L, MIX, C-1, C-2, M-1, M-1A and M-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Submit a site plan along with the application which shall depict the open space and spatial arrangement of buildings and facilities. 
2.  Sources of exterior illumination shall not be visible from adjoining residences. 
19.4.22 Open. 
19.4.23 Open. 
19.4.24 Kennel or outside animal facilities. 
A.  Required Districts: C-2, M-1, and M-2 (See article 19.3.19 for enclosed kennels) 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Minimum one-acre lot size is required. 
2.  Buildings and runs, sun areas, exercise yards, patios or facilities other than parking shall be located at least 100 feet from all property lines and 200 feet from any single family district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
19.4.25 Landfill, inert waste disposal. (Amended 11/1/89, 11/03/93, 04/05/06) 
A.  Required Districts: AG-1, M-1 and M-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  No access shall be allowed from local streets. 
2.  Access streets shall be paved and shall be able to withstand maximum load limits established by the State of Georgia as approved by the director of public works. 
3.  No portion of a new landfill shall be located within a three mile radius of the property lines of an existing landfill. 
4.  The waste disposal boundary of a landfill shall be located at least 500 feet from all property lines except adjacent to M-1 (Light Industrial) and M-2 (Heavy Industrial) zoned districts. 
5.  A minimum 200-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be required along all property lines except public rights-of-way. 
6.  A minimum 50-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be required along all public rights-of-way. 
7.  A minimum six-foot high solid fence or wall shall be located on property lines or interior to the required buffers and improvement setbacks. 
8.  Limit hours of operation from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
9.  The owner shall provide the director of the environment and community development department a current copy of all applicable permits from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources upon application for a land disturbance permit. 
10.  Vehicles shall be allowed into a landfill site only if waste is covered to prevent blowing of material from the vehicle. 
11.  In accordance with article 28.4.3.2, submit an environmental impact report as required. (Amended 04/03/02) 
12.  No portion of a new or expanded landfill shall be located within a one-mile radius of the property lines of residentially zoned or used property. An expanded landfill shall not include any expanded use within the parcel boundaries of an existing site or location. (Added 04/05/06) 
13.  The landfill shall be operated in accordance with the Rules of Georgia, Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-4 Solid Waste Management, Official Code of Georgia Annotated 12-8-20 Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Plan, and 40 CFR Part 258 (Subtitle D of RCRA). (Added 04/05/06) 
19.4.26 Landfill, solid waste disposal. (Amended 11/1/89, 11/03/93, 04/05/06) 
A.  Required Districts: M-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  No access shall be allowed from local streets. 
2.  Access streets shall be paved and shall be able to withstand maximum load limits established by the State of Georgia as approved by the director of public works. 
3.  No portion of a new landfill shall be located within a three-mile radius of the property lines of an existing landfill. 
4.  The waste disposal boundary of a landfill shall be located at least 500 feet from all property lines except adjacent to M-1 (Light Industrial) and M-2 (Heavy Industrial) zoned districts. 
5.  A minimum 200-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be required along all property lines except public rights-of-way. 
6.  A minimum 50-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be required along all public rights-of-way. 
7.  A minimum six-foot high solid fence or wall shall be located on property lines or interior to the required buffers and improvement setbacks. 
8.  Limit hours of operation from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
9.  The owner shall provide the director of the environment and community development department a current copy of all applicable permits from the Georgia Department of Natural Resource upon application for a land disturbance permit. 
10.  Vehicles shall be allowed into a landfill site only if waste is covered to prevent blowing of material from the vehicle. 
11.  In accordance with article 28.4.3.2, submit an environmental impact report as required. (Amended 04/03/02) 
12.  No portion of a new or expanded landfill shall be located within a one-mile radius of the property lines of a residentially zoned or used property. An expanded landfill shall not include any expanded use within the parcel boundaries of an existing site or location. (Added 04/05/06) 
13.  The landfill shall be sited and operated in accordance with the Rules of Georgia, Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-4 Solid Waste Management, Official Code of Georgia Annotated 12-8-20 Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Plan, and 40 CFR Part 258 (Subtitle D of RCRA). (Added 04/05/06) 
19.4.27 Landscaping business, plant nursery, or garden center with indoor retail component. (Added 04/03/02) 
A.  Required Districts: AG-1 (Agricultural) 
B.  Standards: 
1.  No access shall be allowed from local streets. 
2.  No parking is permitted in the minimum front yard. 
3.  All use areas/structures other than parking and pedestrian walkways shall be located at least 50 feet from any adjoining residential district or AG-1 (Agricultural) district. 
4.  Limit hours of operation from 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
5.  The minimum buffers and landscape strips required for the O-I (Office-Institutional) zoning district as specified in section 4.23 shall be required. 
6.  Structure(s) for retail sales shall be limited to 1,000 total gross square feet. 
19.4.28 Lodge, retreat and/or campground facilities to include lodging and food service for social, educational and/or recreational purposes. (Added 8/1/90, Amended 2/7/96) 
A.  Required Districts: AG-1, M-1A, M-1 and M-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Minimum lot size shall be ten acres. 
2.  Permitted curb cut access shall not be derived from a local street. 
3.  A minimum 100-foot wide buffer and ten-foot improvement setback are required adjacent to residential districts, AG-1 districts used for single family and adjoining a public street. 
4.  A minimum 50-foot wide buffer and ten-foot improvement district are required adjacent to all other non-residential districts. 
5.  Length of the stay for all but permanent staff shall not exceed 30 consecutive days. 
6.  Sanitary facilities or trash receptacles shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any residential district and/or AG-1 district when used for single family. 
7.  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines of adjacent residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
8.  Recreational facilities associated with the use shall be for staff and guests only. 
9.  One parking space per lodging unit or five per 1,000 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater. 
10.  Facilities must be served by public sewer when available within 1,000 feet of a utilized gravity flow. 
11.  Provide per the following chart a minimum distance separation between the nearest property line of the proposed lodge, retreat or campground and the nearest property line of a lodge, retreat or campground with frontage on the same road(s) as the proposed facility. 

 
*Source: The Department of Transportation Division of Planning, Data, and Intermodel Development Office of Transportation Data in cooperation with U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration as of 08/07/2007. 
19.4.28(1) Medical related lodging. (Added 12/4/91)(Allowed as a permitted use in A and A-L) 
A.  Required Districts: R-6 and TR 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Total number of bedrooms or units shall not exceed 20, including staff facilities. 
2.  Rooms or suites of rooms may be designed with separate kitchen facilities. 
3.  Lodging Facility shall be located within one mile of a hospital or inpatient clinic. 
4.  Facilities locating in a TR district must have frontage on streets with classifications higher than local streets. 
5.  If located adjacent to a single family district and/or an AG-1 district used for single family, the minimum buffers and landscape strips required for the O-I district as specified in section 4.23 shall be required. 
6.  Off-street parking requirements shall be one per living unit plus one per nonresident employee. Parking is not allowed in the front yard setback. 
7.  Signs shall not exceed four square feet in area and four feet in height. 
8.  Facilities must be served by public sewer when available within 1,000 feet of a utilized gravity flow. 
9.  Provide per the following chart a minimum distance separation between the nearest property line of the proposed medical related housing and the nearest property line of medical related housing with frontage on the same road(s) as the proposed facility. 

 
*Source: The Department of Transportation Division of Planning, Data, and Intermodel Development Office of Transportation Data in cooperation with U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration as of 08/07/2007. 
19.4.29 Open. 
19.4.30 Open. 
19.4.31 Mobile home—Accessory dwelling. 
A.  Required Districts: AG-1 
B.  Standards: 
1.  The mobile home shall be limited to a three-year period from the date of the board of commissioners' approval, after which the mobile home shall be removed unless an additional use permit has been granted. (Amended 3/4/92) 
2.  The mobile home shall be located in the rear yard of an existing residential structure in conformance with the yard standards for the location of accessory buildings. 
3.  The mobile home shall be for the exclusive use of and occupancy by a member of the family or a near relative of the occupant of the existing structure, including father, mother, sister, brother, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, child, ward or guardian. 
19.4.31(1) Nightclub/private club. 
A.  Required Districts: C-1, C-2 and MIX 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Permitted curb cut access shall be derived only from arterial streets. 
2.  The hours of operation shall be limited to the following hours: 

 
If adjacent to a residentially zoned or used district the hours of operation including the parking lot area shall be: 

 
3.  All facilities must close and clear their premises, including all exterior and parking lot areas, of patrons within 30 minutes after the set ending time for alcohol sales. 
4.  All music and entertainment activities associated with the use shall occur entirely within a completely enclosed soundproof structure. 
5.  A sound level of 65 dBA shall not be exceeded at the property line of any adjacent residential zoning or use. 
6.  Outdoor gathering areas for patrons other than parking shall be limited to 15% of the gross floor area of the venue. No outdoor gathering area for patrons use other than parking shall be permitted if the property is adjacent to a residential zoning or use. 
7.  Alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages shall not be "for sale" outside the interior (heated and/or cooled) areas of the nightclub/private club. 
8.  Entertainment, DJ booths, outdoor loudspeakers and dancing are prohibited in all outdoor areas. 
9.  All parking for the venue shall be provided onsite and meet the minimum standard of 10 parking spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of building area. 
10.  Shared and/or offsite parking are prohibited. 
11.  Parking shall be setback a minimum of 50 feet from a property line adjacent to a residential zoning or use. 
12.  Facilities must be served by public sewer when gravity flow sewer is available within 1,000 feet of the property. 
13.  Provide a minimum distance separation of 600 feet as measured from each property line of a daycare use. 
14.  Provide per the following chart a minimum distance separation as measured from each property line of a nightclub/private club. 

 
*  Source: The Department of Transportation Division of Planning, Data, and Intermodal Development Office of Transportation Data in cooperation with U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration as of Aug. 7, 2007. 
(Res. No. 11-0884, pt. 2, 10-5-11) 
19.4.32 Quarries and/or surface mining sites. (Added 04/05/06) 
A.  Required Districts: AG-1, M-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  No portion of a new or expanded quarry shall be located within a 1.5 mile radius of the property lines of a residentially zoned or used property. An expanded quarry shall not include any expanded use within the parcel boundaries of an existing site or location. 
2.  No portion of a new or expanded surface mining site shall be located within a 500-foot radius of the property lines of a residentially zoned or used property. An expanded surface mining site shall not include any expanded use within the parcel boundaries of an existing site or location. 
3.  All activities of a quarry and/or surface mining shall be in compliance with the Georgia Blasting Standards Act of 1978, the 1968 Georgia Surface Mining Act and the U.S. Bureau of Mines RI 8507. 
19.4.33 Personal care home/assisted living. (Allowed as a permitted use in O-I, A, A-L, MIX, C-1 and C-2) 
A.  Required Districts: R-6 and TR 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Facilities shall be for five persons or more. 
2.  Permitted curb cut access shall be from an arterial or a major collector. Permitted curb cut access may be allowed from a minor collector if within 1,000 feet of the property line of an institutional use. 
3.  Provide a 50-foot building setback from single family districts and/or AG-1 districts when used for single family. 
4.  No parking allowed in the minimum front yard setback. 
5.  The minimum parking spaces provided shall be in conformance with health care facilities per article 18.2.1. 
6.  Provide landscape strips and buffers as required in the O-I district as specified in article 4.23. 
7.  Rooms or suites of rooms may be designed with separate kitchen facilities. 
8.  Facility shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations, and provide applicable permits to the department of environment and community development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
9.  In accordance with article 28.4.6, submit a noise study report as required. (Added 04/03/02) 
10.  Facilities must be served by public sewer when gravity flow sewer is available within 1,000 feet of the property. 
11.  Provide per the following chart a minimum distance separation between the nearest property line of the proposed personal care home/assisted living facility and the nearest property line of an existing personal care home/assisted living facility with frontage on the same road(s) as the proposed facility. 

 
*Source: The Department of Transportation Division of Planning, Data, and Intermodel Development Office of Transportation Data in cooperation with U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration as of 08/07/2007. 
19.4.34 Private correctional facility/prison. (Added 07/07/99) 
A.  Required Districts: M-1, M-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Minimum lot size: 100 acres 
2.  All boundary lines of the property included within the use permit must be located at least 500 feet from the properties listed below: 
a.  The property line of Suburban A, Suburban B, Suburban C, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-4A, R-5, R-5A, R-6, NUP, CUP, TR, A, A-L, AG-1 zoned property or property conditioned or used for residential purposes. 
b.  The property line of any public recreational facilities, public or private institutional uses, including but not limited to churches, schools, universities, colleges, trade-schools, libraries, day care centers and other training facilities when minors are the primary patrons. 
3.  All boundary lines of the property included within the use permit must be located at least ten miles from all property lines of any other correctional facility. 
4.  Submit, with the application for a use permit, a certified boundary survey of the site and the use of adjoining properties. If any of the uses or zoning districts referenced in B.2.a. and b. are located within 500 feet of the boundary lines of the subject property, and/or a correctional facility is located within ten miles of the boundary line of the subject property, they must be identified by map as part of the use permit application. 
5.  A minimum 200-foot wide buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjacent to any property zoned other than M-1 and M-2 and from any property used for residential purposes. 
6.  A minimum 100-foot wide buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjacent to property zoned M-1 and/or M-2. 
7.  Permitted curb cut access shall be from a major thoroughfare. 
8.  Parking spaces shall be in accordance with article 18, Hospitals. 
9.  Fencing shall be in accordance with American Correction Institute standards and located interior to required buffers and improvement setbacks. 
10.  Lighting shall be in accordance with American Correction Institute standards and the lighting standards set forth in this zoning resolution. The more restrictive standards shall apply. 
11.  Facility shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations and applicable permits shall be provided to the environment and community development department prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
12.  Facilities must be served by public sewer when gravity flow sewer is available within 1,000 feet of the property. 
19.4.35 Race track. 
A.  Required Districts: AG-1, M-1 and M-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  A minimum of ten acres is required. 
2.  The race track and spectator stands for animal tracks shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family, and 2,000 feet from such districts for vehicular tracks. 
3.  Permitted curb cut access shall not be from a local street. 
4.  A minimum 75-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjacent to residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
5.  A minimum 50-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjacent to all other property lines. 
6.  Provide an eight-foot high fence interior to the required buffer/improvement setback and landscape strips. 
7.  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines of adjacent residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
8.  Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. when adjacent to residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
9.  In accordance with section 28.4.3.2, submit an environmental impact report as required. (Amended 04/03/02) 
10.  Facilities must be served by public sewer when gravity flow sewer is available within 1,000 feet of the property. 
19.4.36 Recreational fields including but not limited to soccer, softball, baseball, polo, football, cricket, etc. 
A.  Required Districts: All 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Permitted curb cut access shall not be from a local street. 
2.  A minimum 50-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjacent to residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
3.  Loudspeakers/paging systems are prohibited adjacent to residentially used property. 
4.  The hours of operation shall be limited to daylight hours when said facility is located adjacent to residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
19.4.37 Recycling center, reprocessing. (Added 12/4/91, Amended 04/03/02) 
A.  Required Districts: C-2 and M-1A 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Limit hours of operation from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
2.  No portion of a new recycling facility shall be located within a three-mile radius of the property lines of an existing recycling facility. 
3.  A minimum 200-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be required along all property lines except public rights-of-way. 
4.  A minimum 50-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be required along all public rights-of-way. 
5.  All recyclable materials shall be stored in containers with no stockpiling outside the containers. 
6.  Collection, storage containers, or receptacles shall not be allowed in minimum yards. Storage shall be screened with a six-foot high, solid wall or fence, including access gates. 
7.  The processing of recyclable materials must be done within an enclosed building. 
8.  Driveways shall be designed so vehicles will exit the facility in a forward direction. 
9.  A maximum continuous sound level of 65 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines of adjacent residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
10.  The recycling center shall comply with regulations administered by the Fulton County Department of Health. 
11.  In accordance with article 28.4.3.2, submit an environmental impact report as required. (Amended 04/03/02) 
(Res. No. 11-0743, 9-7-11) 
19.4.38 Open. 
19.4.39 Salvage, storage, and/or junk facility. (Amended 11/03/93, 04/03/02) 
A.  Required Districts: M-1 and M-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  No portion of a new salvage, storage, and/or junk facility shall be located within a three-mile radius of the property lines of an existing salvage, storage, and/or junk facility. 
2.  A minimum 200-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be required along all property lines except public rights-of-way. 
3.  A minimum 50-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be required along all public rights-of-way. 
4.  All facilities shall be screened from view from adjacent properties and roadways with a minimum six-foot high, solid fence or wall, as approved by the environment and community development department, except for approved access crossings and utility easements. Said fence or wall shall be located interior to any required buffer or landscape strip. (Amended 3/4/92) 
5.  Vehicles and other materials shall not be stacked so that they are visible from any adjacent properties. 
6.  In accordance with article 28.4.3.2., submit an environmental impact report as required. (Amended 04/03/02) 
19.4.40 School, private or special. 
A.  Required Districts: All 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Minimum lot area shall be one acre. 
2.  If located adjacent to a single family dwelling district and/or AG-1 district used for single family, the minimum landscape strips, buffers, and improvement setbacks required for the O-1 district as specified in section 4.23 shall be required. (Amended 04/07/93) 
3.  Buildings, and refuse areas shall not be located within 100 feet of a residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
4.  Active outdoor recreation areas shall not be located within 100 feet of an adjoining residential district or use. Recreational fields, such as playing fields, that are accessory to the school do not require a separate use permit. 
5.  Day care facilities in association with the school do not require a separate use permit. 
6.  Parking areas shall not be located within 50 feet of any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
7.  Student drop-off and vehicular turn-around facilities shall be provided on the site so that vehicles may re-enter the public street in a forward manner. 
8.  Permitted curb cut access shall not be from a local street. 
9.  In accordance with article 28.4.6, submit a noise study report as required. (Added 04/03/02) 
10.  Facilities must be served by public sewer when available within 1,000 feet of a utilized gravity flow. 
11.  Provide per the following chart a minimum distance separation between the nearest property line of the proposed private or special school facility and the nearest property line of an existing private of special school facility with frontage on the same road(s) as the proposed facility. 

 
*Source: The Department of Transportation Division of Planning, Data, and Intermodel Development Office of Transportation Data in cooperation with U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration as of 08/07/2007. 
12.  Provide a 600-foot distance separation measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground between the property line of a school and any business that is licensed for the sale or consumption of liquor, wine and malt beverages; a 300-foot distance separation from those businesses that are licensed for consumption or wholesale/retail sales of wine and malt beverages only. 
19.4.41 Self storage/mini. 
A.  Required Districts: C-1 and C-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  At least 75 percent of the total on-site storage space shall be contained in individual enclosed stalls containing no more than 500 square feet each and being no more than ten feet high. 
2.  No activities other than the dead storage or transfer of nonvolatile goods or leasing of storage space are permitted. Prohibited uses include but are not limited to miscellaneous sales; fabrication or repair of vehicles, equipment or other goods; transfer-storage business based on site; residential uses (other than the resident manager's apartment), or any use which creates a nuisance due to noise, odor, dust, light or electrical interference. 
3.  An on-site manager or resident manager shall be required and shall be responsible for the operation of the facility in conformance with conditions of approval. A resident manager's apartment is included in the use permit. 
4.  Provide a minimum six-foot high, 100 percent opaque solid wooden fence or masonry wall along the entire length (except for approved access crossings) of all property lines. Said fence/wall shall to be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any required landscape strips or buffers. 
5.  A new or expanded self storage facility shall be located a minimum of 1,500 feet from the boundary of any other self storage facility (mini or multi). (Added 03/03/04) 
19.4.41(1) Self storage/multi. 
A.  Required Districts: MIX, C-1, and C-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  No outside storage shall be allowed, including vehicle leasing. 
2.  All buildings shall have windows or architectural treatments that appear as windows. 
3.  No activities other than the dead storage or transfer of nonvolatile goods or leasing of storage space are permitted. Prohibited uses include but are not limited to miscellaneous sales; fabrication or repair of vehicles, equipment or other goods; transfer-storage business based on site; residential uses (other than the resident manager's apartment), or any use which creates a nuisance due to noise, odor, dust, light or electrical interference. 
4.  Permitted curb cut access shall not be from a local street. 
5.  A new or expanded self storage facility shall be located a minimum of 1,500 feet from the boundary of any other self storage facility (mini or multi). (Added 03/03/04) 
19.4.41(2) Reserved. (Added 04/05/06; deleted 5/4/11) 
19.4.42 Skywalks. (Amended 11/03/93) 
A.  Required Districts: AG-1, O-I, MIX, C-1, C-2, M-1A, M-1, M-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  A minimum vertical clearance of 16 feet above all streets, and a minimum vertical clearance of 16 feet above the walkway shall be provided. 
2.  Ample space for the free flow of pedestrians with a 12-foot minimum walkway width shall be provided. 
3.  Prior to issuance of a building permit, a bridge agreement shall be filed with the environment and community development department as a condition of approval. The environment and community development department shall be responsible for the interpretation and application of the conditions set forth above and no building permit shall be issued by the environment and community development department except upon written approval of the department of public works. 
19.4.42(1) Stadium (offsite) associated with a private school. (Added 09/01/04) 
A.  Required Districts: All 
B.  Standards: 
1.  Vehicular access is prohibited from a local street. 
2.  A minimum 200-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided along all property lines adjacent to residential and AG-1 zoned properties. 
3.  The hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. adjacent to residential and AG-1 zoned properties. 
4.  A 100-foot setback along any public right-of-way is required for all structures and activities. 
5.  The height limit of the zoning district shall apply to all structures unless a use permit to exceed district maximum height is approved. 
19.4.43 Transfer station, solid waste. (Added 10/02/02, Amended 04/05/06) 
A.  Required District: M-2 
B.  Standards: 
1.  No access shall be allowed from local streets. 
2.  Access streets shall be paved and shall be able to withstand maximum load limits established by the State of Georgia as approved by the director of public works. 
3.  No portion of a new transfer station shall be located within a three-mile radius of the property lines of an existing transfer station. 
4.  A minimum 200-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be required along all property lines except public rights-of-way. 
5.  A minimum 50-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be required along all public rights-of-way. 
6.  A minimum six-foot high solid fence or wall shall be located on property lines or interior to the required buffers and improvement setbacks. 
7.  Limit hours of operation from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
8.  The owner shall provide the director of the environment and community development department a current copy of all applicable permits from the State of Georgia upon application for a land disturbance permit. 
9.  In accordance with article 28.4.3.2, submit an environmental impact report as required. 
10.  No portion of a new or expanded solid waste transfer station shall be located within a one-mile radius of the property lines of a residentially zoned or used property. An expanded solid waste transfer station shall not include any expanded use within the parcel boundaries of an existing site or location. (Added 04/05/06) 
11.  Transfer stations shall be sited and operated in accordance with State Regulations 3891-3-4.06 Permit by Rule for Collection, Transportation, Processing, and Disposal, Official Code of Georgia Annotated 12-8-20 Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, Fulton County Solid Waste Management Plan, and Waste Transfer Stations: A Manual for Decision-Making (EPA 530-R-02-002, June 2002). (Added 04/05/06) 
19.4.44 Open. 
(Ord. No. 97-0328, 3-5-97; Ord. No. 97-0568, 5/7/97; Amended 5/7/97; Amended 7/7/99; Res. No. 08-0882, 11/5/08; Amd. No. 11-0289, 5/4/11) 
ARTICLE XXI. - BUILDING SETBACK LINE (Deleted 3/6/91) 
ARTICLE XXII. - APPEALS (Amended 6/2/99) 

22.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for appealing the strict application of regulations contained herein and conditions of zoning when those regulations impose a hardship on the development of the property, and to provide for interpretation of the text of this resolution and the official zoning map. Appeals are authorized herein to be considered by various bodies and individuals depending on the type of appeal and its relationship to applications for use permits or rezonings. Variances apply to the development standards and district standards per the zoning resolution. Modifications apply to the approved conditions of zoning or use permit. 
22.2 - Decision making authority. 
The following are the powers and jurisdiction of the various decision makers and administrative bodies. 
22.2.1 Board of commissioners (BOC) shall have the following powers and duties under the provisions of this zoning resolution: 
A.  To hear and decide applications for rezonings, use permits, and modifications pursuant to article 22 and article 28; 
B.  To hear and decide applications for concurrent variances in conjunction with applications for rezonings, use permits, and/or zoning modifications pursuant to article 22 and article 28; and 
C.  To initiate a modification of approved zoning conditions. 
22.2.2 Board of zoning appeals (BZA) shall have the following powers and duties under the provisions of this zoning resolution: 
A.  To hear and decide applications for primary variance requests; 
B.  To hear and decide appeals from the interpretation of any of the provisions of this resolution by the director of the department of environment and community development in accordance with section 22.2.3.H.; 
C.  To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by any Fulton County official in the enforcement of this zoning resolution; and 
D.  To hear and decide appeals from a permitting or procedural decision of the department director or deputy director regarding minor or administrative variance requests. 
22.2.3 Director of the department of environment and community development (E&CD), shall have the following jurisdiction, power and duties under the provisions of this zoning resolution: 
A.  To determine the type of appeal application or land use process the property owner/agent is required to apply for; 
B.  To consider and decide on minor variances to minimum yard requirements, not to exceed ten percent of such requirement, as long as property owners with standing do not object; 
C.  To consider and decide on administrative minor variances of no more than one foot; 
D.  To consider and decide on administrative variances; 
E.  To consider and decide on administrative modifications to conditions of zoning; 
F.  To interpret the provisions of the zoning resolution related to the following: 
1.  Inconsistent, vague or obscure language; 
2.  Provisions which are in conflict or are confusing; and 
3.  Conflicting or redundant procedural requirements; and. 
G.  To establish procedural requirements for review of appeal applications. 
22.2.4 Limitation on authority. The authority and jurisdiction of boards and individuals as provided herein shall be limited as outlined in the following. In exercising this jurisdiction, each hearing board or individual shall have authority to determine whether it has jurisdiction. 
A.  There shall be no variances to permitted uses or accessory uses as specified in the zoning district regulations, administrative/use permit or zoning conditions. 
B.  There shall be no variances to the minimum lot area nor the minimum district size required in each zoning district. 
C.  There shall be no variances to the minimum lot frontage on a street as required in designated zoning districts of the zoning resolution. 
D.  There shall be no modification to increase the density or change the use approved under the rezoning case except to allow for the development of a conservation subdivision. (Amended 05/05/04) 
E.  There shall be no modification to revise a site plan that, as determined by the director of the department of environment and community development (E&CD) results in a significant change in the approved concept. Such a site plan revision shall require rezoning pursuant to article 28. 
F.  There shall be no relief or variance from the standards of article 22 or article 28. 
22.3 - Variances. 
A variance is a request for relief from the provisions of the zoning resolution. There are six types of variance applications. The type of variance necessary shall be determined by the director of the department of environment and community development. The different types of appeals are listed below and described in the following sections: 
1.  Administrative variance. 
2.  Minor variance/administrative minor variance. 
3.  Primary variance. 
4.  Secondary variance. 
5.  Interpretation. 
6.  Concurrent variance. 
22.3.1 Variance considerations. Variances may be considered in all districts except CUP. Primary variances and concurrent variances shall only be granted upon showing that: (Amended 12-1-99) 
A.  Relief, if granted, would be in harmony with, or, could be made to be in harmony with, the general purpose and intent of the zoning resolution; or, 
B.  The application of the particular provision of the zoning resolution to a particular piece of property, due to extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to that property because of its size, shape, or topography, would create an unnecessary hardship for the owner while causing no detriment to the public; or, 
C.  Conditions resulting from existing foliage or structures bring about a hardship whereby a sign meeting minimum letter size, square footage and height requirements can not be read from an adjoining public road. 
22.4 - Administrative variance. (Amended 12/1/99) 
The director of the department of environment and community development is authorized by this resolution to consider an administrative variance whenever a property owner maintains that a provision contained in Article 34, Development Regulations, as applied to a specific situation, is not in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare; whenever there is a request for the alteration of the ten-foot improvement setback required along all buffers as required in the conditions of zoning and/or in 4.23.1 Minimum Landscape Strips and Buffers; whenever there is a request up to a ten percent reduction in the number of required parking spaces per 18.2.4, Administrative Reduction of Spaces Constructed; and where the director of environment and community development is given administrative authority to approve changes as specified in Article 12, Overlay Districts. 
(Amd. No. 09-0870, 9-2-09) 
22.5 - Administrative minor variance. 
The director of the environment and community development may grant an administrative minor variance up to one foot from any minimum yard requirement. 
22.6 - Minor variance. (Amended 12/1/99) 
The director of the environment and community development may grant minor variances to minimum yard requirements, not to exceed ten percent of such requirement, as long as property owners with standing do not object. 
22.7 - Primary variance. 
A request for a variance from any zoning resolution provision that is not being handled as a minor, administrative minor or concurrent variance and shall be heard and decided by the board of zoning appeals in accordance with section 22.3.1. 
22.8 - Secondary variance/interpretation. 
The board of zoning appeals shall consider appeals of variance decisions and interpretations made by any department director or deputy department director authorized to grant a variance request or interpretation. This type of appeal is considered a secondary variance. 
22.9 - Concurrent variances. 
The Board of Commissioners may consider a concurrent variance from any standards of the Zoning Resolution which shall be filed simultaneously with rezoning, use permit or zoning modification requests on the same property based on the conceptual plan submitted with the petition for the same agenda. The Community Zoning Board shall also hear and make recommendations on concurrent variances filed with rezonings or use permit applications. The Board of Commissioners shall consider such concurrent variance requests in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 22.3.1. Public notification shall be in accordance with Sections 22.13.9 and 28.3. (Amended 06/04/03) 
22.9.1 Limitations on concurrent variances. 
A.  The board of commissioners may only consider variance requests as part of, or in conjunction with, a rezoning, use permit or modification application. 
B.  Deleted 11/03/04. 
C.  If an application for a variance to the board of zoning appeals duplicates a concurrent variance request denied by the board of commissioners, such an application shall not be accepted by the director of the department of environment and community development prior to the expiration of six months from the date of the board of commissioners' denial of the variance request. A variance request to the board of zoning appeals cannot be considered simultaneously with the same variance request pending before the board of commissioners. 
22.9.2 Application for concurrent variances. Applications for a concurrent variance shall be submitted to the director of the department of environment and community development in accordance with the advertised filing deadlines for the board of commissioners meetings. A regular variance fee shall be charged and the application shall comply with all advertising and notification requirements specified in article 28, Rezoning And Other Amendment Procedures. One notice sign may serve for both the rezoning, use permit, zoning modification, and concurrent variance request as long as the sign is marked to indicate all actions which are pending. 
The variance case file number for each concurrent variance requested shall be included on the rezoning petition. 
22.10 - Modifications. 
A modification is a request for relief from the conditions of zoning or use permit when a site development proposal does not comply with approved conditions. There are two different types of modifications which are listed below and described in the following sections: 
1.  Administrative modification. 
2.  Zoning modification 
22.10.1 Application for modification. A request to modify a condition of zoning or use permit may be initiated by the property owner, the Planning Commission or the Board of Commissioners. Applications shall be submitted to the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development in accordance with the deadline schedule adopted by the Board of Commissioners. A modification application shall include a legal description of the property for which the modification is requested and a written explanation of the circumstances upon which the requested change of condition is based including the reason why development or use of the property, as approved, cannot be accomplished without the modification of a condition. Applicants shall submit a revised site plan illustrating the requested modification. The type of modification necessary is determined by the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development. 
22.11 - Administrative modifications. 
An administrative modification application may be filed if the Director of Environment and Community Development determines that the modification request is not prohibited by section 22.2.4, Limitation on Authority, and will constitute only a technical change and does not involve significant public interest, or public interest has been addressed by letters expressing no objections from property owner(s) with standing and/or neighborhood associations. 
The director shall send the administrative modification decision to the Board of Commissioners for confirmation at the next appropriate regular meeting. 
22.11.1 Appeal of an administrative modification decision. If an applicant wishes to appeal the decision of the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development regarding an administrative modification, or if it is determined by the director that a request will involve a matter of public interest, the applicant must file a separate application requesting a zoning modification on forms available from the Environment and Community Development Department. 
22.12 - Zoning modification. 
A zoning modification application shall be filed if an approved zoning condition cannot be met and it is determined by the director that the application involves significant public interest and is in compliance with section 22.2.4, Limitation on Authority. The zoning modification request shall be presented to the Board of Commissioners for consideration in a public hearing. 
22.13 - General procedures. 
This section contains basic steps common to all variances and modifications. 
22.13.1 Applications. All applications for variances, interpretations and modifications shall be filed with the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development on forms available in the department. The type of application process necessary to accomplish the change requested by the applicant shall be the determined by the director of E&CD. The director shall transmit the petition and all documents constituting the record to the appropriate hearing body or individual. 
22.13.2 Standing. Standing refers to a party or parties allowed to initiate a request for variances or modifications which are limited to the following: 
A.  Modification petition - A request for a modification may be initiated by the property owner or its agent, the Planning Commission or the Board of Commissioners; 
B.  Variance petition - A request for a variance may be initiated by the property owner of subject property or its agent; 
C.  Secondary variance petition - A request for a secondary variance appeal may be initiated by the property owner of the subject property or its agent, or the owner of other real property within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property; and 
D.  Interpretation petition - A request for an interpretation of a decision of the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development may be requested by any individual. 
22.13.3 Filing deadlines. 
A.  Applications for variances, interpretations and modifications shall be submitted in accordance with the advertised filing deadlines, depending on the type of petition in accordance with section 28.2.3 of the zoning resolution. 
B.  Concurrent variance applications shall be filed in accordance with the filing deadline for the parent petition of either a use permit, rezoning, or zoning modification request in accordance with section 28.2.3 of the zoning resolution. 
C.  The Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development has the discretion to extend the filing deadline by two days for all applications except administrative minor and minor variance applications. A letter from the applicant explaining the delay in filing shall be submitted prior to the close of the filing deadline. 
22.13.4 Withdrawal of application. 
A.  An application may be withdrawn by the applicant in writing at any time before the public hearing notice advertisement is published and/or the notice of the hearing is posted on the property. 
B.  Applications which do not require a public hearing may be withdrawn at any time before notification of a decision is mailed. 
C.  Once the public hearing has been properly advertised, the request for withdrawal of the application must be placed on the public hearing agenda and the appropriate decision-making body shall act on the withdrawal request. 
22.13.5 Fees. At the time of application, applicants shall pay fees as established by the Board of Commissioners. Fees paid are not refundable except where the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development determines that an application was accepted in error, or the fee paid exceeded the amount due, in which case the amount of the overpayment will be refunded to the applicant. 
22.13.6 Legal action stayed. The filing of an appeal authorized by this article shall operate as a stay of any enforcement proceedings by Fulton County until final resolution of the appeal. No Board of Commissioners or Board of Zoning Appeals action shall be taken on any property which is the subject of any litigation pending in state or federal court wherein Fulton County or its agents or officials are parties. 
22.13.7. Public hearing. A public hearing shall be conducted by the stated hearing body of each appeal application before taking action thereon except those authorized to be considered administratively. The schedule of public hearings and deadlines for the filing of an appeal shall be established by the Board of Commissioners. 
Public hearings are not required for administrative variances, minor variances, administrative minor variances and administrative modifications; however, notification in accordance with section 22.13.9.B. is required. 
22.13.8 Evaluations and reports. The hearing body shall have before it, at the time of hearing, a report from the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development which shall summarize the hardship or justification reported by the applicant as related to the application and background information for variances, modifications, and interpretations, and any other information requested by the hearing body. The hearing body shall, hear, analyze, consider, and make a written report of its decision in accordance with section 22.13.12, Notice of Decision. 
22.13.9. Public notification. (Amended 09/05/01, 10/02/02, 06/04/03, 03/03/04) 
A.  For those applications requiring a public hearing (Primary Variances, Secondary Variances, Concurrent Variances, and Zoning Modifications), the Director of the Environment and Community Development Department shall: 
1.  Publish notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days, but no more than 45 days prior to the public hearing at which an application will be heard. The published notice shall contain the time, place and purpose of the hearing and the location of the property if applicable (secondary variances may not always be property specific). Renotification is not required when a petition is deferred by the Board of Commissioners or the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
2.  The applicant or agent shall post a sign as issued by the Environment and Community Development Department in a conspicuous location on each public street frontage of the subject site, at least 20 days, but not more than 45 days, prior to the public hearing at which an application will be heard. 
The sign shall be mounted and posted as specified by the Environment and Community Development Department. Property that is not posted on the 20th day before the scheduled hearing date will be administratively removed from the agenda. The sign will remain posted on-site until final action by the appropriate hearing body is taken. 
When the Board of Zoning Appeals defers a petition, the applicant is required to post an updated sign with new hearing dates 20 days prior to the next scheduled hearing date. When the Board of Commissioners defers a petition, an updated sign is not required. 
The posted sign shall contain the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
For zoning modifications, all notices shall contain all of the items listed in the previous sentence, the location of the property, the zoning and/or use permit case number to be modified and the condition number(s) to be modified. 
The posting of a sign is not required when a secondary variance is not requested by the property owner or owner's representative. 
3.  Notice of the public hearing shall be postmarked 15 days prior to the hearing date and shall be given by regular mail to all property owners within 300 feet of the boundaries of the property who appear on the current tax records of Fulton County as retrieved by the County's Geographic Information System. Renotification is not required when a petition is deferred by the Board of Commissioners or the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
The mailing of public notices is not required when a secondary variance is sought by other than the property owner. 
B.  For those applications not requiring a public hearing, notification shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Administrative Variance: The owners of property adjacent and contiguous across the right-of-way of the subject site shall be notified in accordance with Section 22.13.9(A)(3). 
2.  Minor Variance: The owners of property adjacent and contiguous across the right-of-way of the subject site shall be notified in accordance with Section 22.13.9(A)(3). 
3.  Administrative Modification: The Director of the Environment and Community Development Department shall determine what notification, if any, is reasonable on a case by case basis. 
4.  Administrative Minor Variance: No written notification. 
22.13.10 Decisions. The Board of Commissioners, Board of Zoning Appeals, and the Director of the Environment and Community Department in considering applications under this article shall do one of the following: 
A.  Approve or partially approve. 
B.  Approve and impose conditions related to the application being considered. (Amended 4-3-02) 
C.  Deny. 
D.  Hold for further study not less than 30 days. 
E.  Withdraw. 
22.13.11 Board of Zoning Appeals decision on secondary variances/interpretations. The Board of Zoning Appeals may take the following actions pursuant to a secondary variance and/or an interpretation appeal: 
A.  Affirm an order, requirement, or decision, wholly or partly. 
B.  Reverse an order, requirement, or decision, wholly or partly. 
C.  Clarify. Present an interpretation of the text in the form of a statement of clarification. Such statement shall not contain substitute language, but shall rely upon language and definitions contained in the Fulton County Zoning Resolution, and definitions contained in Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary, tenth edition. 
22.13.12 Notice of decisions. Written notice of all decisions shall be placed in the official case file and shall be forwarded to the applicant by regular mail within seven working days from the date of the decision by the following authority: 
A.  The Director of the Environment and Community Development Department shall provide written notification of the Board of Zoning Appeals' decisions; 
B.  The Director of the Environment and Community Development Department shall, with respect to minor variances, administrative variances, and administrative modifications provide written notification of such decisions. The approval of a building permit shall constitute notice of approval for an administrative minor variance; and 
C.  The Clerk to the Board of Commissioners shall, with respect to zoning modifications and concurrent variances, provide written notification of the Board of Commissioners' decisions. 
22.13.13 Reconsideration of denied application. If a variance or modification application is denied by an authorized department director, Board of Commissioners or the Board of Zoning Appeals, an application for the same variance or modification item shall not be considered until: 
A.  At least six months has elapsed from the date of the decision; or 
B.  New information pertinent to the subject, not previously considered, is submitted by the petitioner and the six-month period is waived by the hearing body. 
C.  If an application is denied by the Director of the Environment and Community Development Department, the applicant may appeal the decision to the appropriate hearing body depending on the type of petition. 
This provision is not intended to supersede provisions of article 28.2 as related to decisions regarding rezonings and/or use permits. 
22.13.14 Time limitation on appeals to superior court. The decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals is a final decision; therefore, any appeal of such a decision shall be pursued by application for writ of certiorari filed with the Superior Court of Fulton County within 30 days of the date of the decision. The applicant's petition, application for writ of certiorari, the writ of certiorari and any other initials filings with the Superior Court shall be served upon the named defendants/respondents in accordance with O.C.G.A. Section 9-11-4. (Amended 12-1-99) 
Upon filing such an appeal, the Clerk of Superior Court shall give immediate notice thereof to the Director of the Environment and Community Development Department, and within 30 days from the date of such notice, the Director of Environment and Community Development shall cause to be filed with the Clerk of Superior Court a certified copy of the proceedings and the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
Appeals of decisions (Secondary Variances/Interpretation) of the Director of the Environment and Community Development Department, or the Director of Public Works shall be brought within 30 days from the date of the decision. 
22.13.15 Expiration of variance. If not used, a variance shall be valid only for a period of 36 months from the date it is granted. Extensions may be sought under the provisions for Expiration and Extensions in article 28, Rezoning and Other Amendment Procedures. 
22.14 - Board of zoning appeals. 
22.14.1 Membership. The Fulton County Board of Zoning Appeals (or as hereinafter may be called the board) shall consist of seven members appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County. The term of each member shall coincide with that of the district commissioner who appointed the member to serve on the board of zoning appeals. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members shall be removable for cause by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County upon written charges and after public hearing. The members of the board shall be compensated as fixed by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County. None of the members shall hold any other public office or position in Fulton County, except that one member may also be a member of the Fulton County Community Zoning Board. (15-0148, Exh. A, 2-18-15) 
22.14.2 Vacancies. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
22.14.3 Removal of members. Members may be removed for cause by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
22.14.4 Pay. Fees to be paid to the members of the Fulton County Board of Zoning Appeals for attending official meetings shall be fixed from time to time by the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County. 
22.14.5 Secretary. The Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development shall serve as secretary to the Board of Zoning Appeals. The secretary shall keep minutes of proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and shall keep records of evidence, examinations and official actions, all of which shall be filed and shall be a public record. 
22.14.6 Policies and procedures. The Fulton County Board of Zoning Appeals shall adopt and publish policies, procedures and rules in keeping with the provisions of this resolution. Such shall be available in the Environment and Community Development Department. 
22.14.7 Meetings. Meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at least once each month to dispose of matters scheduled. Additional meetings may be called by the chairman. The Board of Zoning Appeals scheduled meetings, places and dates, and deadlines for the filing of applications shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners and published by the Director of the Environment and Community Development Department. (Amended 6-2-99, 11-3-99) 
ARTICLE XXIII. - OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE (Amended 9-5-01)[28] 

Footnotes: 
--- (28) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 01-0979, pt. 3, adopted Sept. 5, 2001, amended the title of article XXIII to read as herein set out. 

23.1 - Certificate of occupancy. 
A certificate of occupancy, indicating that a building, lot and use comply with the building code and this Zoning Resolution is required under provisions of the Fulton County Building Code. Said certificate of occupancy shall be posted on-site where it is visible for inspection for a period of 30 days from the date of issuance. (Amended 9-5-01) 
Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to change the use of a building or structure shall first make application to the building official, obtain the required permits, and obtain a Certificate of Occupancy prior to occupying said structure. (Added 4-3-02) 
ARTICLE XXIV. - PLANS AND INSPECTIONS 

24.1 - Single family dwelling plans. 
Applications for building permits for single family dwellings shall be accompanied by two copies of a plot plan. Applications for building permits and land disturbance permits other than single family dwellings shall respond to the plan requirements set forth by the Department of Environment and Community Development. Plot plans shall be based on a boundary line survey and drawn to scale. One copy of the plot plan shall be returned to the owner when plans have been approved by the Department of Environment and Community Development. Plot plan shall show: (Amended 11-3-93, 2-7-01) 
A.  The exact location of temporary and permanent pins, monuments and stakes used to mark the boundary. 
B.  The exact footprint of existing and proposed buildings and their structures, and the footprint of proposed alterations and additions. 
C.  The existing and proposed use of each building and other structure or part thereof, 
D.  The required number of parking spaces, and their locations, 
E.  Other information as may be necessary to determine compliance with this resolution. 
24.2 - Inspections. 
Prior to pouring footings, the owner shall notify the Department of Environment and Community Development to conduct an inspection to determine that space for required setbacks are available on the site. This inspection shall, in no way, relieve the owner of total responsibility for complying with all provisions of the resolution. (Amended 11-3-93, 2-7-01) 
ARTICLE XXV. - INCLUDED IN SECTION 4.30 (Effective 10-5-88) 
ARTICLE XXVI. - INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND ENFORCEMENT (Amended 3-6-91) 

26.1 - Interpretation. 
The Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development shall interpret the provisions to this resolution, and may utilize opinions of the county attorney and others in arriving at interpretations. Appeals from an interpretation of the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development shall be in accordance with the provisions of article XXII. (Amended 11-3-93, 2-7-01) 
26.2 - Conflict. 
This resolution shall abrogate any other regulations previously adopted or issued that are in conflict with any of the provisions of this resolution relating to the use of buildings or land in conflict with this resolution. This resolution shall not annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that whenever this resolution imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land than are imposed by such easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of the resolution shall control. 
26.3 - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development to enforce the provisions of this resolution. In addition, it shall be the duty of all officers and employees of the county, especially members of the police department, sheriff's department and marshal's office, to assist the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development by reporting to him any seeming violations, including violations in new construction, reconstruction, and/or land uses including signs. appeals from the decision of the Director of the Department of Environment and Community Development shall be made as provided in article XXII, Appeals. (Amended 11-3-93, 2-7-01) 
26.4 - Permits in effect. 
Nothing herein shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any land, building, structure or part thereof for which a building permit or land disturbance permit was issued prior to the effective date of this resolution or amendment thereto. 
ARTICLE XXVII. - ENFORCEMENT (Deleted 3-6-91) 
ARTICLE XXVIII. - REZONING AND OTHER AMENDMENT PROCEDURES (Added 9-1-04)[29] 

Footnotes: 
--- (29) --- 
Note— Adopted by the Board of Commissioners on September 1, 2004 (effective for petitions filed after November 1, 2004). 

28.1. - General amendments. 
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice justify such action, and after consideration by the Community Zoning Board, the Board of Commissioners may, by resolution, change the regulations set forth in this Zoning Resolution (text amendment) or amend the Zoning Maps. 
In amending the Zoning Maps, the Board of Commissioners may approve a use permit and/or zoning district applied for by the applicant or a more restrictive zoning district based on the ranking of Fulton County Zoning District intensities. The Board of Commissioners may consider a variance filed concurrently with a request for a rezoning and/or use permit. 
In approving any zoning district change and/or use permit, the Board of Commissioners shall impose conditions of approval as deemed necessary and appropriate to mitigate potentially adverse influences or otherwise promote the public health, safety or general welfare. 
Rezoning and/or use permit requests are referred to in this text as land use petitions. Changes made to standards contained within the zoning resolution are referred to in this article as text amendments. All land use petitions approved by the board of commissioners are subject to conditions approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Amd. No. 09-0185, 2-4-09) 
28.1.1. - Text amendment procedures. 
(1)  Text amendments may be initiated by any of the following: 
a.  The Fulton County Board of Commissioners. 
b.  The department of environment and community development. 
c.  Recognized community group or organization: 
i.  A recognized community group is an umbrella group which has provided a list of member groups and contact information for the umbrella group's officers and/or directors to the planning staff of E&CD (e.g., community appointed overlay district groups, community associations etc.) 
ii.  A recognized organization is an umbrella group of business owners exclusive of individual businesses which have provided a list of member businesses and contact information for the umbrella group's officers and/or directors to the planning staff of E&CD (e.g., business/merchant associations, community associations etc.) 
(Amd. No. 09-0185, 2-4-09; Amd. No. 09-0563, 6-3-09) 
28.1.2. - Public hearing and notice requirements for text amendments. 
(1)  Before adopting any change to the text of the zoning resolution, the board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing in accordance with section 28.3. In addition to the final board of commissioners public hearing the text amendment shall be presented for public comment at least two times prior to the first public hearing by the community zoning board. At a minimum the text amendment will be presented for public comment at the community zoning information meeting (CZIM) and a community zoning board (CZB) meeting. 
(2)  Notice of the community zoning board (both for public comment and public hearing) and board of commissioners hearing shall be given simultaneously at least 15 days but no more than 45 days prior to the public hearing and shall be published in the official legal organ of Fulton County, posted on the environment and community development (E&CD) website, and email notification to all recognized organizations and community groups as specified in 28.1.1, Section 1.c. 
No posting of signs or mailing of notification letters is required for text amendments. When the community zoning board or the board of commissioners defers a text amendment renotification is not required. 
(Amd. No. 09-0185, 2-4-09; Amd. No. 09-0563, 6-3-09) 
28.2. - Land use petitions. 
Land use petitions may be initiated by the property owner or the Board of Commissioners on forms available from the department. 
No final action shall be taken on a land use petition affecting the same parcel more often than once every 12 months when the petition is initiated by the property owner. 
At any time, the Board of Commissioners may initiate a land use petition on property which was previously rezoned. However, a six-month waiting period from the date of final Board action is required when a rezoning and/or use permit request was previously denied. 
If a petition was previously denied, the owner must demonstrate that the proposed land use petition is significantly different from the previous denial to the satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners before it can be considered for a reinitiation. A significant difference includes, but is not limited to a change in zoning district, use, density, height, buffers or other methods of screening, or other items which were discussed at a public hearing. 
Appeals to Superior Court. Any appeal of, or other legal challenge to, a Board of Commissioners' final decision regarding a use permit petition shall be pursued by petition for writ of certiorari filed with the Superior Court of Fulton County within 30 days of the date of the Board of Commissioners' decision. The applicant's petition and all other initial filings with the Superior Court shall be served upon the named defendants/respondents in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 9-11-4. 
Upon filing such appeal, the Clerk of Superior Court shall give immediate notice thereof to the director, and within 30 days from the date of such notice, the director shall cause to be filed with the Clerk of Superior Court a certified copy of the proceedings before the board and the decision of the board. 
Legal Action Stayed. The filing of a land use petition authorized by this article shall operate as a stay of any enforcement proceedings by Fulton County until final resolution of the petition. No board of commissioners or board of zoning appeals action shall be taken on any property which is the subject of any litigation pending in state or federal court wherein Fulton County or its agents or officials are parties. 
28.2.1. Filing deadlines. A complete land use petition shall be submitted in accordance with the advertised filing deadlines. The director may extend the filing deadline by two days with a letter of explanation from the applicant justifying the delay of submittal. An incomplete petition will not be accepted. 
28.2.2. Withdrawal prior to advertising. If a land use petition has not been advertised for public hearing, a written request for withdrawal with the reason for the request shall be made to and accepted by the director. No refunds of petition fees will be made. 
28.2.3. Withdrawal after advertising. After a land use petition has been advertised for public hearing, it may only be withdrawn by the Board of Commissioners at the public hearing. A withdrawal shall not be deemed final action and shall not bar submission of a new petition. A written request for withdrawal with the reason for the request shall be made to the director. 
28.2.4. Petition requirements. All petitions shall include the following with the required number of copies of each as prescribed by the director: 
(1)  Pre-application review form; 
(2)  Signed and notarized petition with original signatures; 
(3)  Legal description; 
(4)  Letter of intent; 
(5)  Site plan which meets the requirements specified in Article 28.5.2; 
(6)  Site plan checklist which indicates compliance with site plan requirements specified in Article 28.5.2; 
(7)  Environmental site analysis; 
(8)  8½" x 11" transparency of site plan; 
(9)  Impact analysis for rezoning petitions; 
(10)  Disclosure form; 
(11)  Public participation plan; 
(12)  Public participation report (due no later than seven business days before the Board of Commissioners meeting); 
(13)  Traffic study, if applicable; 
(14)  Metropolitan River Protection Act pre-review letter, if applicable; 
(15)  MARTA Corridor plan review form, if applicable; 
(16)  Development of regional impact review form, if applicable; 
(17)  Environmental impact report, if applicable; 
(18)  Noise study report, if applicable; 
(19)  Other documents as identified in the pre-application review; and 
(20)  Non-refundable filing fee. 
(21)  Copy of deed(s) (Added 04/05/06) 
(Amd. No. 09-0185, 2-4-09) 
28.3. - Public hearing and notice requirements. 
Before adopting any land use petition change, the board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing following the public hearing by the community zoning board where a recommendation was made on the petition. 
Notice of the community zoning board and board of commissioners hearings shall be given simultaneously at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the board of commissioners' public hearing and shall be published in the official legal organ of Fulton County. Renotification is not required when a petition is deferred by the board of commissioners. 
The applicant or agent shall post a sign as issued by E&CD in a conspicuous location on each public street frontage of the subject property not later than 8:30 a.m. on the 20th day prior to the Community Zoning Board Hearing. 
The sign shall be mounted and posted as specified by E&CD. Property that is not posted on the 20th day before the scheduled first hearing date will be administratively removed from the agenda. 
When the Community Zoning Board or the Board of Commissioners defers a petition, the applicant is required to post an updated sign with new hearing dates 20 days prior to the next scheduled hearing date. When a petition is deferred by the Board of Commissioners for less than 20 days, posting an updated sign is not required. 
The Department shall give notice by regular mail to all property owners within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property who appear on the tax records of Fulton County as retrieved by the County's Geographic Information System. The notices shall be mailed a minimum of 15 days prior to the hearing date. Renotification by mail is not required when a petition is deferred by the Board of Commissioners. 
The published and mailed notices shall contain the time, place, and purpose of the hearing, the location of the property, and the present and proposed zoning classifications and/or requested use permit. The posted sign shall include all of the items required in the published notice except the location of the property. Notice shall not be considered inadequate if the mail is not delivered. 
(Amd. No. 09-0185, 2-4-09; Amd. No. 09-0766, pt. 2, 8-5-09) 
28.3.1. - Secretary. 
The Director or his/her appointee shall serve as Secretary to the Community Zoning Board. The Secretary shall keep minutes of proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and shall keep records of evidence, examinations and official actions, all of which shall be filed and shall be a public record. 
28.4. - Technical evaluations and reports. 
Proposed land use petitions shall be considered by the Board of Commissioners only after the evaluations and reports required below have been completed and the Community Zoning Board has made a recommendation. Such reports shall be public record. 
28.4.1. Zoning impact analysis by the community zoning board and the department. For each rezoning petition, the Community Zoning Board and the department shall investigate and make a recommendation with respect to the factors listed below. The department shall make a written record of its investigation and recommendation on each rezoning petition, as well as any other factors it may find relevant, and carry out any other duties with which it is charged by the Board of Commissioners. 
The Community Zoning Board shall make a recommendation which the department shall transmit in writing to the Board of Commissioners. 
The zoning impact analysis factors are as follows: 
A.  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
B.  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
C.  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
D.  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 
E.  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policies and intent of the land use plan; 
F.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal; and 
G.  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use which can be considered environmentally adverse to the natural resources, environment and citizens of Fulton County. 
28.4.2. Zoning impact analysis by applicant. If a rezoning is initiated by the property owner, a written documented analysis of the impact of the proposed zoning with respect to each of the matters enumerated in 28.4.1 is required at the time of filing the land use petition. 
28.4.3. Environmental reports. If a rezoning and/or use permit is initiated by the property owner, an Environmental Site Analysis and/or an Environmental Impact Report shall be filed with the land use petition per the following: 
28.4.3.1. Environmental site analysis (ESA). All rezoning and/or use permit petitions shall include an Environmental Site Analysis to identify environmental conditions on the site to determine if the proposed use may be considered environmentally adverse. 
The Environmental Site Analysis shall detail the following: 
1.  Does Article 4.18, Environmentally Adverse Uses, apply to the proposed use? If yes, does the use comply with the prescribed acceptable separation distance? 
2.  The presence or absence of the following and does the project encroach or adversely affect any of the following: 
a.  Wetlands; 
b.  Floodplains; 
c.  Streams/stream buffers; 
d.  Slopes exceeding 25 percent over a 10 foot rise in elevation; 
e.  Vegetation (including endangered species; areas of confirmed Georgia Department of Natural Resources listed endangered species shall comply with the Federal Endangered Species Act) (Amended 04/05/06); 
f.  Wildlife species (including fish and endangered species; areas of confirmed Georgia Department of Natural Resources listed endangered species shall comply with the Federal Endangered Species Act) (Amended 04/05/06); 
g.  Archeological/historical sites; 
3.  How the project implements the following: 
a.  Protection of environmentally sensitive areas (floodplains, slopes exceeding 25 percent, river corridors); 
b.  Protection of water quality; 
c.  Minimization of negative impacts on existing infrastructure; 
d.  Minimization of negative impacts on archeological/historically significant areas; 
e.  Minimization of negative impacts on Environmentally Stressed Communities; 
f.  Creation and preservation of green space and open space; 
g.  Protection of citizens from the negative impacts of noise and lighting; 
h.  Protection of parks and recreational green space; 
i.  Minimization of impacts to wildlife habitats. 
28.4.3.2. Environmental impact report (EIR). Any petition for an industrial rezoning and/or use permit shall include an Environmental Impact Report to determine if the proposed use is environmentally adverse. 
The Environmental Impact Report shall detail the following: 
1.  Does Article 4.18, Environmentally Adverse Uses, apply to the proposed use? If yes, does the use comply with the prescribed acceptable separation distance? 
2.  Impacts on noise levels of the surrounding area; 
3.  Impacts on air quality of the surrounding area; 
4.  Impacts on water quality/resources including surface water, ground water, flood plains, and wetlands; 
5.  Impacts on vegetation, fish, and wildlife species and habitats; 
6.  Impacts of thermal and explosive hazards on the surrounding area; 
7.  Impacts of hazardous wastes on the surrounding area; 
The report shall cite all uses and quantities of any agents listed on the Federal Environmental Protection Agency Lists of Hazardous Wastes; 
8.  Minimization of negative impacts on Environmentally Stressed Communities. 
The Environmental Impact Report shall detail strategies to mitigate or avoid impacts listed above as applicable. 
28.4.3.3. Review criteria for ESA and/or EIR. Environmental Site Analysis and/or Environmental Impact Reports shall be reviewed based upon the following: 
1.  Whether the petition is consistent with the requirements of Article 4.18, Environmentally Adverse Uses; 
2.  The detail provided for ESAs and EIRs as outlined in Sections 28.4.3.1 and 28.4.3.2 above. 
The Department shall review the ESAs and EIRs submitted with petitions for rezoning and/or use permits and make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners with respect to the proposed use. The anticipated impact of the proposed use on an Environmentally Stressed Community will be included in the Department's recommendation. 
As determined by the Director or his/her designee, Environmental Impact Reports may also be required with applications for land disturbance permits, building permits, temporary or permanent certificates of occupancy, or any other permits issued by the Department of Environment and Community Development. 
28.4.4. Traffic impact study. A Traffic Impact Study is required when a land use petition equals or exceeds the thresholds indicated in the department's rezoning, use permit & concurrent variance application package. The study shall be prepared by a certified traffic engineer or transportation planner in accordance with professional practices and must be submitted at the time of the filing of the land use petition. 
28.4.5. Development of regional impact study (DRI). A Development of Regional Impact Study is required when a land use petition meets or exceeds the thresholds indicated in the department's rezoning, use permit & concurrent variance application package. Form 1: Initial DRI Information must be submitted at the time of the filing of the land use petition. 
28.4.6. Noise study report. (Amended 04/05/06) A noise study shall be performed, by a state registered professional engineer or noise professional, if a proposed site is located within 1,000 feet of an expressway, within 3,000 feet of an active rail line, or within 5 miles of the Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport boundary. An expressway is defined as a highway facility usually having two or more lanes for the exclusive use of traffic in each direction and partial control of access (i.e. I-85, I-285 and GA-400). 
1.  The noise study shall include an analysis of the proposed use with respect to existing ambient noise, that is, business and industry noise, aircraft noise, roadway noise, and construction noise. 
2.  If the noise study results in a day-night average sound level greater than 65 dBA, the applicant shall provide a sound attenuation plan specifying the type of noise buffering measures/materials to be employed during construction that will reduce the interior residential noise levels to 50 dBA or less. 
3.  The sound level readings shall be measured at a distance from the site to the noise source. The measurement should be from the source to the nearest points on the site where structures having noise sensitive uses are located. These points shall be labeled as the NAL (noise assessment locations). The measurement location for structures is a point 6.5 feet from the facade. In the event that the location of the structures has not yet been specified at the time of the noise study, then the distance used in the noise study should be measured as 6.5 feet less than the distance from the structure setback line to the major source(s) of noise. (Reference: Title 24, Housing & Urban Development, Part 51 — Environmental Criteria and Standards, Subpart B — Noise Abatement and Control, Section 51.103) Criteria and Standards (c) Exterior standards. 
28.4.7. Public participation plan and report. The Public Participation Plan is to ensure that applicants pursue early and effective public participation in conjunction with their petitions, ensure that the citizens of Fulton County have an adequate opportunity to learn about petitions that may affect them, and to ensure ongoing communication between applicants, adjoining property owners, environmentally stressed communities, community associations and other organizations, elected officials and county staff. A target area for public participation should be determined by the applicant and current planner at the time of the pre-application review. Applicants are required to submit a Public Participation Plan for meeting with interested citizens to advise of pending rezoning/use permit applications and to allow citizens the opportunity to discuss concerns and provide input about project design or development. An applicant's responsibilities are to inform the public, solicit input, and provide a summary of these activities in the form of a written report (Public Participation Report). 
The requirement for a Public Participation Plan does not give communities decision making powers or force a consensus on issues. Applicants are not obligated to make any concessions or changes based upon input from citizens. A refusal by the community to meet with applicants does not mean that the applicants fail to meet the requirements of the Public Participation Plan. 
Dialogue should occur between applicants and communities before the Community Zoning Board hearing, the first public hearing. Public Participation Plans are required with all rezoning and/or use permit applications and must be filed simultaneously with the application. Participation Plan Reports are required to be submitted no less than seven business days before the scheduled Board of Commissioners' hearing. If the report is not submitted as required, the Board of Commissioners may defer an application. 
The minimum requirements for public participation plans and public participation reports are as follows: 
A.  Public participation plan. Every application for a rezoning or use permit which requires a public hearing shall include a public participation plan which must be implemented prior to the first public hearing. 
Minimum standards: 
1.  Identification of all property owners within a quarter mile of the site and area homeowners' associations, environmentally stressed communities, political jurisdictions, and any other public agencies or organizations which may be affected by an application as determined by the applicant and the current planner at the time of the pre-application review. 
2.  Explanation of how interested parties will be informed of rezoning/use permit applications. 
3.  Methods for providing opportunities for discussion with interested parties before public hearings are held. Applicants are required to schedule at least one meeting at a convenient location and time and notify all interested parties, as identified in 1. above, of the purpose, place and time of the meeting. 
4.  Applicant's schedule for completion of the public participation plan. 
B.  Public participation report. Every rezoning and use permit applicant is required to provide a public participation report on the department's form no later than seven business days before the scheduled Board of Commissioners' hearing. This report shall be made a part of the official file and a summary will be provided to the Board of Commissioners. 
Minimum standards: 
1.  Provide a list of all parties that were contacted, the methods of notification that were used, and copies of all notification letters. 
2.  Provide dates and locations of all community and/or other meetings that were attended by the applicant to discuss an application. (attach meeting notices, letters, etc.) 
3.  Provide the number of people who participated in meetings held to discuss an application. (attach sign-in sheets) 
4.  A summary of concerns and issues expressed by interested parties. 
5.  A summary of the applicant's response to concerns and issues. 
(Amd. No. 13-0725, 9-4-13) 
28.5. - Conditional development. 
28.5.1. Designation. Each zoning district shall have a designation thereunder to be known as Conditional for that district. 
28.5.2. Plans. Site plans for rezonings and use permits must be folded, drawn to scale, no larger than 30" × 42", and shall, at a minimum, include the following information: 
(1)  Key and/or legend and site location map with North arrow; 
(2)  Boundary survey of subject property which includes dimensions along property lines that match the metes and bounds of the property's written legal description and clearly indicates the point of beginning; 
(3)  Acreage of subject property; 
(4)  Location of land lot lines and identification of land lots; 
(5)  Existing, proposed new dedicated and future reserved rights-of-way of all streets, roads, and railroads adjacent to and on the subject property; 
(6)  Proposed streets on the subject site; 
(7)  Posted speed limits on all adjoining roads; 
(8)  Current zoning of the subject site and adjoining properties; 
(9)  Existing buildings with square footages and heights (stories), wells, driveways, fences, cell towers, and any other structures or improvements on the subject property; 
(10)  Existing buildings with square footages and heights (stories), wells, driveways, fences, cell towers, and any other structures or improvements on adjacent properties within 400 feet of the subject site based on the county's aerial photography or an acceptable substitute as approved by the director; 
(11)  Location of proposed buildings (except single family residential lots) with total square footage; 
(12)  Layout and minimum lot size of proposed single family residential lots; 
(13)  Topography (surveyed or county) on subject site and adjacent property within 200 feet as required to assess runoff effects; 
(14)  Location of overhead and underground electrical and pipeline transmission/conveyance lines; 
(15)  Required and/or proposed setbacks; 
(16)  100 year flood plain horizontal limits and flood zone designations as shown on survey or FEMA FIRM maps; 
(17)  Required landscape strips, undisturbed buffers, and any other natural areas as required or proposed; 
(18)  Required and proposed parking spaces; Loading and unloading facilities; 
(19)  Lakes, streams, and waters on the state and associated buffers; 
(20)  Proposed stormwater management facilities; 
(21)  Community wastewater facilities including preliminary areas reserved for septic drain fields and points of access; 
(22)  Availability of water system and sanitary sewer system; 
(23)  Tree lines, woodlands and open fields on subject site; 
(24)  Entrance site distance profile assuming the driver's eye at a height of 3.5 feet (See Fulton County Subdivision Regulations); 
(25)  Wetlands shown on the county's GIS maps or survey; and 
(26)  Airport noise contours on those properties within the FAR Part 150 Airport Noise Contour Map. 
A request for relief from any of the above site plan requirements may be submitted in writing to the director for approval prior to the filing deadline. The request should clearly state the reasons for the request. Projects subject to development of regional impact reviews and other large projects that will be phased shall be required to revise the site plan for each phase of the development to comply with the above standards through a Zoning Modification. 
28.6. - Zoning maps. 
The official Zoning Map will be amended to reflect the land use petition approvals. Rezoning and use permits that have not vested pursuant to Section 28.11. will be removed from the Zoning Map and the zoning/land use designation shall revert as indicated in Article 28.10. 
28.7. - Applicable regulations. 
Zoning regulations that applied at the time of acceptance of an application for a Land Disturbance Permit shall prevail. 
28.8. - Petition fees. 
Prior to accepting a petition for rezoning, use permit, concurrent variance, or extension of zoning and/or use permit, the director shall collect nonrefundable fees as established by the Board of Commissioners. 
28.9. - Procedures for modification of zoning conditions. 
See Article XXII. 
28.10. - Expiration and extensions of zonings and/or use permits. 
Land use petitions approved after March 16, 1986 and filed before January 1, 2006 shall expire unless the property owner take action to vest the zoning and/or use permit in accordance with Article 28.11. within a period of 36 months from the date of approval by the board of commissioners, or fails to secure an approved extension. 
A.  Each zoning and/or use permit approval is allowed one 24-month extension subject to the qualifying conditions in section 28.11.2. 
B.  Land use petitions initiated by the board of commissioners to implement the Fulton County Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map are exempt from the provisions of section 28.11.2. 
(Amd. No. 09-0766, pt. 1, 8-5-09) 
28.11. - Vesting of zoning and/or use permit. 
Upon occurrence of one of the four conditions listed immediately below, a zoning and/or use permit shall be vested and such vesting shall be spread upon the minutes of the Board of Commissioners' meeting. 
A.  Prior to the expiration of a land disturbance permit, a vesting determination may be made by the department that substantial progress (28.11.1) has been made toward the completion of on-site construction depicted on the site plan approved with the rezoning and/or use permit. 
B.  Prior to the expiration of a building permit, a vesting determination is made by the department that substantial progress (28.11.1.) has been made toward the completion of a building depicted on the site plan approved with the rezoning and/or use permit. 
C.  The issuance of a certificate of occupancy and/or permit for a use and/or structure specified in the approved conditions shall vest the zoning. 
D.  The issuance of a business license for the approved use shall vest the zoning, but only when no new construction or land disturbance is approved and/or required as a condition of zoning. 
28.11.1. Substantial progress. To demonstrate substantial progress for purposes of vesting a conditional zoning and/or use permit, one of the following must be fulfilled: 
A.  The department may approve a construction schedule which includes at least 50 percent of the public improvements specified for one phase. Substantial progress shall have been demonstrated when, within one year of the date of the issuance of the land disturbance permit, the department observes normal progress toward the approved construction schedule. 
B.  The department shall approve a construction schedule which includes at least the pouring of footings for a principal building. Substantial progress shall have been demonstrated when, within 6 months of the date of the issuance of the building permit, the department observes routine progress toward the approved construction schedule. 
Refusal to certify that substantial progress has been achieved may be appealed in accordance with Article 22 of this Resolution. 
28.11.2. Extensions. Extensions of zonings and/or use permits for any of the four qualifying conditions listed in this section shall be considered by the Board of Commissioners. 
To qualify for an extension, the property owner must submit an application to the department at least 30 days prior to the expiration of a 36-month period beginning with the date of approval of a zoning and/or use permit. 
The department shall prepare an analysis and recommendation as to whether the documentation in the application is sufficient based on one of the four criteria which may validate an extension request. 
The department shall submit its recommendation to the Board of Commissioners. 
No more than one two-year extension, per zoning and/or use permit case, may be granted for any of the qualifying conditions listed below (except a court action delay). 
An extension may not be sought for less than the total acreage of the underlying zoning and/or use permit. 
In every application for an extension, the owner(s) shall provide an affidavit documenting at least one of the following: 
A.  A delay resulting from court action involving the zoning and/or use permit or a previous extension on the property for which an extension is sought. Extensions approved in connection with court action shall remain valid for one year beyond the granting of an order or the expiration of an appeal period before any court with jurisdiction. 
B.  Non-availability of utilities or facilities resulting from government inaction. In those instances where wastewater facilities are available for a fraction of the desired capacity, or when capacity was available at some time during the three-year period, but not during the 60 days prior to expiration, the Board of Commissioners shall evaluate such case's qualifications for an extension on their individual merits considering any evidence that might indicate a diligent effort to proceed with development. 
C.  A delay in development resulting from wetlands regulatory procedures requires the applicant to provide a copy of the application acknowledgment letter from the Savannah Regulatory Branch of the Corps of Engineers as documented evidence. Said application should have been filed at least 12 months before zoning and/or use permit expiration. 
D.  An inability to obtain financing, despite documentation of the owner's efforts during the first year after zoning and/or use permit approval and continuing until one week prior to consideration of the extension request to the board. Documentation shall consist of two official denials signed by officers of two different lending institutions who have final jurisdiction over such financing transactions. 
28.11.3. - Notice of expiration. 
At least 90 days prior to the expiration of a zoning and/or use permit, the director shall send by certified mail a notice of expiration to each owner of record as shown in the tax records. 
ARTICLE XXIX. - VIOLATION AND PENALTY(Amended 4/10/91) 

29.1 - Violation. 
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions of this resolution shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. The owner and/or tenants of any building or premises or parts thereof, where anything in violation of the resolution shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, or agent or the owner and/or tenants who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense. (Amended 6/2/99) 
29.2 - Penalty. 
Where a determination is made that property is in violation of the zoning resolution, and any other codes and laws enforced by the department of environment and community development, and all reasonable efforts and means to obtain compliance have been exhausted, the director of the department of environment and community development is authorized to effect such compliance at public expense. The cost effectuating compliance shall constitute a lien upon the property and said lien shall be recorded by the director of the department of environment and community development in accordance with the laws for such. (Amended 4/7/93, 11/3/93, 6/2/99) 
The Magistrate Court of Fulton County and the State County of Fulton County shall each have jurisdiction to try offenses alleging violations by any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity of this article. Upon conviction, any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity shall be subject to a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the Fulton County Jail for not more than 60 days, or both this fine and imprisonment for each offense. (Added 6/2/99) 
ARTICLE XXX. - VALIDITY 
Should any section or provision of this resolution be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the resolution as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
ARTICLE XXXI. - CONFLICTING RESOLUTIONS REPEALED 
The provision of any resolutions or parts of resolutions in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE XXXII. - EFFECTIVE DATE 
This resolution having been adopted in the manner prescribed by law at the meeting of the commissioners of roads and revenues on March 11, 1955, becomes effective as of this date. 
ARTICLE XXXIII. - SIGNS[30] 

Footnotes: 
--- (30) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 08-0238, adopted May 7, 2008, amended Art. XXXIII in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said article to read as herein set out. The former Art. XXXIII, §§ 33.1—33.5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the original zoning ordinance as well as amendments of March 6, 1991; Sept. 4, 1991; May 6, 1992; April 7, 1993; Nov. 3, 1993; Sept. 1, 1999; March 3, 2004; and April 5, 2006. See the Code Comparative Table for further information. 

33.1 - General provisions. 
This article shall hereafter be known and cited as the "Fulton County Sign Ordinance." 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5/7/08) 
33.2 - Purpose and findings. 
A.  Purpose. This article is enacted for the following purposes: 
1.  To protect the rights of individuals and businesses to convey their messages through signs; 
2.  To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication; 
3.  To promote economic development; 
4.  To improve traffic and pedestrian safety as it may be affected by distracting signs; 
5.  To prevent the destruction of the natural beauty and environment of the county; 
6.  To protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; 
7.  To restrict the continued existence of abandoned or nonconforming signs unless in compliance with the terms of this article and to eliminate, over time, all nonconforming signs; 
8.  To ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign standards; and 
9.  To make it easy, quick and economically efficient to apply for a sign permit. 
B.  Findings. 
1.  The county finds that signs are a proper use of private property, are a means of personal free expression and a necessary component of a commercial environment. As such, signs are entitled to the protection of the law. In the absence of regulation, however, the number of such signs tends to proliferate, with property owners' desiring ever increasing numbers and sizes of signs, leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares. In addition, the competition among competing sign owners for visibility of their signs contributes to safety hazards for both vehicles and pedestrians and undermines the sign owners' original purpose of presenting a clear message of its idea or identification of its premises. 
2.  The county further finds that the regulation of the size, height, number and spacing of signs is necessary to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the county, to protect the public investment in the streets and highways, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, to eliminate visual clutter and blight, to provide an aesthetically appealing environment, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of signs for the benefit of all the county's citizens. 
3.  The county further finds that there is a substantial difference between signs erected by public authority and signs erected by private citizens or businesses. Signs erected by public authority are virtually all erected for the purpose of maintaining the public safety either through direct control of traffic or through provision of such type signage as street signs which enable the traveling public to know where they are located and to find where they are going. As such, with the exception of signs identifying government buildings, virtually all government signs are erected purely for public safety purposes. Moreover, their use in the public right-of-way is necessary to ensure their visibility to the motoring public. The county finds that public utility signs are frequently of the same nature as those signs erected by governmental entities in that they provide necessary information to safeguard the public from downed power lines and from street excavations. Even where signs serve a propriety purpose, such as identifying markings on utility polls, those signs are marked primarily for the purpose of benefiting the public generally through identification of locations where there may be temporary losses of power. 
4.  The county further finds that some signage has a single targeted function and that identification of such signage by description is impossible without referring to its function. For instance, address numerals are used for the sole purpose of locating addresses, which is of benefit to persons looking for those addresses and is essential to public safety personnel responding to emergencies. Subdivision signs at the entrances to subdivisions favor a similar purpose in enabling both the traveling public and emergency personnel to quickly locate subdivision entrances for the purpose of either visitation or responding to emergency calls. While such signage is often referenced based upon the function it serves within the context of this ordinance, whenever possible, it is the intent of this ordinance to refer to signs unrelated to the content of the speech provided and to allow maximum expressive potential to sign owners. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5/7/08) 
33.3 - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section, but defined in the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County, shall be given the meanings set forth in such resolution. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or captions are for reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this article. 
Abandoned sign. Any sign that contains or exhibits broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, or missing letters or which is otherwise dilapidated, unsightly, or unkempt, and for which no person accepts maintenance responsibility. 
Animated sign. Any sign, or part of a sign, that uses any movement or change of lighting or color to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
Audible sign. Any sign which emits a sound which is audible or emits a signal which can be converted into audible sounds, whether by radio or other means. 
Awning/canopy sign. Any sign that is a part of, or attached to, an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
Banner. A sign other than a flag with or without characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, vinyl, plastic or fabric that is intended to be hung either with a frame or without a frame. Neither flags nor canopy signs are considered banners. 
Beacon. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Billboard. A sign with an area of more than seventy-two (72) square feet but not more than six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet. 
Changeable copy sign. Any sign that incorporates changing lettering or images to form a message or messages, whether such changes are accomplished electronically or manually. Changeable copy signs shall not incorporate changing lights or electronic images. Such changeable copy signs cannot flash, and if located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a road right-of-way, may not change more than once per twenty-four (24) hours. 
Commission or commissioners. The Fulton County Board of Commissioners. 
County. Fulton County. 
Department. The department of environment and community development. 
Director. The director of the department of environment and community development or his or her designee for a particular purpose. 
Directory sign. A single sign for multiple businesses, offices, professionals, industries, or other entities located within a planned center. 
Drive-through/drive-in facility. A location where products and/or services are distributed to, or business is transacted with, a person seated in a motor vehicle. 
Fall zone. An area equal to 133 percent of the height of the structure in every direction. 
Flag. Any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or symbols used as a symbol of a government or other entity or organization. 
Flashing sign. A sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use and which exhibits marked changes in lighting effects. 
Freestanding sign. Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure. A permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support with a base of a width not less than the width of the sign face. 
Illuminated sign, external. A sign illuminated by an external light source. Such source cannot be a device that changes color, flashes or alternates. 
Illuminated sign, internal. A sign illuminated by an internal light source. Such source cannot be a device that changes color, flashes, or alternates. 
Internal development signs. Signs not visible from a public right of way, including but not limited to signs such as parking lot information, directional, safety signs and signs delineating internal sub-components of the overall development. 
Lot. A parcel of land that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for lot area, coverage, and use and that can provide such yards as required by the zoning standards. 
Marquee, marquee sign. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Menu sign. A sign that informs on the products or services offered at a drive-through facility. Such sign is not to be legible by the traveling public and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height and 32 square feet in size. 
Moving sign. A sign which revolves, rotates, swings, undulates, or otherwise attracts attention through the structural movement of parts. 
Multi-tenant. One or more buildings, located on a single premise, containing two or more separate and distinct individual establishments, which occupy separate portions of the building and which are physically separated from each other by walls. 
Obscene. Material is obscene if to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, it predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion; the material taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value; and the material depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined as: (a) acts of sexual intercourse, heterosexual or homosexual, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; (b) acts of masturbation; (c) acts involving excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; (d) acts of bestiality or the fondling of sex organs of animals; or (e) sexual acts of flagellation, torture, or other violence indicating a sadomasochistic sexual relationship. 
Out-of-store marketing device. An out-of-store marketing device is any facility or equipment which is located outside of a primary building on a site zoned for nonresidential uses, which is used for the primary purpose of providing a product or service without the owner's immediate presence, and which is manufactured to include a color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, and/or writing thereon to communicate information regarding the product or service provided thereby to the public. Examples of out-of-store marketing devices include: fuel pumps, bank ATM units, vending machines, newspaper racks, drink machines, ice boxes, and phone booths. 
Pennant, streamer. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series, designed to move in the wind. 
Permanent sign. Any sign which, when installed, is intended for permanent use. A permanent freestanding sign shall be of a type and construction as not to be easily or readily removed from the lot on which it has been erected. 
Permit. A sign permit reviewed, approved, and issued by the county. 
Permittee. The person and/or entity owning or leasing the land on which the sign is erected or for which an application has been submitted. 
Person. A natural or legal person, including a firm, organization, partnership, trust, and corporation. 
Portable sign. A sign which is not permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure, including but not limited to signs on trailers or signs mounted or painted on vehicles which are parked in such a manner as to serve the purpose of a sign. 
Principal building. The building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. Non-residential lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other structures with clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
Projecting sign. Any sign which is suspended or projected from the wall, eave, or soffit of the building. 
Public sign. Any sign erected by a governmental entity. 
Roof sign. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, or supported by the roof structure. 
Sign face. That part of a sign that is or can be used for advertising purposes. 
Sign. Any device, fixture, placard, or structure affixed to, supported by, or suspended by a stationary object, building or the ground that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to communicate information of any kind to the public. 
Standard informational sign. A sign with an area of not greater than four square feet, with a sign face made for short term use (90 days or less), containing no reflecting elements, flags, or projections and which, when erect, stands at a height not greater than three feet and is mounted on a stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than 1½ inches. 
Temporary sign. Any sign that is not permanently mounted. 
Wall sign. Any sign attached parallel to a wall, painted on the wall surface or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building and which displays only one sign surface. Wall signs may be allowed to extend up to 15 inches from any wall, building or structure when a raceway is utilized. Raceways shall be painted to match the color of the exterior walls to which they are attached. Wall signs shall not cover architectural features or details, and not extend beyond the horizontal roof line or vertical edges of the building. Except for principle anchors, wall signs shall be uniform in alignment and height in developments in which multiple businesses share a building. 
Window sign. Any sign that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass, either inside or outside the building, and is visible from the exterior of the structure. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08; Res. No. 08-0586, 7-2-08; Res. No. 12-0556, 7-11-12) 
33.4 - Powers and duties of personnel. 
The director is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce this article, unless otherwise specifically provided by resolution of the commissioners. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.5 - Applicability. 
The standards of this article shall apply to all signs erected within unincorporated Fulton County. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.6 - Permit required. 
Except where specifically not required by the standards of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, materially change, or erect a sign in the county without first having obtained a sign permit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, signs which are not visible from a public right-of-way or from neighboring properties shall not be subject to the standards of this article. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.7 - Fees required. 
No permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the director and fees, as set from time to time by resolution of the board of commissioners, have been paid. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.8 - Application content. 
Applications for sign permits required by this article shall be filed along with two additional copies by the person owning the subject lot, or the owner's agent with express permission of the owner, in the office of the director upon forms furnished by that office. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
1.  The type and purpose of the sign as defined in this article. 
2.  The value of the sign. 
3.  A survey to scale showing the street address of the property upon which the subject sign is to be located, the proposed location of subject sign on subject property, the distance of the proposed sign from the subject property's boundaries, and all existing structures or buildings on the subject property. 
4.  The square foot area per sign and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
5.  The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
6.  Written consent of the owner of the property, or his/her agent, granting permission for the placement, maintenance, size, and height of the subject sign to be placed on the property. 
7.  For wall signs: Two sets of building elevations. 
8.  The name, address, telephone number, and business license number of the sign contractor. All applications for signs which incorporate electricity must obtain an electrical permit. 
9.  Sign details, including a proposed color scheme of sign, and scaled elevation of the size and height of the proposed sign from ground level and adjacent street level. 
10.  The zoning district in which the subject property is located and a statement of compliance with all requirements of the zoning district. 
11.  Any additional information as required by the director or his designee on an application form which shall remain on file at the department. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.9 - Application rejection. 
A.  Incomplete application; false information. The director shall reject any application that is incomplete or inaccurate, that contains false material statements or omissions, or that is for a sign which would violate any standard within this article within 45 business days of receipt of said application. The director may reject at anytime prior to the expiration of the 45-day period, if the application is incomplete, inaccurate or contains false material statements or omissions, by returning the application to the applicant. 
B.  Processing time; denial. The county shall process all complete and accurate sign permit applications within 60 business days of the department's actual receipt of a complete and accurate application and upon remittance of the appropriate sign permit fee. The director shall give notice to the applicant of his/her decision by hand delivery, electronic communication (email), or by mailing such notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before the 60th business day. If the decision of the director is to deny the application, the decision shall state the grounds upon which the denial is based. Failure of the county to act within the 60-day period shall be deemed an approval of the permit. If notice is mailed in conformity with this section, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing. Any application meeting the standards of this article shall be granted. Any application not meeting the standards of this article shall be denied. 
C.  Appealable. A rejection or denial pursuant to this section shall be appealable pursuant to the procedures for zoning appeals as outlined in the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. However, notwithstanding the foregoing, a final decision will be rendered within 90 days from date an appeal is filed. If a final decision is not rendered within the 90-day period, the decision sought to be appealed shall be affirmed. 
D.  Resubmission. A rejected application later resubmitted in conformity with this article shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the original submission date. An application which is resubmitted shall meet all the standards for an original application. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.10 - Permit revocation. 
Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an application containing a false material statement or omission, the director shall revoke said permit and the subject sign shall be immediately removed. A revocation pursuant to this section shall be appealable pursuant to the procedures for zoning appeals as outlined in the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. However, notwithstanding the foregoing, a final decision will be rendered within 90 days from the date an appeal is filed. If a final decision is not rendered within the ninety-day period, the decision sought to be appealed shall be affirmed. The permit for any sign not meeting the standards of this article will be revoked. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.11 - Zoning ordinance requirements. 
So long as an application conforms to the standards and procedures of this article, the applicant is exempted from any additional standards, excepting any standards relating to color, building materials, and procedures relating to signs in the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.12 - Variance. 
A.  Limitations. The board of zoning appeals shall be allowed to grant variances where a hardship has been demonstrated pursuant to the Fulton County Zoning Resolution. Said variance or variances may only be granted as to number, set back, building material, height, and size or sign style. 
B.  Timing. The board of zoning appeals shall hear and decide upon a variance within 90 days of the submission of a complete and accurate application. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.13 - Expiration date. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been installed and completed within six months after the date of issuance; provided, however, that where an applicant can demonstrate that an entity was timely engaged to construct the permitted sign, but the fabrication has not yet been completed, one 90-day extension may be granted by the director. No refunds shall be made for a permit after the permit is issued. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application for the sign must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.14 - Occupational tax certificate, public liability insurance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of erecting or maintaining signs within the county, unless and until such entity shall have obtained an occupation tax certificate and a certificate of insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state evidencing that the entity has in effect public liability and property damage insurance in the sum of $25,000.00 for property damage for any one claim, and public liability insurance in an amount not less than $100,000.00 for injuries, including accidental death to one person. The certificate of insurance shall state that the insurance carrier shall notify the county 30 days in advance of any termination and/or restriction of the coverage, including nonrenewal, cancellation, and nonpayment of any premium. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.15 - Identification labels; inspection; notice. 
A.  Identification labels. With each sign permit, the director shall issue a sticker bearing a number sufficient to reference a valid permit for which the permit is issued. It shall be the duty of the permittee or his agent to affix such sticker to the sign in the lower right hand area so it is easily seen. The absence of a proper sticker shall be prima facie evidence that the sign has been, or is being, erected or operated in violation of the standards of this article. 
B.  Inspection. The director or his/her designee shall inspect all existing signs in the county to determine if such signs conform to the standards of this article. Identification stickers shall be provided for all signs in order to identify existing conforming and nonconforming signs. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.16 - Signs which require no permit. 
The following shall not count toward the total amount of signage allowed and no permit is required so long as all standards in this article are met, including those set forth below: 
1.  Numerals displayed for the purpose of identifying property location not to exceed eight inches in height; 
2.  Flags; 
3.  Window signs; 
4.  Door signs not to exceed one square foot in size and not more than one sign per door; and 
5.  Standard informational signs in all districts. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.17 - Prohibited signs and devices. 
The following types of signs are prohibited in the county: 
A.  Signs. Any sign not specifically identified in this article as a permitted sign. 
B.  Balloons; streamers. Balloons, streamers or air or gas filled figures. 
C.  String lights. Signs consisting in whole or in part of a series, line, or row of lights, whether supported by cables or other physical means, within 150 feet of a street right-of-way and visible there from. Notwithstanding the foregoing, holiday lights and decorations displayed not more than 30 days before or after a calendar holiday shall be exempted from this section. 
D.  Beacons; search lights; laser. Promotional beacons, search lights or laser lights or images. 
E.  Audible signs. Audible signs. 
F.  Signs in right-of-way. Signs in a public right-of-way, other than official county signs or those belonging to a government, public service agency, or railroad. 
G.  Signs on tree or utility pole. Signs mounted or located on a tree, utility pole, or other similar structure. 
H.  Roof signs. Roof signs and signs which extend vertically above any portion of a roof or parapet of the applicable wall. Exception: Signs that are painted on, or otherwise attached flat, to a flat roof structure so as to not be visible from ground level and do not extend vertically from the roof structure more than 24 inches, do not add load to the roof structure and allow access to all roof areas shall be permitted. Flat roof signs shall not be illuminated animated or contain mechanical movements. There is no maximum square footage limit to the sign area. 
I.  Portable signs. Portable signs, including signs attached to any parked vehicle or trailer, so as to be visible from a public right-of-way. 
J.  Obscene signs. Signs which depict obscene material. 
K.  Illegal activity signs. Signs which advertise an activity which is illegal under federal, state or local laws. 
L.  Signs not maintained. Signs not in good repair, in violation of codes, or containing or exhibiting broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, or missing letters. 
M.  Abandoned signs. Abandoned signs. 
N.  Animated; flashing. Animated signs, flashing signs, and changeable copy signs which change more than once per 24 hours within 150 feet of a road right-of-way. 
O.  Imitation traffic signs. Signs which contain or are an imitation of an official traffic sign or signal or contain the words "stop," "go," "slow," "caution," "warning," or similar words in such a manner as to resemble official traffic control signs. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08; Res. No. 12-0556, 7-11-12) 
33.18 - Violations; penalties. 
A.  Noncompliance. No person shall erect on any premises owned or controlled by that person any sign which does not comply with the standards of this article. 
B.  Dangerous or defective. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by that person any sign which is in a dangerous or defective condition. Any such sign shall be removed or repaired by the permittee of the sign, the owner of the premises, or as otherwise provided for in this article. 
C.  Separate violation. Each sign installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this article shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions herein. 
D.  Public nuisance. Any sign erected or maintained in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
E.  Notice. The director shall give the permittee or sign owner 24 hours to 30 days written notice, based on the practical considerations of completing measures to comport with the standards of this article, to correct the deficiencies or to remove the sign(s) which is in violation of this article. If the permittee or sign owner refuses to correct the deficiencies or remove the sign, the director will have the sign removed at the expense of the permittee or sign owner. 
F.  Citations. If any sign or other device covered by this article is, or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, altered, converted or used in violation of any provision of this article, the director or his designee shall issue a citation. Additionally, the county may seek an injunction for a continuing violation or take other appropriate action to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion or use to correct or abate such violation. Any violation of this article shall be an offense, and the violator shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00 per day, per citation, imprisonment for up to 60 days, or both. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.19 - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  Maintained. A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, or dismountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. All nonconforming signs shall be maintained in good repair. 
B.  Repairs; material change. Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs shall be permitted, provided, however, that no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the standards of this article. To the extent that any sign allowable hereunder is damaged or destroyed by act of God or by other circumstances beyond control of owner of sign then such sign may be repaired without regard to the restrictions of this paragraph. 
C.  Grandfathering. Nonconforming signs may stay in place until one of the following conditions occurs: 
1.  The advertised business ceases at that location for a period of more than 30 days; 
2.  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard or renders it dilapidated, unsightly, or unkempt; or 
3.  The sign has been damaged to such extent that more than minor repairs or a material change is required to restore the sign. No structural repairs or change in shape or size shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with all standards of this article. To the extent that any sign allowable hereunder is damaged or destroyed by act of God or by other circumstances beyond control of owner of sign then such sign may be repaired without regard to the restrictions of this paragraph. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.20 - Removal of unlawful or dangerous signs. 
A.  Removal. The county may order the removal of any sign in violation of this article by written notice to the permit holder and/or property owner if there is no permit holder of record; or if there is no permit holder, then to the owner of the sign; or if the sign owner cannot be found or cannot be determined, then to the sign erector and any party that procured the erection of the sign. If a permit has been issued, such notice shall operate to revoke the permit. 
B.  Procedure following removal order. If the sign is not removed within the time allowable pursuant to section 33.18(E), the county shall remove or cause to be removed the sign and collect the costs thereof as provided below. 
C.  Removal without notice. The county shall have removed any sign in violation of this article, without giving notice to any party, if: 
1.  Said sign is upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property or upon the pavement of a private street or drive; or 
2.  Said sign poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any members of the public. 
D.  Removal after court determination. Other than signs located in a public right-of-way, a sign shall be removed by the county after a final determination by a court that the sign is unlawful and should be removed. If the permittee or property owner fails to remove the sign, the sign may be immediately removed and disposed of by the county with all costs to be paid by the permittee or property owner. If permittee or property owner fails to pay within 30 days a lien shall be filed on said property for the incurred expenses. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.21 - Sign location. 
A.  Obstructions to doors, windows, or fire escapes. No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. 
B.  Signs not to constitute traffic hazard. No sign or any part thereof, except authorized traffic signs, shall be located in any government right-of-way. No sign may be located any closer than 20 feet to an intersection as measured from the intersection of the two rights-of-way. 
C.  Setback. Unless a more restrictive setback is specified in conditions of zoning or otherwise in this article, all signs shall set back at least ten feet from the right-of-way or 20 feet from the edge of pavement if a private street and no sign shall project over the right-of-way except that standard information signs shall be allowed to be placed on private property up to the edge of the publicly dedicated right-of-way or ten feet off the edge of pavement on a private road with no dedicated right-of-way for a period beginning 90 days before the date of the election and ending with the final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. Freestanding signs shall be a minimum of 25 feet from an intersection as measured from the intersection of the two rights-of-way and shall be a minimum of 35 feet from any other freestanding signs. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.22 - Measurement of sign area. 
A.  Area. The area of a sign shall be computed as the area within the smallest continuous polygon comprised of not more than eight straight lines enclosing the limits of a sign face, together with any sign face cabinet or frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. If polygons established around wall signs located on the same street oriented wall are within 24 inches or less of one another, then the area of the sign shall be measured within one continuous polygon. 
B.  Structure. The computation of the area of a sign face shall not include the structure, supports, or uprights on which the sign face is placed or any portions of a sign structure that are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature, other than those parts contained within the polygon that delineates the sign face. 
C.  Changeable copy signs. For any signs on which the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements routinely change or are intended to be changed from time to time, the sign face area shall include the entire area within which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements may be placed, together with any frame or material, texture or coloring forming the integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
D.  Multi-faced signs. For multi-faced signs, when the sign face surfaces are parallel and are back to back, or where the interior angle formed by the faces is 45 degrees or less, the area of the sign shall be taken as the areas on the largest side. For all other multi-faced signs, the area of the sign shall be the total area on all sides that can be viewed at one time from any angle. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08; Res. No. 12-0556, 7-11-12) 
33.23 - Measurement of sign height. 
The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign structure at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of: (1) existing grade prior to construction or (2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. 
In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zoned lot, whichever is greater (surveyor's certificate required). 
Where the normal grade is below the normal grade of a public street, the sign base can be raised to the elevation of the normal grade of the street before the height limitations are applied (surveyor's certificate required). At no time shall any sign's overall height exceed the zoning district's height limitations. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.24 - Construction standards. 
A.  Building and safety codes. All signs permitted under this code shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the applicable county building and safety codes. The county may remove, after due notice, any sign which shows neglect or becomes dilapidated. 
B.  Faces. The face of sign shall be flat, with protrusions of no more than two inches to allow for the texture of the sign and words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements. No sign or other advertising structure shall be constructed so as to have nails, tacks, or wires protruding there from. Lettering for address signage shall not exceed eight inches in height or as required by the applicable building code. 
C.  Illumination. Signs, when illumination is permitted and except as otherwise set forth, may be illuminated internally or externally. Free standing signs with external illumination shall have light directed downward. Externally illuminated signs shall not exceed 55 foot-candles. 
D.  Landscaping. Landscaping, weeds, and grass shall be kept cut in front of, behind, underneath, and around the base of freestanding signs. 
E.  Construction. Freestanding sign structure/base materials shall match the principal building material. Any architectural color standards of an applicable overlay district apply only to the sign structure not to the sign face. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
33.25 - Restrictions based on location. 
If not otherwise stated, any sign not specifically allowed in a zoning district as provided under this Section shall be prohibited in that district, except as otherwise provided for under this Article. The following standards govern signs within specific zoning districts. For any zoning district not identified in the following sub-parts, signs shall comply with the sign regulations contained in section A, Agricultural district (AG-1). 
A.  Agricultural district (AG-1) (article V, Fulton County Zoning Resolution). 
1.  Freestanding signs. 
a.  One maximum 32 square foot, freestanding sign per business or institutional use shall be permitted for each street on which the lot has frontage. 
b.  One maximum 32 square foot, freestanding sign or two single-faced freestanding signs not to exceed 16 square feet for each side of a platted single family subdivision entrance. 
c.  Freestanding signs shall have a maximum height of six feet, may be externally illuminated, and shall not have changeable copy. 
2.  Window signs. Not more than three window signs per lot of record shall be allowed and shall not be larger than four square feet or cover more than 25 percent of the area of each window in which a sign is placed, whichever is less. Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
3.  Signs during construction. One additional sign shall be allowed during construction. The sign shall not be internally illuminated, shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and five feet in height, and shall be allowed beginning with the commencement of construction and ending with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first. 
4.  Flag. Each lot may display no more than one flag and/or flagpole. The flagpole shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Flag size shall not be more than 20 square feet. 
5.  Banner. Banners shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 14 days with no more than three such 14-day periods being permitted per calendar year per lot. Time periods shall not be consecutive. Banners shall not be more than 24 square feet. No banner shall be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet or shall not extend more than five (feet above grade when on the ground. 
6.  Standard informational sign. Each lot may display two standard informational signs without a permit, except that during a political election, each lot may display no more than six standard informational signs during the period 90 days before the date of the election and the final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. 
7.  Internal development signs. Internal development signs (signs not visible from a public right-of-way) are permitted adjacent to internal road(s) serving the development. Includes but is not limited to signs such as parking lot information, directional, safety signs, and signs delineating internal sub-components of the overall development. Internal directional signs shall not exceed ten square feet in area and four feet in height. 
B.  Residential districts (R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-4A, R-5, R-5A, CUP, NUP, SUB A, SUB B and SUB C) (Article VI, Article XI, sections 11.1 and 11.2 and Appendix A, Fulton County Zoning Resolution). 
1.  Freestanding signs. 
a.  One maximum 32 square foot, freestanding sign per lot occupied with an institutional use shall be permitted for each street on which the lot has frontage. 
b.  One maximum 32 square foot, freestanding sign or two single-faced freestanding signs not to exceed 16 square feet for each side of a platted single family subdivision entrance. 
c.  Freestanding signs shall have a maximum height of six feet, may be externally illuminated, and shall not have changeable copy. 
2.  Window signs. Not more than three window signs per lot of record shall be allowed and shall not be larger than four square feet or cover more than 25 percent of the area of each window in which a sign is placed, whichever is less. Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
3.  Signs during construction. One additional sign shall be allowed during construction. The sign shall not be internally illuminated, shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and five feet in height, and shall be allowed beginning with the commencement of construction and ending with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first. 
4.  Flag. Each lot may display no more than one (flag and/or flagpole. The flagpole shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Flag size shall not be more than 20 square feet. 
5.  Banner. Banners shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 14 days with no more than three such 14-day periods being permitted per calendar year per lot. Banners shall not be more than 24 square feet. No banner shall be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet or shall not extend more than five feet above grade when on the ground. 
6.  Standard informational signs. Each lot may display two standard informational signs without a permit, except that during a political election, each lot may display no more than six standard informational signs during the period 90 days before the date of the election and the final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. 
7.  Internal development signs. Internal development signs (signs not visible from a public right-of-way) are permitted adjacent to internal road(s) serving the development. Includes but is not limited to signs such as parking lot information, directional, safety signs, and signs delineating internal sub-components of the overall development. Internal directional signs shall not exceed ten square feet in area and four feet in height. 
C.  Apartment and townhouse residential districts (R-6, TR, A, A-L, MHP and A-1) (article VII, article XI, section 11.3 and Appendix A, Fulton County Zoning Resolution) and non-residential uses approved by a use permit (article XIX of the Fulton County Zoning Resolution). 
1.  Freestanding signs. One maximum 32 square foot freestanding sign shall be permitted for each street on which the development has frontage. The sign shall have a maximum height of six feet, may be externally illuminated, and shall not have changeable copy. 
2.  Window signs. Not more than three window signs per unit shall be allowed and shall not be larger than four square feet or cover more than 25 percent of the area of each window in which a sign is placed, whichever is less. Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
3.  Signs during construction. One additional sign shall be allowed during construction. The sign shall not be internally illuminated, shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and five feet in height, and shall be allowed beginning with the commencement of construction and ending with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first. 
4.  Flag. Each lot may display no more than one flag and/or flagpole. The flagpole shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Flag size shall not be more than 20 square feet. 
5.  Banner. Banners shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 14 days with no more than three such 14-day periods being permitted per calendar year per lot. Banners shall not be more than 24 square feet. No banner shall be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet or shall not extend more than five feet above grade when on the ground. 
6.  Awning/canopy signs. Awning/canopy signs may be displayed. A permit is required. The signs shall be deducted from allocated wall sign area. The area of the sign shall not exceed ten percent of the area of the awning or canopy. 
7.  Standard informational signs. Each lot may display two standard informational signs without a permit, except that during a political election, each lot may display no more than six standard informational signs during the period 90 days before the date of the election and the final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. 
8.  Internal development signs. Internal development signs (signs not visible from a public right-of-way) are permitted adjacent to internal road(s) serving the development. Includes but is not limited to signs such as parking lot information, directional, safety signs, and signs delineating internal sub-components of the overall development. Internal directional signs shall not exceed ten square feet in area and four feet in height. 
D.  Office-institutional and apartment-office districts (O-I and A-O) (article VIII, section 8.1 and Appendix A, Fulton County Zoning Resolution). 
1.  Freestanding signs. 
a.  One maximum 32 square foot, freestanding sign shall be permitted for each street on which the lot has less than 500 feet of frontage. The sign shall have a maximum height of ten feet, may be externally illuminated, and shall not have changeable copy. 
b.  One maximum 64 square foot, freestanding for each street on which the lot has 500 or more linear feet of frontage. If the lot has two or more entrances on a street on which it has frontage, the one maximum 64 square foot sign may be substituted by two single-faced freestanding signs not to exceed 32 square feet. The sign shall have a maximum height of ten feet, may be externally illuminated, and shall not have changeable copy. No more than two signs shall be allowed per frontage over 500 feet. 
2.  Wall sign. Wall signs are permitted on street-facing walls (including windows and doors). Businesses without a street on which there is frontage, but which have exterior entrances to the building, are entitled to one wall sign on the exterior wall of the business where the primary entrance is located. Wall sign(s) shall not exceed the smaller of five percent of the applicable wall area or 100 square feet, confined to the upper 30 feet of the facade. Wall signs shall not have changeable copy unless approved as a marquee sign. Each place of business is allowed a maximum of two wall signs. Only one sign is allowed per wall. Wall signs shall face public streets and/or pedestrian-parking areas. 
3.  Internal freestanding signs. Internal freestanding signs (signs not visible from a public right-of-way) are permitted adjacent to internal road(s) serving the development. The freestanding sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area and six feet in height and shall not be legible by the traveling public from a public right-of-way. 
4.  Window signs. Not more than three window signs per unit shall be allowed and shall not be larger than four square feet or cover more than 25 percent of the area of each window in which a sign is placed, whichever is less. Such signs shall not be illuminated, except that one window sign may be illuminated. Window signs shall not be counted toward the wall sign total square footage. 
5.  Awning/canopy signs. Awning/canopy signs may be displayed. A permit is required. The signs shall be deducted from allocated wall sign area. The area of the sign shall not exceed ten percent of the area of the awning or canopy. 
6.  Flags. Each lot may display no more than three flags and/or flagpoles. Flagpoles shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Flag size shall not be more than 20 square feet. 
7.  Standard informational signs. Each lot may display two standard informational signs without a permit, except that during a political election, each lot may display no more than six standard informational signs during the period 90 days before the date of the election and the final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. 
8.  Banners. Banners shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 14 days with no more than three such 14-day periods being permitted per calendar year per lot. In the case of lots which contain multiple businesses, each business shall be allowed a banner. Banners shall not be more than 32 square feet. No banner shall be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet and shall not extend more than five feet above grade when on the ground. 
9.  Projecting signs. In a multi-tenant office building, in addition to all other permitted signs, one projecting non-illuminated sign per entrance used shall be allowed to identify the location of each tenant's premises. Projecting signs shall adhere to the following: does not exceed three square feet in area; is uniform in size, material, color and shape and is placed in an equivalent location to other such signs located on the same building; is suspended from the eave or soffit of the building; and maintains a minimum of seven feet clearance between the bottom of the sign and the walkway below. 
10.  Internal development signs. Internal development signs (signs not visible from a public right-of-way) are permitted adjacent to internal road(s) serving the development. Includes but is not limited to signs such as parking lot information, directional, safety signs and directional signs associated with hospitals and other emergency care facilities. Internal directional signs shall not exceed ten square feet in area and four feet in height except that signs associated with hospitals and emergency care facilities shall not exceed 20 square feet in area. 
E.  Commercial, industrial park, and mixed use districts (C-1, C-2, M-1A, MIX) (article IX, article X, section 10.1, article VIII, section 8.2, Fulton County Zoning Resolution). 
1.  Freestanding signs. 
a.  One maximum 32 square foot, freestanding sign shall be permitted for each lot which contains less than three acres. 
b.  One maximum 44 square foot, for each lot which contains three or more, but not more than 15 acres. 
c.  For lots that contain more than 15 acres, one maximum 64 square foot, freestanding for each street on which the lot has primary frontage and one 32 square foot, freestanding sign for each street on which the lot has secondary frontage. If the primary frontage of the lot is 500 linear feet or more and if the lot has two or more entrances on the street on which it has primary frontage, the one maximum 64 square foot sign may be substituted with two single-faced freestanding signs not to exceed 32 square feet. The sign shall have a maximum height of six feet if 32 square feet or less and eight feet if 64 square feet or less and may be externally illuminated. No more than two signs shall be allowed per development unless there is a secondary frontage. 
d.  All signs shall have a maximum height of six feet if 32 square feet or less, a maximum height of eight feet or less if greater than 32 square feet, may be internally lighted, and shall not have changeable copy, except in association with motor vehicle fuel pricing. Each sign may have not more than four tenant panels if 32 square feet or less, or not more than six tenant panels if greater than 32 square feet. 
e.  Within the mixed use (MIX) district one maximum 32 square foot, freestanding sign or two single-faced freestanding signs not to exceed 16 square feet for each side of a platted residential component's entrance shall be permitted. 
2.  Wall signs. Wall signs are permitted on street-facing walls (including windows and doors). Businesses without a street on which there is frontage, but which have exterior entrances to the building, are entitled to one wall sign on the exterior wall of the business where the primary entrance is located. Wall sign(s) shall not exceed five percent of the applicable wall area or 100 square feet, whichever is smaller. Wall signs shall not have changeable copy unless approved as a marquee sign or in association with motor vehicle fuel pricing. Each place of business is allowed a maximum of two wall signs. Only one sign per business is allowed per wall. Wall signs shall face public streets and/or pedestrian-parking areas. (Amended 5/7/08) 
3.  Wall signs, tenant over 50,000 square feet. A tenant that has over 50,000 square feet of gross floor space and has independent leased space within a shopping center shall be allowed wall signs not to exceed five percent of the applicable wall area or 300 square feet, whichever is smaller. 
4.  Menu sign. One menu sign as part of a drive-thru or drive-in facility. One menu sign shall be allowed per drive-through lane. 
5.  Banner. Banners shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 14 days with no more than three such 14-day periods being permitted per calendar year per lot. In the case of lots which contain multiple businesses, each business shall be allowed a banner. Banners shall not be more than 32 square feet. No banner shall be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet, or shall not extend more than five feet above grade when on the ground. 
6.  Signs during construction. One additional sign shall be allowed during construction. The sign shall not be internally illuminated. The sign shall be allowed beginning with the commencement of construction and ending with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first. The sign shall not exceed the maximum freestanding sign allowed on the lot. 
7.  Out-of-store marketing device. Out-of-store marketing devices shall be allowed, shall not exceed eight feet in height, and shall not be illuminated except for illumination intrinsic to the device. No permit shall be required. 
8.  Flags. Each lot may display no more than three flags and/or flagpoles. Flagpoles shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Flag size shall not be more than 20 square feet. 
9.  Entrance signs. In a multi-tenant commercial or office building, in addition to all other permitted signs, one projecting non-illuminated sign per entrance used shall be allowed to identify the location of each tenant's premises. Projecting signs shall adhere to the following: does not exceed three square feet in area; is uniform in size, material, color and shape and is placed in an equivalent location to other such signs located on the same building; is suspended from the eave or soffit of the building; and maintains a minimum of seven feet clearance between the bottom of the sign and the walkway below. 
10.  Window signs. Not more than three window signs per unit shall be allowed and shall not be larger than four square feet or cover more than 25 percent of the area of each window in which a sign is placed, whichever is less. Such signs shall not be illuminated, except that one window sign may be illuminated. Window signs shall not be counted towards the wall sign total square footage. 
11.  Awning/canopy signs. Awning/canopy signs may be displayed. A permit is required. The area of the sign shall not exceed ten percent of the area of the awning or canopy. The area of an awning/canopy sign shall be deducted from the allowable area of a wall sign. Changeable copy shall be allowed in association with motor vehicle fuel pricing. 
12.  Standard informational signs. Each lot having one business or residence may display two standard informational signs, and each lot having more than one business may display four standard informational signs without a permit, except that during a political election, each lot may display no more than six standard informational signs during the period 90 days before the date of the election and the final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. 
13.  Projecting signs. In a multi-tenant commercial or office building, in addition to all other permitted signs, one projecting non-illuminated sign per entrance used shall be allowed to identify the location of each tenant's premises. Projecting signs shall adhere to the following: does not exceed three square feet in area; is uniform in size, material, color, and shape and is placed in an equivalent location to other such signs located on the same building; is suspended from the eave or soffit of the building; and maintains a minimum of seven feet clearance between the bottom of the sign and the walkway below. 
14.  Internal freestanding signs. Internal freestanding signs (signs not visible from a public right-of-way) are permitted adjacent to internal road(s) serving the development. The freestanding sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area and six feet in height and shall not be legible by the traveling public from a public right-of-way. 
15.  Internal development signs. Internal development signs (signs not visible from a public right-of-way) are permitted adjacent to internal road(s) serving the development. Includes but is not limited to signs such as parking lot information, directional, safety signs and directional signs associated with hospitals and other emergency care facilities. Internal directional signs shall not exceed ten square feet in area and four feet in height except that signs associated with hospitals and emergency care facilities shall not exceed 20 square feet in area. 
F.  Industrial districts (M-1, M-2) (article X, sections 10.2 and 10.3 of the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County). 
1.  Billboards. Within industrial districts (M-1 and M-2), freestanding signs shall not exceed 672 square feet and shall be located according to the following standards: 
a.  Along, and oriented toward, state numbered primary routes or national highways only; 
b.  At least 500 feet from all residential or AG-1 zoning districts; 
c.  Minimum 100-foot setback from right-of-way; 
d.  Minimum of 1,500 feet from any other billboards or freestanding sign, except standard informational signs; 
e.  The lot on which the billboard is located shall have sufficient area to accommodate the fall zone, and excepting the sign, no buildings, structures, or appurtenances shall be contained in the fall zone; 
f.  Be in compliance with applicable height standards for the district in which located. 
2.  Freestanding signs. 
a.  One maximum 32 square foot, freestanding sign shall be permitted for each street on which the lot has up to and including 500 feet of frontage. The sign shall have a maximum height of 20 feet and shall not have changeable copy. 
b.  One maximum 64 square foot, freestanding sign shall be permitted for each street on which the lot has more than 500 linear feet and up to 1,000 linear feet of frontage. The sign shall have a maximum height of 20 and shall not have changeable copy. 
c.  One maximum 72 square foot, freestanding sign shall be permitted for each street on which the lot has more than 1,000 linear feet of frontage (excludes spin sites and out-parcels). The sign shall have a maximum height of 20 feet and shall not have changeable copy. 
d.  One maximum 32 square foot, freestanding sign per sign site or out-parcel which is identified on a site plan approved pursuant to a single zoning case. The sign shall have a maximum height of eight feet and shall not have changeable copy. 
3.  Wall signs. Wall signs are permitted on street-facing walls (including windows and doors). Businesses without a street on which there is frontage, but which have exterior entrances to the building, are entitled to one wall sign on the exterior wall of the business where the primary entrance is located. Wall sign(s) shall not exceed five percent of the applicable wall area or 180 square feet, whichever is smaller. Wall signs shall not have changeable copy unless approved as a marquee sign. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an anchor tenant that has over 50,000 square feet of gross floor space within a shopping center shall be allowed wall signs not to exceed five percent of the applicable wall area or 300 square feet, whichever is smaller. Each place of business is allowed a maximum of two wall signs. Only one sign is allowed per wall. Wall signs shall face public streets and/or pedestrian-parking areas. 
4.  Menu sign. One menu sign as part of a drive-thru or drive-in facility. One menu allowed per drive-through lane. 
5.  Banner. Banners shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 14 days with no more than three such 14 day periods being permitted per calendar year per lot. In the case of lots which contain multiple businesses, each business shall be allowed a banner. Banners shall not be more than 32 square feet. No banner shall be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet or shall not extend more than five feet above grade when on the ground. 
6.  Signs during construction. One additional sign shall be allowed during construction. The sign shall not be internally illuminated. The sign shall be allowed beginning with the commencement of construction and ending with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first. The sign shall not exceed the maximum freestanding sign allowed on the lot. 
7.  Out-of-store marketing device. Out-of-store marketing devices shall be allowed, shall not exceed eight feet in height, and shall not be illuminated except for illumination intrinsic to the device. No permit shall be required. 
8.  Flags. Each lot may display no more than three flags and/or flagpoles. Flagpoles shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Flag size shall not be more than 20 square feet. 
9.  Projecting signs. In a multi-tenant commercial or office building, in addition to all other permitted signs, one projecting non-illuminated sign per entrance used shall be allowed to identify the location of each tenant's premises. Projecting signs shall adhere to the following: does not exceed three square feet in area; is uniform in size, material, color and shape and is placed in an equivalent location to other such signs located on the same building; is suspended from the eave or soffit of the building; and maintains a minimum of seven feet clearance between the bottom of the sign and the walkway below. 
10.  Window signs. Window signs are allowed without a permit and shall not occupy in the aggregate more than 25 percent of the window area. Window signs shall not be counted towards the wall sign total square footage. 
11.  Awning/canopy signs. Awning/canopy signs may be displayed. A permit is required. The signs shall be deducted from allocated wall sign area. The area of the sign shall not exceed ten percent of the area of the awning or canopy. The area of an awning/canopy sign shall be deducted from the allowable area of a wall sign. 
12.  Standard informational signs. Each lot having one business may display two standard informational signs, and each lot having more than one business may display four standard informational signs without a permit, except that during a political election, each lot may display no more than six standard informational signs during the period 90 days before the date of the election and the final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. 
13.  Internal freestanding signs. Internal freestanding signs (signs not visible from a public right-of-way) are permitted adjacent to internal road(s) serving the development. The freestanding sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area and six feet in height and shall not be legible by the traveling public from a public right-of-way. 
14.  Internal development signs. Internal development signs (signs not visible from a public right-of-way) are permitted adjacent to internal road(s) serving the development. Includes but is not limited to signs such as parking lot information, directional and safety signs. Internal directional signs shall not exceed ten square feet in area and four feet in height. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08; Amd. No. 10-0679, pts. 1, 2, 7-7-10; Amd. No. 11-0478, 6-1-11; Res. No. 11-0743, 9-7-11; Res. No. 12-0556, 7-11-12) 
33.26 - Severability. 
Should any article, section, clause, or provision of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part hereof other than the part so declared to be invalid, it being the intent of the county that each article, section, clause, and provision hereof be severable. 
(Res. No. 08-0238, 5-7-08) 
ARTICLE XXXIV. - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 

34.1 - Scope and intent. 
This article includes a variety of development related regulations which are designed to insure that development, and infrastructure additions and improvements are provided in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Fulton County, and to assure that development regulations and review procedures are standardized and equitably applied. 
34.2 - Compliance. 
Any land disturbance activity or any development activity must comply with the development standards of Fulton County along with any other applicable local or state regulations. Compliance with the provisions of this article, and actions to bring about compliance with this article shall be in accordance with administrative guidelines of the Environment and Community Development Department. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
34.3 - Appeals. 
The Director of the Environment and Community Development Department shall administratively consider variance appeals to article XXXIV in accordance with article XXII, Appeals. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
34.4 - Permit and sign-off requirements. 
These standards acknowledge or establish Fulton County requirements for permits for development of properties within the unincorporated area of Fulton County. All development shall comply with these and other requirements including, but not limited to, the Fulton County Tributary Buffer Ordinance, the Fulton County Tree Preservation Ordinance and Administrative Guidelines, the Fulton County Sediment and Erosion Control Ordinance, and the Georgia Metropolitan Area River Protection Act. 
34.4.1 Land disturbance permit prerequisites. Prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for each phase of development, the following documents shall be submitted to the Director of the Environment and Community Development Department for approval. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
A.  Site plan. A site plan which meets or exceeds the requirements contained herein and the Environment and Community Development Department administrative guidelines, and incorporates the following therein: (Amended 2/7/01) 
1.  A certified boundary description based on a survey of the entire property. 
2.  A graphic representation of those conditions of zoning which can be graphically represented. This is not intended to require that conditions of zoning be written-out on a site plan. 
3.  Zoning case number and other relevant file numbers. 
B.  Grading plan with phasing. 
C.  Erosion and sediment control plan. A separate sheet depicting erosion and sediment control measures as required by the State of Georgia. 
D.  Landscape/tree protection plan. A detailed landscape or tree protection plan for all required buffers, landscape strips, tree protection zones, and screened areas. If project completion does not coincide with an appropriate planting season, or if water prohibitions are in effect, a performance bond may be posted to delay planting until an appropriate time approved by the Fulton County Arborist. (Amended 3/6/91, 03/03/04) 
E.  Storm water management plan. (Name Changed 7/7/93) 
1.  Evaluate the downstream ditch stability and bank erosion protection potential of existing downstream conveyance system. Provide all necessary documentation to the Department of Public Works, Storm Water Management Section at construction drawing phase. 
2.  Contact the Department of Public Works, Storm Water Management Section to arrange an on-site evaluation as to the location of storm water facility, discharge path of detention/retention pond and other downstream constraints. 
3.  The design discharge at the outlet of drainage system shall not result in velocities that equal/exceed the erosive velocity or the existing receiving channel/draw, unless dissipation and erosion protection measures are placed at the outlet. Said documentation shall be provided to the Department of Public Works, Storm Water Management Section. 
4.  Provide downstream analysis of the flood discharge timing effect on the existing conveyance systems due to each storm frequency. 
5.  All natural streams within the limit of the project must be stable and be expected to remain stable under ultimate development or provide appropriate erosion protection for the streams subject to the approval of the Department of Public Works, Storm Water Management Section. 
6.  Evaluate the downstream effect from storm water management structures and the development, hydrologic-hydraulic engineering studies shall extend downstream to a point where the proposed development represents less than ten percent of the total watershed to this point. 
7.  The result of the extended downstream point analysis (ten percent point) shall be included in the hydrologic study submitted with the storm water management plan. Said documentation is subject to approval by the Department of Public Works, Storm Water Management Section. 
8.  Provide detention/retention as maybe required by Fulton County subject to the approval of the Department of Public Works. 
9.  The development site shall be graded in such a manner that the surface runoff does not affect down stream lots, flow through lots shall be collected and conveyed in appropriate storm drainage system. Documentation shall be provided at construction drawing phase. 
10.  Water intake and discharge points in a single-family residential development to be a minimum of 15 feet from any existing or proposed residential structure and to be at a minimum of five feet above and/or five feet below any existing or proposed buildable area. (Added 9/1/99) 
F.  Other plans, as applicable. 
1.  Water and waste water plans. 
a.  Water and waste water systems constructed under the jurisdiction of Fulton County government shall abide by the department of public works. 
b.  Fulton County Public Works/government does not guarantee the availability of water or waste water capacity. 
c.  Matters pertaining to septic systems shall be determined by the Fulton County Board of Health. 
d.  The project being proposed shall utilize one geographical information system (GIS) monument as the development's benchmark. Furthermore, the developer shall abide by all provisions of the Fulton County "Monument Resolution," as established by the Department of Public Works. 
e.  Matters pertaining to pump stations shall be pre-reviewed by the Department of Public Works, Engineering Support Services Division, with regards to current policy, prior to the submittal of project design drawings. 
f.  All appropriate fees shall be paid by the developer prior to the issuance of any land disturbance permits. 
g.  The developer is required to extend the water pipe line system across the entire length of road frontage, within the right-of-way. 
h.  At the time of design review, the Department of Public Works, Engineering Support Services Division may require the developer to connect (loop) the project to the adjoining property, for flow enhancement of the public water system. 
i.  Rerouting of existing water pipe lines and/or waste water pipe lines shall be pre-approved by the Department of Public Works, Engineering Support Services Division, prior to the submittal of project design drawings. 
j.  As part of the project, the developer is required to network the waste water pipe line system to all upstream properties. 
k.  Easements dedicated to Fulton County government shall abide by all established standards. All easements shall be obtained and approved by the Department of Public Works, Engineering Support Services Division. 
l.  Conflicts, with other review disciplines of Fulton County government shall be submitted to and resolved by the Department of Public Works, Engineering Support Services Division. 
2.  Profiles of roads and sewers. 
3.  Traffic signs and striping. 
4.  Standard construction details. 
5.  Proposed permanent stormwater management plan. 
6.  A traffic impact mitigation plan which details an owner's or developer's plan to address the number of trips that their development will produce when such development is within one mile of a roadway operating at a level of service D or lower as established by the Department of Public Works. This plan shall include, but is not limited to roadway improvements including costs and other proposals such as providing transit access, transit use incentives, car/van pooling, bicycle path construction, internal sidewalk construction, and lunch trip reduction, which when combined mitigate the traffic impact of the proposed development and shall also include a time table for the construction/implementation of improvements and who will be financially responsible for them. (Added 4/3/02) 
G.  Permits, agreements, studies as applicable. 
1.  An approved curb cut permit from the Georgia Department of Transportation or the Fulton County Development Services Department. 
2.  Board of health approvals. 
3.  Right-of-way dedication. 
a)  Property owners be required to dedicate at no cost to Fulton County, along the entire frontage, sufficient right-of-way to provide a minimum 10.5 foot shoulder behind any required project improvement subject to the approval of the director of public works. 
4.  Off-site transportation improvement funds and agreements. 
5.  Fire department approval. 
6.  Sanitary sewer pre-treatment approval. 
7.  Siltation Study. (Added 3/4/92, Amended 7/7/93, 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
a.  At the discretion of the Director of the Environment and Community Development Department, submit prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit and prior to recording of the final plat for each phase of development, base siltation studies of any water bodies located on the development site and on adjacent properties. Said studies shall identify, for removal by the applicant, prior to recording of the final plat for each phase of development, all siltation resulting from the development. (Amended 2/7/01) 
b.  At the discretion of the Director of the Environment and Community Development Department, prior to the recording of the final plat for the final phase of development, submit a performance bond for the removal of any siltation resulting from the development. The performance bond shall remain on file in the Environment and Community Development Department until release of the occupancy certificates for a minimum of 90 percent of all residences permitted pursuant to the development or three years from the date of the first certificate of occupancy, whichever is earlier. (Amended 2/7/01) 
34.4.2 Prerequisite to occupancy permit inspection. The Public Works Department and/or the Inspections and Zoning Enforcement Department shall notify the Environment and Community Development Department in writing of holds on the issuance of a certificate of occupancy on a project. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
A.  Single-family residential. Before a certificate of occupancy may be considered by the Environment and Community Development Department for any dwelling located in a subdivision, the items listed under "B"., below, must have been signed-off on by the Environment and Community Development Department as complete for that phase of the subdivision in which a dwelling is located. (Amended 2/7/01) 
B.  All structures except single-family residential. Before a certificate of occupancy may be considered for a structure, including the first of several structures within a development, the following must have been signed-off on as complete by the Environment and Community Development Department: (Amended 2/7/01) 
1.  Required landscaping. 
2.  Required buffers. 
3.  Required tree protection measures. 
4.  Required walls and fences. 
(Amd. No. 09-0766, pt. 3, 8-5-09) 
34.4.3.7(g) Siltation study. See section 34.4.1(G)(7) (Moved 7/7/93) 
(Ord. No. 18-0340, Att. A, 5-16-18) 
34.5 - Site improvement standards. 
These standards shall regulate site improvement, and the provision of amenities related to site improvement. 
34.5.1 Off-street parking. Property owners shall provide and maintain off-street parking throughout construction. Parking on any lot other than the lot for which a building permit is issued must be approved for a temporary parking lot by the Environment and Community Development Department. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
34.5.2 Interparcel access. Interparcel access shall be provided to adjacent properties upon determination by the Director of the Environment and Community Development Department that such access is in the best interest of the public health, safety or welfare. (Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
34.5.3 Sidewalks/curb and gutters. (Amended 11/03/93, 02/07/01, 03/03/04, 04/05/06) Sidewalk, curb and gutter shall be provided for all development projects as determined by the Department of Environment and Community Development. When required, sidewalk, curb and gutter shall be constructed in accordance with the Department of Public Works Standard Plans (also known as Standard Details). 
34.5.4 Detention/retention. On-site storm water detention facilities shall not be located within any required buffer or landscape strip. Detention facilities shall not be located within parking or loading areas unless approved by the department of public works. A minimum 20-foot wide landscape strip planted to buffer standards shall be provided around the exterior of the detention area outside of the access easement or as may be approved by the Fulton County Arborist. (Added 3/6/91) (Amended 07/07/93, 04/05/95, 11/03/04) 
34.5.5 Compliance with tree preservation ordinance. Prior to applying for a land disturbance permit, the owner shall arrange with the county arborist, through the Director of the Environment and Community Development Department, for an on-site evaluation of existing specimen trees and stands of trees, and an evaluation of buffers and tree protection zones. At a minimum, the tree density requirements prescribed by the Fulton County Tree Preservation Ordinance Administrative Guidelines shall be provided and permanently maintained. (Added 4/7/93, Amended 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
34.5.6 Subdivision access. Any subdivision of land for single family that has new roads providing direct access to the lots within the subdivision shall be limited to newly constructed internal roads. (Added 9/4/91) 
34.5.7 Minimum setback for new street. The right-of-way for new streets must be located a minimum of 50 from any peripheral property line adjoining AG-1 and residentially zoned property unless interparcel access is required. (Added 12/4/91) 
34.5.8 Arborist notification. Contact the Director of the Environment and Community Development Department, prior to the application for a land disturbance permit, to arrange with the county arborist an on-site evaluation of existing specimen trees/stands, buffers, and tree protection zones within the property boundaries and otherwise to ascertain compliance with the Tree Preservation Ordinance. (Added 12/4/91, Amended 4/7/93, 11/3/93, 2/7/01) 
34.5.9 Dams. All dams within the jurisdiction of Fulton County shall comply with the provisions of the Safe Dam Act and Rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
34.5.10 Development in or near a transmission line easement. (Added 8/4/99, Amended 06/04/14) 
A.  Definitions. Words and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section, but defined in the Zoning Resolution of Fulton County, shall be given the meanings set forth in such resolution. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or captions are for reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this article. 
Consultation zone. An area within 500 feet from a transmission line easement. 
Development permit. For the purposes of the consultation zone requirements, any permit for activity that involves construction, grade modification, excavation, blasting, land clearing, or the deposit of earth, rocks or other materials that places an additional load upon the soil. Construction that involves work totally within an existing building footprint, such as residential remodeling projects, is specifically exempted from these consultation zone requirements. 
Environmental justice working group. A board of commissioners established group of key personnel from Fulton County departments and agencies whose activities relate to or impact environmental justice matters. 
New construction. Construction after June 2, 2014 of a structure intended for human occupancy, and includes the construction of a new structure, the construction of an addition to an existing structure and the reconstruction of a portion of an existing structure. The term excludes an addition to or the reconstruction or replacement of a structure existing on June 2, 2014 used for: 
1.  Single-family residential use; 
2.  Townhouse use; 
3.  Duplex, triplex or quadruplex use; 
4.  Multi-family residential use; 
5.  Mobile home residential use; or 
6.  Nonresidential buildings occupied by human beings. 
Person. Any individual, firm, joint venture, entity, partnership, corporation, association or cooperative. 
Planning area. The area within 300 feet of a transmission line easement. 
Restricted pipeline area. The area within 40 feet of a transmission line easement and the area within a transmission line easement. 
Transmission line. See article III, section 3.3.20. 
Use requiring evacuation assistance. A land use which includes the following: 
1.  Congregate living; 
2.  Convalescent services; 
3.  Detention facilities; 
4.  Day care services (commercial); 
5.  Hospital; 
6.  Medical offices exceeding 5,000 square feet of gross floor area; 
7.  Private primary educational facilities; 
8.  Private secondary educational facilities; 
9.  Public primary educational facilities; 
10.  Public secondary educational facilities; and 
11.  Retirement housing development. 
B.  Consultation zone. 
1.  Consultation zone distance. 
a.  A consultation zone is hereby established for any parcels within 500 feet from a transmission line easement. 
2.  Consultation zone notification. 
a.  At application for a development permit, zoning or use permit, Fulton County staff shall notify the individual that they are within the consultation zone, explain the relevant application procedures, and provide contact information for the applicable pipeline operator(s). This same procedure shall be followed whenever an individual inquires about development regulations or zoning restrictions for property within the consultation zone. 
b.  A complete application for a development permit, zoning or use permit within a designated consultation zone must include written verification from the applicant that: 
1.  Applicant has contacted the pipeline operator(s) and has provided them with documentation detailing the proposed development type and place of the activity; and 
2.  The pipeline operator(s) has reviewed the documents; 
3.  The written verification required by this section can be in any form acceptable to the director of the department planning and community services, including electronic communications, so long as it is clear that the pipeline operator(s) has received and reviewed documentation showing the proposed information concerning any impact the activity will have upon the integrity of the transmission line(s). The verification should include all comments received from the operator or a notice from the operator indicating that the operator has no comments; 
4.  If the operator does not respond within 30 days after being contacted and provided information by the developer pursuant to b.1. above, then the director of planning and community services may waive the requirement for written verification given under b.3. above. 
C.  Planning area. 
1.  Whereas a proposed use within a consultation zone requires notification to and a review by the pipeline operator(s), additional procedures are required in planning areas based upon characteristics of the transmission line(s) and potential for impact to people and property. Planning areas are hereby established within 300 feet of transmission line(s) easement. 
2.  Application process within a planning area. 
a.  At application for a development permit, zoning or use permit, Fulton County staff shall notify the individual that they are within the planning area and explain the relevant requirements. 
b.  Development within the planning area shall meet the requirements under section D (Development near a transmission line) below. 
c.  The plat must provide a note that all existing transmission lines or transmission line facilities through the residential or commercial development have been shown, or that there are no known transmission lines or transmission line facilities within the limits of the residential or commercial development. 
d.  The location of all transmission lines and related easements shall be shown on all preliminary plat, zoning, building, and record plat maps when proposed development is within the planning area. 
D.  Development near a transmission line. 
1.  A use requiring evacuation assistance is prohibited in a structure intended for human occupancy that is located within the 300-foot planning area. This prohibition does not apply to a structure that is located between 40 and 300 feet of a pipeline if the Fulton County Environmental Justice Working Group determines, after receiving a recommendation from the fire marshal, that: 
a.  The structure has a performance-based design that provides an adequate time period for occupant evacuation to a safe place in the event of a transmission line leak or fire associated with the transmission line, after considering: 
1.  The requirements of the current adopted edition of the National Fire Protection Association 101 Life Safety Code and International Fire Code; 
2.  The site and structure design; 
3.  The structure's building materials; 
4.  The structure's distance from the transmission line; 
5.  The use of radiant energy barriers; 
6.  Access to the site and the structure by emergency responders; 
7.  Available on-site resources for emergency responders; 
8.  The topography and other natural features; 
9.  The use of the structure; and 
10.  The evacuation capability of the occupants. 
b.  The structure incorporates a system for the early detection and notification of a transmission line leak, if the fire chief determines that an appropriate system is commercially available. 
2.  A person may not build new construction within 125 feet of a transmission line easement unless the fire marshall determines that: 
a.  The new construction has a performance-based design that provides a minimum one-hour time period for occupant evacuation to a safe place in the event of a transmission line leak or a fire associated with the transmission line, in accordance with the current adopted edition of the National Fire Protection Association 101 Life Safety Code and International Fire Code; and 
b.  The new construction incorporates a system for the early detection and notification of a transmission line leak, if the fire chief determines that an appropriate system is commercially available; or 
c.  The new construction complies with the standards for construction near a transmission line prescribed by the Fire Criteria Manual. 
3.  A person may not place a structure or excavate within a restricted pipeline area. This prohibition does not apply to: 
a.  The transmission line or an appurtenance; 
b.  A facility that produces, consumes, processes, or stores the product transported by the transmission line, including a power generation facility; 
c.  A utility line that crosses the restricted pipeline area, including an appurtenance to the line; 
d.  A utility service connection; 
e.  A road; 
f.  A surface parking lot; or 
g.  A structure or excavation that the director determines does not disturb the transmission line or impede its operation. The director in his/her determination shall consult Appendix A - Appropriateness of Proposed Land Uses within a Transmission Line Easement and section 4. below, to assist in the final determination. 
4.  Before a person may place a road, surface parking lot, structure, utility line or otherwise excavate in a restricted pipeline area, the person must: 
a.  Deliver to the director a certification by a registered engineer stating that the proposed construction activity and structure are designed to prevent disturbing the transmission line or impeding its operation; and 
b.  Provide notarized documentation that the pipeline or transmission line easement owner has been notified of the proposed development activity. 
5.  If a proposed use is subject to any required determination in sections 1 through 4 above, the county's response and the results of the review will be provided to the applicant within ten business days of the county's acceptance of the complete application package. The office of planning and community services in collaboration with Fulton County Fire and Rescue shall determine when such submissions are deemed complete. 
E.  Platting transmission lines/pipelines. 
1.  A developer shall determine whether a transmission line crosses a proposed development. 
2.  A developer shall depict on the plat a restricted pipeline area, if any. 
3.  A residential lot that is less than one acre in size may not include a restricted pipeline area. 
4.  A person may not place a structure or excavate within a restricted pipeline area. This prohibition does not apply to: 
a.  The transmission line or an appurtenance; 
b.  A facility that produces, consumes, processes, or stores the product transported by the transmission line, including a power generation facility; 
c.  A utility line that crosses the restricted pipeline area, including an appurtenance to the line; 
d.  A utility service connection; 
e.  A road; 
f.  Surface parking lot; or 
g.  A structure or excavation that the director determines does not disturb the transmission line or impede its operation. 
5.  Before a person may place a road, surface parking lot, or utility line in a restricted pipeline area, the person must: 
a.  Deliver to the director a certification by a registered engineer stating that the proposed construction activity and structure are designed to prevent disturbing the transmission line or impeding its operation; and 
b.  Provide notarized documentation that the pipeline or transmission line easement owner has been notified of the proposed development activity. 
F.  Severability. Should any article, section, clause, or provision of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part hereof other than the part so declared to be invalid, it being the intent of the county that each article, section, clause, and provision hereof be severable. 
G.  Effective date. This ordinance shall be in full force and take effect from and after the date of its final passage and approval. 
H.  Savings. Nothing contained herein shall in any manner be deemed or construed to alter, modify, supersede, supplant or otherwise nullify any other ordinance of the county or the requirements thereof whether or not relating to or in any manner connected with the subject matter hereof, unless expressly set forth herein. 
APPENDIX A - Appropriateness of Proposed Land Uses within a Restricted Pipeline Area 
The purpose of this table is to increase awareness and encourage early communication among key stakeholders when considering changes to an existing land use or new land use development within an existing restricted pipeline area. 
This table provides a list of common land use activities and is only meant to provide guidance to those tasked with determining whether the proposed land use is acceptable or not. There will be variances in the application of these rules from operator to operator based on site-specific conditions, operator practices, and evolving safety regulations and concerns. Therefore, this table should be referenced only for general informational purposes. Stakeholders should consult with the appropriate pipeline operator for acceptable land uses within a restricted pipeline area. 

 

34.5.11. Burying of construction material. No person shall bury unused, scrap, waste, excess or discarded construction material without the approval of a use permit for an inert waste landfill in accordance with article XIX. Any person who violates this provision shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of article XXIX, Violation and Penalty. (Added 12/1/99) 
34.5.12. Wastewater pump and lift stations. A minimum 50-foot buffer and 10-foot improvement setback shall be provided along all property lines adjacent to residentially and/or agriculturally zoned properties used for residential or public recreational purposes. (Added 09/01/04) 
34.5.13. South Fulton Greenway Trail Master Plan. At the time of application for a land disturbance permit or building permit, development projects with frontage adjacent to roads identified on the South Fulton Greenway Trail Master Plan Map shall incorporate a multi-use path subject to the approval of the director of the environment and community development. (Amd. No. 10-0379, 4-7-10) 
34.5.14. Reserved. 
34.5.15. Reserved. 
34.5.16. Cluster mailboxes. 
A.  Applicable districts: 
1.  All residential districts or districts with residential components when developed with residential units. 
2.  Non-residential districts and interior building cluster mailboxes are exempt from the design and location standards of this section. 
3.  Procedural standards are applicable to all cluster mailbox installations. 
B.  Procedural standards: 
1.  Prior to the submission of the preliminary plat, approval of the United States Postal Service (USPS) must be obtained and attached with the plat. 
2.  Where a final plat is recorded with a performance bond, the surety shall cover the cluster-style mailbox kiosk and the installation shall occur prior to any certificate of occupancy being issued for a residential structure shown on the plat. 
3.  Cluster-style mailbox kiosks shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any residential structure that will be served by a cluster-style mailbox. 
4.  The cost of installation, including but not limited to box units, architectural elements, landscaping, concrete pad and concrete/masonry or stone sidewalk access, shall be borne by the developer. 
5.  Maintenance of the cluster-style mailbox kiosk, landscaping, trash can and surrounding areas shall be borne by the home owners association (HOA) of the neighborhood/development. Where no HOA exists, maintenance and associated costs shall be the responsibility of the homeowners served by the cluster mailbox kiosk. 
6.  Cluster-style mailbox kiosks shall be exempt from the setback requirements of the zoning district; however all structures shall require a separate building permit and must meet or exceed all applicable building code. 
C.  Design standards: 
1.  All cluster-style mailbox units shall be incorporated into a cluster-style mailbox kiosk unless the cluster-style mailbox units are located interior to a building or as may be approved by the director. 
2.  Cluster-style mailbox kiosks shall be compatible with other streetscape elements and be architecturally enhanced with building materials and details typical of the architectural style of the neighborhood/development. 
a.  Cluster-style mailbox kiosks shall be located away from any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, or obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic control device. 
b.  Provide a four-foot-wide impervious surface parallel to the kiosk and a roof overhang for a weather free standing location wherever the individual mailboxes are to be accessed. 
c.  Provide landscaping consistent with the landscape theme of the neighborhood/development. 
d.  Provide a trash receptacle at each clustered mailbox location. 
e.  Provide lighting. 
3.  Cluster-style mailbox kiosks shall have a base of a width not less than the width of the cluster mailbox structure itself. 
4.  Cluster-style mailbox kiosks shall have a minimum four-foot-wide concrete/masonry or stone access from the street and/or sidewalk. 
5.  Cluster-style mailbox kiosks shall provide access compliant with the Americans with Disability Act (ADA). 
6.  Cluster-style mailbox kiosks shall provide a paved area with ingress/egress to allow vehicles to pull off, park and re-enter the roadway safely while retrieving mail. 
7.  Cluster-style mailbox kiosks shall be located in areas that will best allow for vehicle parking. Parking layout is to be designed in a manor so as to not create pedestrian safety or vehicle safety issues as determined by the Fulton County Traffic Engineer. 
_____ 
8.  Minimum required parking shall be required as follows: 

 
_____ 
9.  Access drives and parking areas shall be constructed to Fulton County road standards or as approved by the director of the department. 
D.  Location standards: 
1.  The location of the cluster-style mailbox is to be approved by the county and by the USPS. 
2.  Cluster-style mailbox kiosks shall be prohibited from being located within the public right-of-way. 
3.  Clustered mailboxes shall be placed so as to not adversely affect the privacy of residents. 
4.  Cluster-style mailbox kiosks shall not be installed within a cul-de-sac bulb. 
5.  Cluster-style mailbox kiosks shall be located away from the intersection of any street and in no case closer than 75 feet measured from the street centerline in order to prevent obstruction of free and clear vision. 
6.  Clustered mailboxes shall be centrally located, offering easy pedestrian access to all residents. Cluster-style mailbox kiosks shall be located no more than one-fourth mile from the property line of those residents served by the cluster-style mailbox kiosk. Distance shall be measure as a radius drawn from the cluster-style mailbox kiosk. 
7.  No driveway or street access shall be constructed within five feet of a cluster-style mailbox kiosk and vice versa. 
E.  Address post: 
1.  Each residential one- or two-family dwelling shall have its address number posted on a mailbox or addressing post located at or near the main entrance or vehicle access point to the property. 
2.  The address post shall not exceed six inches by six inches in dimension. 
3.  One-third of the total length of the address post shall be buried in the ground and the address post shall be secured in the ground i.e. surrounded by concrete. 
4.  Such address numbers shall have a minimum stroke height of three inches and shall be a color that contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable. 
5.  Such numbers shall have a minimum one-half inch between numbers. 
6.  Address numbers shall not be placed within 18 inches of the ground. 
7.  Address numbers must be clearly visible on both sides of the post, and shall face the direction of traffic. 
8.  The post shall not be obstructed from view by any means. 
9.  The property owner shall have the responsibility of ensuring compliance with the requirements of this section, regardless of whether the premises are leased or owner-occupied. 
The following diagram has been provided as reference for acceptable and unacceptable installation, of the address posts and address numbers. 

(15-0273, 4-1-15; 16-0363, pt. 1, 5-4-16) 
34.6. Timber harvesting. (Added 3-6-91; Deleted 12-1-99) 
34.7. Cemeteries. In a parcel with a cemetery, burial ground, human remains or burial object(s), there shall be no land disturbing activity or timbering unless approved by the Department of Environment and Community Development. The person or entity seeking a permit shall also comply with O.C.G.A. § 36-72-4. If a parcel is adjacent to a cemetery, there shall be no land disturbance in that parcel unless approved by the Department of Environment and Community Development. 
The following development standards shall be required as a part of the application process for a land disturbance permit or building permit on any parcel with a cemetery or on any parcel adjacent to a cemetery: 
A.  A report prepared by an archeologist determining the boundary of the cemetery and stating the number of graves believed to be present and their location as can be determined from the use of minimally invasive investigation techniques, including remote sensing methods and the use of metal probes. 
B.  A survey of the cemetery prepared by or under the direction of a registered surveyor showing the location of the boundaries of the cemetery or burial ground based on an archeologist's report. 
C.  A 25-foot natural undisturbed buffer with a 10-foot improvement setback shall be provided around the perimeter of the outermost burials, as determined by an archeologist, if a cemetery is located on the parcel of land to be developed. If a cemetery is adjacent to the parcel to be developed, a 25-foot natural undisturbed buffer with a 10-foot improvement setback shall be provided along common property lines on the parcel where the land disturbance permit or building permit is being sought. 
D.  A temporary tree protection fence shall be installed on the outer perimeter of the 25-foot undisturbed buffer before any land disturbing activity occurs. If the cemetery is located on an adjacent parcel, the tree protection fence shall be located along common property lines. The temporary tree protection fence shall remain in place until construction is completed. 
E.  A permanent 6-foot high fence or wall with a gate shall be constructed along the perimeter of a cemetery on a parcel for which land disturbing activity is sought. The fence shall be constructed of a durable metal material. At minimum fence shall be black vinyl clad chain-link. Uncoated chain-link fence is prohibited. The location of the fence shall be as determined by an archaeologist. If the cemetery is located on an adjacent parcel, the fence shall be located interior to the required buffer and improvement setback or along the common property line(s) as may be approved by the Fulton County Arborist. The gate shall have a latch and be 4 feet wide if the cemetery is inactive or 10 feet wide if active. 
F.  Uninhibited daylight access to the cemetery shall be provided via a 20-foot graveled easement to the cemetery from the nearest public road. The easement shall be recorded in the Fulton County Courthouse. 
G.  A maintenance plan for a cemetery located on the parcel for which a land disturbance permit or building permit is sought shall be developed and implemented. 
H.  The location of a cemetery, as identified by the surveyor, shall be included on the recorded plat. 
I.  A small plaque/marker with the name of the cemetery, range of burials and any other historical information may be placed on the cemetery fence. (Added 2-1-06) 
APPENDIX A - (INACTIVE) 
ARTICLE XIII. - A-1 APARTMENT DWELLING DISTRICT REGULATIONS (11-2-66) 

1. - [Article applicable to A-1 district.] 
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this resolution when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the A-1 District. (See article XIX) 
2. - Use regulations. 
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
A.  Any use permitted in the R-1 Single Family Dwelling District. 
B.  Two family dwelling. 
C.  Multiple dwelling. 
D.  Rooming house and boardinghouse. 
E.  Institutions of a religious, educational, eleemosynary or philanthropic nature, but not penal or mental institutions. (These uses are contingent upon compliance with article XIX — Additional Use Regulations.) 
F.  Hospital, except a criminal, mental or animal hospital, (These uses are contingent upon compliance with article XIX — Additional Use Regulations.) 
G.  Private club, fraternities, sororities and lodge, excepting those the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business. (These uses are contingent upon compliance with article XIX — Additional Use Regulations.) 
H.  Accessory use or building and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, including as follows: 
(1)  Single family and two family dwellings: Accessory buildings that are not a part of the main structure shall be located in the rear yard not less than ten feet from the main building nor less than five feet from any side or rear yard. 
(2)  Multiple family dwellings and other uses: All accessory buildings shall be located in the rear yard and not nearer to any lot line than the distance prescribed for side and rear yards. 
(3)  Deleted - 37, Regular Meeting 2/3/88. 
(4)  Swimming pools may be located within the buildable area of any tract or parcel of land used for multiple family dwelling purposes, provided that when located on property adjacent to single family or two family dwelling districts, such pools, including their enclosed areas, shall not be located within 150 feet thereof. Provided, however, when swimming pools are located so as to be screened from such districts by a multiple family dwelling greater in length by a minimum of 20 feet on each end of the enclosed area of such pools, said distance of 150 feet shall not be required. 
3. - Off-street parking regulations.(Superseded by article XVIII) 
1.  Location of parking spaces and driveways on the lot: 
(a)  Off-street parking shall be provided in the rear yard or within that portion of the side yard lies between a main building and the side lot line. 
(b)  Except at points where they provide ingress and egress to a property, development, or parcel of land, driveways may not be located nearer than ten feet to any lot line which abuts a single family or two family dwelling district nor nearer than four feet to any other lot line. 
2.  Parking space requirements: Parking spaces on the lot with adequate access to a public street and with adequate circulation space shall be constructed of a material which will assure a surface resistant to erosion and maintained permanently follows: 
(a)  Multiple dwellings: One and one-half tenant parking spaces for each dwelling unit, plus one visitor parking space for ever four units, rounded to the next highest whole number of spaces. 
(b)  Single family and two family dwellings: Two parking spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(c)  Fraternities or sororities: One parking space for every three beds contained in the structure. 
(d)  Rooming house and boardinghouse: One parking space for every two guest rooms contained in the structure. 
(e)  Private club or lodge: One parking space for every five active members. 
(f)  Hospitals or institutions: One space for ever four beds, plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor (based on the average number), plus one space for every two employees, including nurses. 
(g)  Professional office or studio of a physician, dentist, artist, musician, lawyer, architect or teacher in his place of abode: Parking space with adequate ingress and egress from a public way, place or street equal to twice that area within the structure which is devoted to such office or studio, but in no instance less than two parking spaces. 
(h)  Schools and public buildings: One parking space for every ten seats in the auditorium or similar places of public assembly. 
(i)  Government buildings: One parking space for every 200 square feet of floor area (excluding storage area) plus one space for every two persons employed in an accessory use. 
4. - Height regulations. 
No building shall exceed three stories or 45 feet. 
5. - Area regulations. 
1.  Front yard: 
(a)  Single family and two family dwellings: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 40 feet. 
(b)  Multiple dwellings and other uses: There shall be front yard having a depth of not less than 40 feet. 
2.  Side yard: 
(a)  Single family and two family dwellings: There shall be two side yards, one on each side of the building, having a combined width of not less than 15 feet; provided, however, that no side yard shall be less than seven feet in width. 
(b)  Multiple dwelling and other uses: 
(1)  Where multiple dwelling districts abut single family and two family districts, there shall be two side yards, one on each side of the building each having a width of not less than 25 feet. 
(2)  Where multiple dwelling districts do not abut single family and two family districts, there shall be two side yards, one on each side of the building, having a combined width of not less than 25 feet provided, however, that no side yard shall be less than ten feet in width. 
(3)  Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets, the width of the yard along the side street shall be not less than 25 feet. 
3.  Side yard: 
(a)  Single family and two family dwellings: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet. 
(b)  Multiple dwellings and other uses: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet, provided, that when a rear yard abuts a single family district and is used for multiple dwelling purposes, the rear yard shall be not less than 75 feet. 
4.  Lot area per family: Every dwelling shall be located upon a lot having the following minimum size: 
(a)  Single family dwelling: Every lot shall have a frontage of not less than 85 feet and an area of not less than 12,000 square feet, however, in no case shall lot frontages and lot areas be required which are larger than those required by zoning standards established in the nearest single family dwelling district. 
(b)  Two family dwellings: Every two family dwelling shall be located upon a Lot having a frontage of not less than 85 feet and an area of not less than 10,000 square feet, however, in no case shall lot frontages and lot areas be required which are larger than those required by the zoning standards established in the nearest single family dwelling district. 
(c)  Multiple dwellings: Multiple dwellings shall be located upon a lot having a frontage of not less than 100 feet and an area of not less than 2,250 square feet per family. 
(d)  Where a lot has less area or width than herein required and was of record at the time of the effective date of this resolution, that lot may be used for a single family dwelling, for a two family dwelling, or for the other nondwelling uses permitted in this article. 
6. - Residential floor area resolutions. 
1.  Each efficiency or studio apartment shall have a floor area of not less than 450 square feet. 
2.  Each multiple dwelling other than efficiency or studio apartments shall have a floor area of not less than 600 square feet per dwelling unit. 
3.  Each two family dwelling shall have a minimum floor area of 1,000 square feet per dwelling unit. 
4.  Each single family dwelling shall have a minimum floor area of 1,100 square feet. 
7. - Lot coverage. 
Maximum coverage of the lot by buildings, including accessory buildings, shall be 30 percent of the gross lot area. 
8. - Buffer screen. 
The developer shall provide a buffer screen beginning at the building line and extending along any side or rear property line which abuts a single family or two family district when an A-1 District is used for any purpose other than one or two family dwellings. 
Definition: 
Buffer screen: Superseded by article III, Definitions. A permanent fence, wall, or evergreen planting screen which will interrupt vision between adjacent properties. A buffer screen shall be at least six feet high except that initially an evergreen planting screen may be less than six feet if plants are provided which will ultimately attain a height of six feet or more. (Note: If grouped in proximity, such plants as Pinus Strobus (White Pine); Prunus Caroliniana (Cherry Laurel); ligustrum Licidum (Ligustrum); Elaeagnus Pungens (Elaeagnus); and Ilex Crenta Burfordi (Burfordi Holly) will grow to form a hardy screen thick enough and high enough to interrupt vision and to effectively reduce the transmission of sound.) 
ARTICLE XIII-A. - (Sept. 6, 1961) (Repealed 5/2/68) A-O APARTMENT-OFFICE DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

1. - [Article applicable to A-O District.] 
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this resolution when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the A-O District Regulations (See article XIX). 
(a)  Intent: These regulations are designed to apply to land so located that it is readily adaptable to commercial development but where proximity to residential, public, or other land uses, and its relationship to existing and projected traffic patterns, make it desirable to limit the extent of commercial and residential operations. 
2. - Use regulations. 
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
1.  Any use permitted in the A-1 Apartment Dwelling District but not including single family dwelling, two family dwelling, agriculture, horticulture and general farming as provided in article VII, section 2, paragraph 7, and fraternities or sororities containing sleeping accommodations. 
2.  Apothecary shop as an accessory retail use within a building without exterior advertising display, provided that only drugs, prescription medicines, medicinal supplies and pharmaceutical products shall be sold. 
3.  Assembly halls, gymnasiums, stadiums, and similar structures operated on a nonprofit basis. 
4.  Automobile parking garages and lots (commercial) provided that portions of open parking lots abutting dwelling districts are separated therefrom by a planted area 25 feet or more in width measured from the property line. 
5.  Churches and temples. 
6.  Clinics, medical, dental, chiropractic, osteopathic and similar operations, but not including a practice of veterinary medicine. 
7.  Colleges, universities, business colleges, music conservatories, dancing schools and similar institutions, public or private, all without students in residence. 
8.  Community center buildings, and other similar facilities operated on a nonprofit basis. 
9.  Financial establishments, such as banks, loan companies, insurance companies. 
10.  Government buildings: buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county, or city governments for public purposes but not including repair garages, repair or storage yards for material, vehicles or equipment, warehouses, buildings and other facilities having commercial or industrial characteristics, and buildings used or intended to be used as correctional or penal institutions. 
11.  Incidental accessory retail uses such as cafeterias, gift shoos, flower shops, snack bars, barber shop, beauty shop, tailor shoo, radio-TV shop, and repair shoe shop, conducted for the convenience of the employees, patients, patrons, or visitors on the premises wholly within the principal buildings and without exterior advertising display. 
12.  Libraries, museums, and art galleries. 
13.  Office buildings: governmental and private office buildings, including professional offices in which no retail trade activity is carried on with the general public and no stock of goods is maintained for sale to the general public, except as permitted in an accessory use. 
14.  Signs: 
(a)  Professional or announcement sign, illuminated indirectly, not more than 20 square feet in area mounted flat to the wall on the main building freestanding but situated no nearer to the street line than one-half the distance between the street line and the building line on the main building on the lot; 
(b)  A temporary, unilluminated real estate sign not over 12 square feet in area pertaining only to the sale, lease, or rent of the property upon which the sign is located, provided the sign shall be mounted or displayed behind the building set-back line of the lot; 
(c)  A church or institutional bulletin board or sign, not more than 12 square feet in area, illuminated indirectly, used to display the name and/or activities of the church or institution, situated no nearer to the street line than one-half the distance between the street line and the building line of the main building on the lot; 
(d)  Lettering, illuminated indirectly, attached to or built into the front wall of the main building or assembly halls, churches, colleges and universities, community centers, government buildings, hospitals, libraries, museums, office buildings and schools, for the purpose of displaying the name and/or address of the facility upon which such lettering is affixed. 
15.  Accessory building and uses customarily incident to the above listed uses. Any building used primarily for any of the above enumerated uses may have not more than 25 percent of the floor area devoted to storage purposes incidental to such primary use. 
3. - Off-street parking and loading area regulations.(Superseded by article XVIII) 
1.  Location of parking and loading areas on the lot: 
(a)  The required off-street parking and loading area shall be provided in the rear yard or within that portion of the side yard which lies between the main building and the side lot line. 
(b)  No off-street parking space shall be provided within 25 feet of any lot which abuts a dwelling district. 
2.  Provision of required parking area on remote lots: The required parking area may be located on the lot with the principal use or on a lot separated therefrom by not more than 300 feet along a directly accessible walkway. 
3.  Joint use of off-street parking areas: One-half of the off-street parking area required for any permitted use in this district, not including multiple dwellings, may be counted toward the parking requirements or the following uses, provided the uses sharing such parking areas are not normally open, used or operated during the principal operation hours of these uses: 
(a)  Auditorium. 
(b)  Assembly halls. 
(c)  Churches. 
(d)  Gymnasiums. 
4.  Minimum requirements for off-street parking and loading: 
(a)  Rooming house, boardinghouse, and professional office in place of abode; same as those in A-1 Apartment Dwelling District. 
(b)  Multiple dwelling; 1½ spaces for every dwelling unit. 
(c)  Hospitals or institutions: one space for every four beds, plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor (based on the average number), plus one space for every two employees, including nurses. 
(d)  Clinics and offices of doctors, dentists, osteopaths and similar offices; five spaces for ever doctor plus one for every two employees. 
(e)  Auditoriums, assembly halls, churches, gymnasiums, stadiums, libraries, museums, art galleries, private club or lodge, one space for each four fixed seats in the largest assemble room or facility or for each 35 square feet of enclosed floor area used for accommodation of movable seats in the largest assembly room, whichever is greater, plus one space for each 100 square feet of ground area used for assembly. 
(f)  Government buildings, financial establishments, and office buildings other than clinics and offices for doctors, dentists, etc., one space for every 200 square feet of floor area (excluding storage area) plus one space for every two persons employed in an accessory use. 
(g)  Schools. 
(1)  Public or private elementary, and special schools without students in residence; two spaces for every classroom. 
(2)  Public or private high; four spaces for every classroom. 
(3)  Public or private colleges, music conservatories, dancing schools, universities, business colleges, one space for ever 200 square feet of floor area. 
(4)  School auditorium assembly halls, stadiums, gymnasiums, same as subsection (e) above. 
(h)  Accessory retail uses; one space for every two employees 
(i)  One loading space on the lot shall be provided for each 15,000 square feet of area, or fraction thereof in excess or 5,000 square feet, devoted to uses requiring the receipt of distribution of material or merchandise by auto vehicle. 
(j)  No lot shall have more than two curb breaks per 100 feet of frontage. No curb break shall exceed 30 feet in width. Curb breaks shall be not less than 25 feet from the intersection of two or more curb lines, as measured along one of the said curb lines. 
4. - Height regulations.(7/5/67) 
1.  Buildings intended for multiple dwelling use shall not exceed three stories or 45 feet. 
2.  Buildings intended for nondwelling use shall not exceed four stories or 60 feet in height except as or may be provided in this resolution. This limitation may be exceeded by special permit as provided in article XIX in specific building and site plans are reviewed and approved by the commissioners of roads and revenues subsequent to public hearing and recommendation of the Atlanta-Fulton County Joint Planning Board. Such approval shall follow investigation and finding that the proposed building: 
(a)  Will provide adequate open space and off-street parking facilities, and 
(b)  Will not adversely affect the privacy of adjoining uses and that screened buffer areas will provide separation from any adjoining single family residences. 
5. - Area regulations. 
1.  Multiple dwellings shall conform to the following requirements: 
(a)  Front yard: The front yard regulations shall be the same as those in the A-1 Apartment Dwelling District. 
(b)  Side yard: The side yard regulations shall be the same as those in the A-1 Apartment Dwelling District. 
(c)  Rear yard: The rear yard regulations shall be the same as those in the A-1 Apartment Dwelling District. 
(d)  Lot area per family: The lot area per family shall be the same as those in the A-1 Apartment Dwelling District. 
(e)  Lot coverage: Maximum coverage of the lot by buildings including accessory buildings) shall be 35 percent of the gross lot area. 
2.  Nondwelling uses shall conform to the following requirements: 
(a)  Front yard: The front yard regulations shall be the same as those in the A-1 Apartment Dwelling District. 
(b)  Side yard: The side yard regulations shall be the same as those in the A-1 Apartment Dwelling District. 
(c)  Rear yard: The rear yard regulations shall be the same as those in the A-1 Apartment Dwelling District. 
(d)  Lot area per family: Lot area per family shall be the same as those in the C-1 Commercial District. 
(e)  Lot coverage: Maximum coverage of the lot by buildings (including accessory buildings) shall be 40 percent of the gross lot. 
6. - Residential floor area regulations. 
The residential floor area regulations for multiple dwellings shall be the same as those in the A-1 Apartment Dwelling District. 
ARTICLE XII-A - TR TOWNHOUSE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (Adopted August 6, 1969) (Z-68-161 FC) 

1. - Intent of the district. 
A.  This district encompasses lands devoted to residential uses having both single and multifamily characteristics. The intent of this district is to provide standards for low density dwellings which will: 
1.  Encourage the provisions of usable open and recreation areas and desirable living environment; 
2.  Be located primarily in areas near or adjacent to single family use areas; 
3.  Be located so as to provide transition between single family use areas and higher density dwelling areas and/or commercial areas; 
4.  Be located near such services as retail shopping and major thoroughfares and collector streets; and 
5.  Encourage home ownership. 
B.  The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this resolution when referred to in this article, are the regulations of the TR Townhouse Residential District (see articles XIX, XX and XXI). 
C.  An application for rezoning to TR Townhouse Residential District shall be supported by a site plan for the proposed development. (Amended 6/6/73 — Z-73-75 FC) 
D.  Approval of plans for drainage, sewerage, driveways, and parking areas by the department of planning and community development shall be required prior to the issuance of building permits. 
E.  Construction shall conform to the overall site plan and detailed engineering plans as approved by planning and community development. 
2. - Use regulations. 
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes. 
1.  Single family dwelling. 
2.  Two family dwelling. 
3.  Townhouses: As defined in article III, section 1, 56(b). 
4.  Accessory uses or buildings customarily incidental to any of the above uses as follows: 
(a)  Single family and two family dwellings: Accessory uses and buildings that are not a part of the main structure shall be located in the rear yard or in the side yard, and shall not be less than ten feet from any side or rear lot line. 
(b)  Townhouses: 
(1)  All accessory buildings shall be located not nearer to any perimeter lot line than the distance prescribed for side and rear yards. 
(2)  Deleted — 37, 2/3/88. 
(3)  Unenclosed recreational facilities, except swimming pools, may be placed within any required side or rear yard, provided that any such use shall not be permitted nearer to any perimeter lot line than 30 feet. 
(4)  Swimming pools: Provided that no swimming pool may be placed nearer than 30 feet to any rear or side lot line, nor nearer than 50 feet to any public street line. Provided further that when located adjacent to a single family residential district, such pools shall not be located within 150 feet thereof, except in cases when located so as to be screened from single family dwelling district by a townhouse dwelling, or an accessory structure greater in length by a minimum of 20 feet on each side of such pool(s), the distance of 150 feet shall not be required. A fence of minimum height of five feet shall be provided around the perimeter of all swimming pools. 
(5)  Stacked flats, (Deleted) with approval of special use permit, pursuant to article XIX, Additional Use Regulations (Z83-33 FC, April 6, 1983). 
3. - Off-street parking regulations.(Superseded by article XVIII) 
1.  Location of parking and driveways: 
(a)  No off-street parking shall be permitted in any front yard. On a corner property, no off-street parking shall be permitted within the side yard between the buildings and the adjacent street frontage. 
(b)  No off-street parking or driveways shall be located within ten feet of any perimeter lot line. 
(c)  Driveways serving more than two parking spaces shall provide an adequate turn-around space. 
2.  Parking space requirements: 
(a)  Single family and two family dwellings: Two off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(b)  Townhouse dwellings: Two off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit, plus one visitor parking space for every four units or fraction thereof. Each visitor parking space shall be located in the proximity of the units it serves. 
4. - Building regulations. 
1.  For single family, two family and townhouse dwellings: No building or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
2.  For townhouse residential development: 
(a)  Deleted 6/6/73 — Z-73-75 FC 
(b)  No more than 20 townhouse dwelling units shall be permitted to form a single building. 
(c)  No more than three contiguous townhouse dwellings which form a part of a single building shall have the same front setback or roof line. Said setback and roof line shall be varied by a minimum of two feet. 
(d)  Sidewalks shall be provided for each townhouse pedestrian access throughout the entire development. 
(e)  Driveways serving more than six units shall be paved to a minimum width of 30 feet. 
5. - Area regulations. 
1.  For single family and two family dwellings: 
(a)  Front yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 40 feet. 
(b)  Side yard: There shall be two side yards, one on each side of the building of not less than ten feet. where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets, the width of the yard along the side street shall not be less than 20 feet. No accessory building or portion thereof shall be located within the required yard area along any street. 
(c)  Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of 25 feet. 
(d)  Lot area per family: Every dwelling shall be located on a lot having a frontage of 90 feet at the building setback line and containing the following areas: 
1.  Eleven thousand square feet for a single family dwelling (90′ × 122′). 
2.  Fifty-five hundred square feet per family for a two family dwelling (99′ × 112′). 
2.  For townhouse residential developments: 
(a)  Density: A Townhouse Residential Development shall not exceed nine dwellings units per gross acre (4,480 square feet per family unit). 
(b)  Size of development site: The minimum size of the site to be developed for townhouse residential use shall be two acres, with 100 feet of frontage. (Z-80-38 FC — App. 4-2-80). 
(c)  Yard requirements: 
1.  Front yard: There shall be a front yard of not less than 40 feet. 
2.  Side yard: There shall be two side yards of not less than 30 feet on each side provided, however, where a side yard abuts a single family dwelling district, the side yard shall not be less than 40 feet. 
3.  Corner setback: Where a lot, tract, or parcel of land is located at the intersection of two streets, the width of the yard along the side street side shall not be less than 40 feet provided, however, that when such property lies adjacent to a single family dwelling district, the yard requirement along the side street shall be the same as prescribed or established for the front yard of the adjacent single family dwelling district. In no case shall such yard be less than 40 feet. 
4.  Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard along the rear lot line of not less than 35 feet provided, however, when a rear yard abuts a single family dwelling district and is used for townhouse dwellings, the rear yard 
(d)  Buffers: In addition to the above setback requirements, a buffer zone may be required along any perimeter lot line, or portion thereof, in order to provide privacy and separation between adjoining properties. Property with such buffer areas may be included within the lot area for density and lot coverage purposes. 
6. - Residential floor area regulations. 
1.  Each single family dwelling shall have a minimum ground floor area of 1,200 square feet if less than two stories. 
2.  Each single family dwelling of two stories in height shall have a minimum ground floor area of 900 square feet, and a total minimum floor area of 1,320 square feet. 
3.  Each two family dwelling shall have a minimum floor area of 900 square feet and a minimum ground floor area of 900 square feet if two stories in height. 
4.  Each townhouse dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area of not less than 1,100 square feet. 
(a)  Each townhouse unit shall have a minimum width of 20 feet. 
(b)  Private, usable open space, such as balconies, sundecks, patios, etc. shall be provided contiguous to each dwelling unit. The area of such open space provided for each unit shall not be less than ten percent of the floor area of the unit served. The location and number of square feet shall be clearly indicated on the site plan. 
7. - Screening garbage and storage areas.(Superseded by article IV) 
All exterior garbage, incinerators, or other outside storage areas shall be screened by a solid enclosure of not less than four feet in height. 
8. - Townhouse Residential open space requirements. 
1.  Open space requirements for Townhouse Residential buildings shall be as follows: 
(a)  The minimum distances between buildings, when so arranged shall be as follows: 

 
(b)  Where unusual and uncommon conditions of topography or configuration of the property exist, the planning board may permit a departure from the above prescribed distances between buildings, provided such departure shall not diminish the required distances by more than 50 percent. 
2.  Common open space and facilities: Deleted 6/6/73 — Z-73-75 FC 
APPENDIX A - (INACTIVE) 
SUB A SUBURBAN A SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT 

1. - SUB A District intent and scope. 
Regulations set forth in this article are the SUB A District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative or use permit. The SUB A District encompasses lands devoted to residential use areas of one or fewer dwellings per acre and closely related uses. 
2. - Use regulations. 
2.1 Permitted uses. A building or property may be used for only the following purposes: 
A.  Single family dwelling. 
B.  Agriculture, general and specialized farming, initiated prior to March 7, 1990, including: horticulture, plant nursery, greenhouse, dairy farming, and truck gardening, provided that buildings used for agricultural purposes shall not be located nearer than 200 feet to any side or rear lot line and provided that produce is not offered for sale on the premises. 
2.2 Accessory uses. A building or lot may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
3. - Development regulations. 
3.1 Height regulations. Buildings shall be no higher than 35 feet or 2½ stories, whichever is higher. 
3.2 Area regulations. 
A.  Minimum front yard: 60 feet. 
B.  Minimum side yard: 
— 15 feet adjacent to interior lines. 
— 30 feet adjacent to streets. 
C.  Minimum rear yard: 40 feet 
D.  Minimum lot area: one acre 
E.  Minimum lot width: 150 feet 
F.  Minimum lot frontage: 35 feet 
G.  Minimum heated floor area: 1,200 s.f. for less than two story. 
1,320 s.f. for two story or more than two story with 900 s.f. on ground floor 
I.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Accessory structures may be located in rear or side yards, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
4. - Other regulations. 
The headings below contain provisions applicable to uses allowed in the SUB A District. 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
APPENDIX A - (INACTIVE) 
SUB B SUBURBAN B SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT 

1. - SUB B District scope and intent. 
Regulations set forth in this article are the SUB B District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative or use permit. The SUB B District encompasses lands devoted to residential use areas of one or fewer dwellings per acre and closely related uses. 
2. - Use regulations. 
2.1 Permitted uses. A building or property may be used for only the following purposes: 
A.  Single family dwelling. 
B.  Agriculture, general and specialized farming, initiated prior to March 7, 1990, including: horticulture, plant nursery, greenhouse, dairy farming, and truck gardening, provided that buildings used for agricultural purposes shall not be located nearer than 200 feet to any side or rear lot line and provided that produce is not offered for sale on the premises. 
2.2 Accessory uses. A building or lot may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
3. - Development regulations. 
3.1 Height regulations. Buildings shall be no higher than 35 feet or 2½ stories, whichever is higher. 
3.2 Area regulations. 
A.  Minimum front yard: 60 feet. 
B.  Minimum side yard: 
— 15 feet adjacent to interior lines. 
— 30 feet adjacent to streets. 
C.  Minimum rear yard: 40 feet. 
D.  Minimum lot area: 
One acre. 
Ten acres for poultry. 
Five acres for kennel. 
E.  Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
F.  Minimum lot frontage: 35 feet. 
G.  Minimum heated floor area: 850 s.f. on ground floor. 
H.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: 
Accessory structures may be located in rear or side yards, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
4. - Other regulations. 
The headings below contain provisions applicable to uses allowed in the SUB B District. 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
APPENDIX A - (INACTIVE) 
SUB C SUBURBAN C SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT 

1. - SUB C District scope and intent. 
Regulations set forth in this article are the SUB A District regulations. Article XIX should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative or use permit. The SUB C District encompasses lands devoted to residential use areas of two or fewer dwellings per acre and closely related uses. 
2. - Use regulations. 
2.1 Permitted uses. A building or property may be used for only the following purposes: 
A.  Single family dwelling. 
B.  Agriculture, general and specialized farming, initiated prior to March 7, 1990, including: horticulture, plant nursery, greenhouse, dairy farming, and truck gardening, provided that buildings used for agricultural purposes shall not be located nearer than 200 feet to any side or rear lot line and provided that produce is not offered for sale on the premises. 
2.2 Accessory uses. A building or lot may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. 
3. - Development regulations. 
3.1 Height regulations. Buildings shall be no higher than 35 feet or 2½ stories, whichever is higher. 
3.2 Area regulations. 
A.  Minimum front yard: 50 feet. 
B.  Minimum side yard: 
Ten feet adjacent to interior lines. 
20 feet adjacent to streets. 
C.  Minimum rear yard: 35 feet. 
D.  Minimum lot area: 18,000 s.f. 
E.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
F.  Minimum lot frontage: 35 feet. 
G.  Minimum heated floor area: 1,000 s.f. on ground level for less than two story. 
1,100 s.f. for two story or more than two story dwelling with 850 s.f. on ground floor. 
H.  Minimum accessory structure requirements: Accessory structures may be located in rear or side yards, but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
4. - Other regulations. 
The headings below contain provisions applicable to uses allowed in the SUB C District. 
Development regulations. Article XXXIV 
Exceptions. Section 4.3 
Floodplain management. Section 4.24 
Off-street parking and loading. Article XVIII 
Outside storage. Section 4.2 
Landscape area and buffer regulations. Section 4.23 
River protection. Metropolitan River Protection Act 
Signs. Article XXXIII 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1983 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1983 Code, as updated through May 4, 1988, which are included herein. Sections of the 1983 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances and resolutions adopted since the 1983 Code, as updated through May 4, 1988, which are included herein. Ordinances and resolutions adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1983 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances and resolutions which precede May 4, 1988, but which were never included in the 1983 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances and resolutions adopted since May 4, 1988, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Local Constitutional Amendments and Local Acts Compilation and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 