THE CODE OF TYBEE ISLAND, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published 2007 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted January 11, 2007  and  Adopted February 8, 2007 
____________ 

ORDINANCE NO. 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF TYBEE ISLAND, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING AUTHORITY OF THE CITY OF TYBEE ISLAND, IN OPEN MEETING ASSEMBLED, AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Tybee Island, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 70 and appendix A, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 31, 2005, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, by a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding six months and to work on the streets or public works for a period not exceeding 60 days, any or all such penalties in the discretion of the judge. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 31, 2005, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
Passed and adopted on January 11, 2007 on 2nd Reading by City Council Tybee Island, Georgia 

 \Vivian Woods, Clerk of Council 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF TYBEE ISLAND, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING AUTHORITY OF THE CITY OF TYBEE ISLAND, IN OPEN MEETING ASSEMBLED, AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Tybee Island, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 70 and appendix A, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 31, 2005, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, by a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding six months and to work on the streets or public works for a period not exceeding 60 days, any or all such penalties in the discretion of the judge. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 31, 2005, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
Passed and adopted on February 8, 2007 on 2nd Reading by City Council Tybee Island, Georgia 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
TYBEE ISLAND, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Jason Buelterman 
Mayor 
____________ 
Shirley Sessions, Mayor Pro Tem 
Eddie Crone 
Wanda Doyle 
Mallory Pearce 
Kathryn Williams 
Paul Wolff 
City Council 
____________ 
Diane Schleicher 
City Manager 
____________ 
Edward Hughes 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Vivian Woods 
Clerk of Council 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
TYBEE ISLAND, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Jason Buelterman 
Mayor 
____________ 
Wanda Doyle, Mayor Pro Tem 
Barry Brown 
Bill Garbett 
Tom Groover 
Frank Schuman 
Paul Wolff 
City Council 
____________ 
Diane Schleicher 
City Manager 
____________ 
Edward Hughes 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Janet LeViner 
Clerk of Council 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Tybee Island, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1983 Code, as supplemented through April 9, 2004, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1983 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Kimberly Wodrich, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Edward Hughes for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Tybee Island, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Tybee Island, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Tybee Island, Georgia. 2006. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's Charter, being 1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 436), page 4462. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
This city and the inhabitants thereof, are reincorporated by the enactment of this Charter and are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style City of Tybee Island, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate Boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the clerk of council and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the corporate limits of the City of Tybee Island, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such maps or descriptions certified by the clerk of council shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and Construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Sec. 1.13. - Examples of Powers. 
The city is authorized: 
(1)  Animal regulations . To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl, and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted pursuant to this paragraph; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures . To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation . To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation . To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 48-1-1 et seq.], or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(5)  Condemnation . To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 22-1-1 et seq.], or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(6)  Contracts . To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(7)  Emergencies . To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(8)  Environmental protection . To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(9)  Fire regulations . To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations, not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fee . To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, trash collection and disposal, and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare . To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city, and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts . To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation . To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences . To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles . To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power . To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city; and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts . To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership . To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection . To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities . To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties, and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal to pay the same; 
(21)  Nuisance . To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Penalties . To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)  Planning and zoning . To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to insure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and fire protection . To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen, and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and fire fighting agency; 
(25)  Public hazards: removal . To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public improvements . To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 22-1-1 et seq.], or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public peace . To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public transportation . To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public utilities and services . To grant franchises, make contracts for, or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas . To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Retirement . To provide and maintain a retirement or pension plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)  Roadways . To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands, and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)  Sewer fees . To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(34)  Solid waste disposal . To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials; and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)  Special areas of public regulation . To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(36)  Special assessments . To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(37)  Taxes: ad valorem . To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)  Taxes: other . To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs . To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Urban redevelopment . To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(41)  Lifeguards . To enact appropriate ordinances to require hotels, motels, bathhouse proprietors, rooming houses, and other like or similar commercial establishments within the city which cater to the public to furnish lifeguards for the bathing beaches or swimming pools, or both, so as to provide safety and protection to bathers; 
(42)  Beach protection . To provide for the maintenance and repair of the seawall and groins, as well as the prevention and control of beach and sand dune erosion through the utilization of either city, county, state, or federal funds; and the council shall continue to have the authority to deed, transfer, and quitclaim by resolution all of the right, title, and interest of the city in and to that portion of the beach formerly known as the "strand" which abuts the property of such property owner eastwardly to within 18 feet of the seawall, provided that the city and the said property owner shall not utilize the 18 foot area abutting on the seawall and the land so deeded except for the purposes of repair, maintenance, prevention, and control of the seawall, groins, beaches, and sand dunes; 
(43)  Other powers . To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia; and 
(44)  Property rights . To grant easements and rights-of-way, sell, transfer, lease, and otherwise dispose of property rights over public streets, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, and other properties of the city on such terms and conditions and for such lengths of time as the council of the city may deem proper, provided that such transfers may not be granted without the written consent of the owners on either side of the streets, lanes, alleys, and sidewalks; provided, further, that such transfers may not be granted without clear and adequate compensation being paid to the city for the transfer and further provided such transfers may only be made in areas of the city zoned C-1. 
Sec. 1.14. - Exercise of Powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 2.10. - Council Creation; Numbers; Election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six councilmembers. The city council established shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the governing authority under prior law. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by general law and this charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - Council Terms and Qualifications for Office. 
The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified, except as otherwise provided by Section 5.12 of this charter. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of election of the mayor and members of the council and each shall continue to reside therein during that period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
(H.B. 629 of 2009, § 1) 
Editor's note— The amendment of § 2.11 was approved by the voters at a referendum held on Nov. 2, 2010) 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancies; Filling of Vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies . The office of mayor or councilmember shall be come vacant upon the occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, Title 45 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 45-1-1 et seq.], or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Filling of vacancies . A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment as provided in Section 5.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and Expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.14. - Holding Other Office; Voting When Financially Interested. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officials of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)  Except as authorized by law, the mayor or any council member shall not hold any other city office or city employment during the term for which that person was elected. 
(c)  Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall vote upon, sign, or veto any ordinance, resolution, contract, or other matter in which that person is financially interested. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and Investigations. 
Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General Power and Authority of the Council. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
Sec. 2.17. - Eminent Domain. 
The city council is empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
Sec. 2.18. - Organizational Meetings. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the first business day in January following their election. The meeting shall be called to order by the clerk of council and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear)(affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor)(councilmember) of the City of Tybee Island and that I will support and defined [defend] the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Sec. 2.19. - Regular and Special Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or four members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible as provided by Code Section 50-14-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1], or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.20. - Rules of Procedure. 
(a)  The city shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time with the approval of the council. 
Sec. 2.21. - Quorum; Voting. 
Three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of a majority of councilmembers present, provided a quorum exists, shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion or for any action by council. An abstention shall be counted as an affirmative vote. The mayor may not vote on any matter before the council for determination except, in the event of a tie vote of council, the mayor will be required to vote on the matter then under consideration in order to break the tie vote of the council, and in such event of a tie, the mayor may not abstain or refrain from voting unless legally disqualified. 
Sec. 2.22. - Ordinance Form; Procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Tybee Island" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided in Section 2.24 of this charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 2.23. - Action Requiring An Ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.24. - Emergencies. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists, and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at a meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with Code Section 51-14-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 51-14-1], or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be [enacted.] 
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of Technical Regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1) the requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.22 of this charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 2.26 of this charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for inspection by the public. 
Sec. 2.26. - Signing, Authenticating; Recording; Codification; Printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Tybee Island, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations include[d] in the code. 
Sec. 2.27. - Manager; Appointment; Qualifications; Compensation. 
The city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the manager's compensation. The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications. 
Sec. 2.28. - Removal of Manager. 
The city manager is employed at will and may be summarily removed from office at any time by the city council. 
Sec. 2.29. - Acting Manager. 
By letter filed with the clerk of council, the manager shall designate, subject to approval by the city council, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of manager during the manager's temporary absence or physical or mental disability. During such absence or disability, the city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the manager shall return or the manager's disability shall cease. 
Sec. 2.30. - Powers and Duties of the Manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city. The manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the manager's charge by or under this charter. As the chief executive and administrative officer, the manager shall: 
(1)  Appoint and, when the manager deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers the manager appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter. The manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)  Attend all city council meetings except for closed meetings held for the purposes of deliberating on the appointment, discipline, or removal of the city manager and have the right to take part in discussion but not vote; 
(4)  See that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the manager or by officers subject to the manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council; 
(6)  Submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  Make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the manager's direction and supervision; 
(8)  Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as the manager deems desirable; and 
(9)  Perform other such duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 2.31. - Council Interference with Administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.15 of this charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager solely through the manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 2.32. - Powers and Duties of Mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes, and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; and 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing. 
Sec. 2.33. - Selection and Powers and Duties of Mayor Pro Tem. 
At the first regular meeting of the city council following the regular election of a mayor and council, the council shall select one of its members as mayor pro tem. During the absence or physical or mental disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tem, or in the mayor pro tem's absence or disability for any reason, anyone of the councilmembers chosen by a majority vote of the city council, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by a majority vote of all councilmembers. The mayor pro tem or selected council member shall sign all contracts and ordinances in which the mayor has a disqualifying financial interest as provided in Section 2.14 of this charter. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and Service Departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, alter, consolidate, or leave vacant all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's department or agency. 
(e)  All appointive officers and directors under the supervision of the city manager shall be nominated by the city manager with confirmation of appointment by the city council. All appointive officers and directors shall be employees at will and subject to removal or suspension at any time by the city manager unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, Commissions, and Authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this section for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of that member's office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  All board members serve at will and may be removed at any time by a vote of a simple majority of the city council unless otherwise provided by law. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chair and one member as vice chair and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.12. - Attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the person's position as city attorney. 
Sec. 3.13. - Clerk/Clerk of Council. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal and city records, maintain city council records required by this charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. The terms "city clerk" and "clerk of council" shall be synonymous. 
Sec. 3.14. - Position Classification and Pay Plans. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Sec. 3.15. - Personnel Policies. 
All employees serve at will and may be removed from office at any time unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; Name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Tybee Island. 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief Judge; Associate Judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or standby judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years, shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, or his or her designee, that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of that person's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 2.20 of this charter. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; Powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violators of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 12 months or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizance to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on a rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Chatham County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules of the Court. 
The judge of the municipal court shall have the full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court. Any rules which may be adopted by the Court shall be available for public inspection and upon request a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2008(1)) 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of General Law. 
All elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11. - Regular Elections; Time for Holding. 
In odd-numbered years, on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, and biennially thereafter, a regular election shall be held in the City of Tybee Island at the city hall or at such other place or places as the city council may designate for the election of a mayor and six councilmembers, who shall have the qualifications specified in this charter to hold such office. An incumbent mayor or incumbent councilmember who shall qualify as a candidate and meet the qualifications to hold such office may be a candidate to succeed himself or herself for such office or for office as a member of the city council. 
Sec. 5.12. - Continuation in Office of Mayor and Councilmembers; Commencing Terms. 
The mayor and six councilmembers elected at the general municipal election in November, 2009, shall serve for and during the two-year terms for which they were elected and until their successors are elected and qualified. Of those six persons elected as councilmembers at the general municipal election in 2011, the three elected councilmembers who received the least number of votes shall serve for terms of two years each and until their successors are elected and qualified; and the three other councilmembers and mayor elected at the general municipal election in 2011 shall serve for terms of four years each and until their successors are elected and qualified; and all shall take office on the first day of January following their elections. Thereafter, all successors to the mayor and six councilmembers shall serve for terms of four years each and until their successors are elected and qualified, and all shall take office on the first day of January following their elections. 
(H.B. 629 of 2009, § 2) 
Editor's note— The amendment of § 2.11 was approved by the voters at a referendum held on Nov. 2, 2010) 
Sec. 5.13. - Nonpartisan Elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations and no political party shall conduct primaries for the purpose of nominating candidates for such municipal elections. 
Sec. 5.14. - Election of Mayor By Plurality. 
The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for the office of mayor shall be elected. 
Sec. 5.15. - Run-off Election. 
In the event of a tie vote in any election between two or more candidates for any office, whether mayor or councilmember, a new election between only the candidates thus tied in number of votes for the particular office shall be ordered held by the council in accordance with the provisions of Code Section 21-3-40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.] and the person who shall receive the highest number of votes cast in the second or run-off election for each office shall be declared to have been duly elected to the office. 
Sec. 5.16. - Times of Qualifying of Candidates. 
Qualification of candidates for municipal office shall begin no later than the forty-fifth day before the general election and shall close no later than the thirtieth day before the general election, and shall begin no later than the thirtieth day before a special election and shall close no later than the tenth day before such special election. The times of beginning and ending qualification of candidates shall be consistent with the normal operating hours of the city hall. 
Sec. 5.17. - Nondesignation of Specific Office By Candidate; Highest Vote Elects. 
A candidate seeking one of two or more public offices each having the same title and to be filled at the same election by the vote of the same electors shall not designate the specific office he or she is seeking. The six candidates for city council receiving the highest number of lawful votes cast shall be elected as the six councilmembers of the City of Tybee Island. 
Sec. 5.18. - Filling Vacancy in Office of Mayor or Councilmembers. 
Should, during the term of office to which elected, the mayor or any councilmember die, resign, remove or change residence beyond the city limits of the municipality, or otherwise fail to meet all of the qualifications prescribed in this charter for the particular office held at the time, the office of such person shall thereby become, and thereupon be declared, vacant; and in case of vacancy in the office of mayor or of any councilmember from any cause whatsoever other than expiration of the term of office, the mayor and remaining members of the council, or the remaining members of the council, as the case may be, shall elect within 30 days after the vacancy occurs a qualified person to fill the vacant office; provided, however, the person so elected to fill the vacancy shall be possessed of each and every of the qualifications required and prescribed by this charter for a candidate seeking election to the office to be filled; provided, further, such person so elected to fill a vacancy shall serve only for the remainder of the unexpired term of the vacant office which he or she is elected to fill. 
Sec. 5.19. - Other Provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, the "Georgia Municipal Election Code" [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.]. 
Sec. 5.20. - Removal of Officers. 
(a)  The mayor, councilmembers, or other appointed officers provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in Title 45 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1 et seq.] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished in one of the following methods: 
(1)  Following a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this paragraph shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Chatham County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Chatham County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Tybee Island. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property Tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage Rate; Due Dates; Payment Methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Property Tax; Special. 
The city council shall have the power to levy, impose, and collect in addition to the mills otherwise provided by law, a special tax on the total value of the assessment of all real and personal property within the city for purposes of construction, maintenance, and repair of the following: 
(1)  Seawalls and groins; 
(2)  Beach erosion; 
(3)  Street paving; 
(4)  Collection and disposal of garbage; and 
(5)  Sewage and pollution. 
Such special tax shall not be imposed for longer than one fiscal year at a time, but may be renewed annually if so required, and shall not exceed a collective total of a maximum of ten mills whether imposed for one, for more than one, or for all five of the specific purposes stated. In all cases where it shall be necessary to levy a special additional tax for any one or more of the purposes stated in this section, the levy and assessment of the same for each such purpose shall be separately made and collected and all amounts so collected shall be applied exclusively to said maintenance and expense for which the said tax is levied and collected. 
Sec. 6.13. - Taxes and Licenses for Use of Streets. 
The city council shall have full power and authority and is empowered to assess and levy taxes and licenses for the use of the streets, lanes, and sidewalks of the City of Tybee Island for business purposes; and no person, firm, or corporation shall have the right to use the streets of the City of Tybee Island for business purposes without first having obtained the consent and license of the city council of the City of Tybee Island. 
Sec. 6.14. - Parking, Street, and Beach Use Fee. 
(a)  The city council may provide by ordinance for the imposition and collection of a parking, street, and beach use fee upon motor vehicles entering the City of Tybee Island. Such ordinance shall not apply to motor vehicles owned by residents of the city or to motor vehicles owned by persons who own property within the city. The city council may classify persons, firms, or corporations for the purpose of the ordinance authorized by this section and may provide for such other exceptions to the application of such ordinance as may be reasonable or necessary. 
(b)  The city council may prescribe penalties and punishment for the violation of any ordinance adopted by the city council pursuant to the authority of this section. 
Sec. 6.15. - Occupation and Business Taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, or professions for purposes of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.21 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Regulatory Fees; Permits. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business within the city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.21 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of the city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of the city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
Sec. 6.18. - Service Charges. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.21 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.19. - Special Assessments. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect the cost[s] of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.21 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.20. - Construction; Other Taxes and Fees. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.21. - Collection of Delinquent Taxes and Fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.20 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi.fa.'s; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.22. - General Obligation Bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.23. - Revenue Bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.24. - Short-Term Loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.25. - Lease-Purchase Contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the municipality at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of Code Section 36-60-13 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13], or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 6.26. - Fiscal Year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. The fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6.27. - Preparation of Budgets. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and plans. 
Sec. 6.28. - Submission of Operating Budget to Council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget and the capital budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.29. - Action by Council on Budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager; except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the 30th day of June of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity, as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.27 of this charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2008(2)) 
Sec. 6.30. - Tax Levies. 
The city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the city. 
Sec. 6.31. - Changes in Appropriations. 
The city council may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or any special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Sec. 6.32. - Capital Budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council but no later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and proposed budget. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 2.24 of this charter. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the 30th day of June of each year. No appropriation provided for in a capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2008(3)) 
Sec. 6.33. - Independent Audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.34. - Contracting Procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings. 
Sec. 6. - 35. Sale and Lease of Property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey or lease any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the city manager to sell and convey said cut off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilities the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for Officials. 
The officers and employees of the city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior Ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12. - Existing Personnel and Officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this charter takes effect for a period of 90 days before or during which the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointive officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Sec. 7.13. - Pending Matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.14. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 7.15. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 7.16. - Referendum. 
Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the election superintendent of the City of Tybee Island shall call and conduct an election as provided in this section for the purpose of submitting this Act to the electors of the City of Tybee Island for approval or rejection. The election superintendent shall conduct that election on the date of the November, 1995, municipal general election and shall issue the call and conduct that election as provided by general law. The superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of Chatham County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 
"() YES 
() NO 
Shall the Act be approved which provides a new charter for the City of Tybee Island and which, among other things, provides for the appointment of a city manager and the adoption of a city manager form of government?" 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, Sections 1.10 through 7.15 and Sections 7.18 and 7.19 shall become of full force and effect on January 1, 1996. If the Act is not so approved or if the election is not conducted as provided in this section, the remaining sections of this Act shall not become effective and this Act shall be automatically repealed on the first day of January immediately following that election date. The expense of such election shall be borne by the City of Tybee Island. It shall be the election superintendent's duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
Sec. 7.17. - Effective Dates. 
This section and Section 7.16 of this Act shall become effective immediately upon approval of this Act by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval for the purpose of conducting the referendum provided for in Section 7.16. The remaining provisions of this Act shall become effective as provided in Section 7.16. 
Sec. 7.18. - Specific Repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Tybee Island in the County of Chatham, approved February 20, 1970 (Ga. L. 1970, p. 2080), as amended, is repealed in its entirety. 
Sec. 7.19. - Repealer. 
All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter. The Charter is derived from 1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 436), page 4462. 

 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections and Appendix A shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Tybee Island, Georgia," and may be so cited, and may also be cited as "The Code of the City of Tybee Island, Georgia." 
(Code 1970, § 1-1; Code 1983, § 1-1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body: 
Generally. Ordinary meanings shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case words shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. The definitions of terms found in generally accepted dictionaries are prima facie evidence of meaning. In making interpretations of ordinances, the courts shall look diligently for the intent of the city council, as gleaned from the minutes of meetings reflecting the approval of motions by the city council, recitals found in ordinances and statements of policy and intent adopted by the council. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
Adequate. The term "adequate" means equal to what is required, suitable to the case or occasion, fully sufficient, proportionate, satisfactory. 
All. The term "all" means everyone, or the whole number of particulars. 
Also. The term "also" means "in like manner," "likewise," "in addition," "besides," "as well," "further," "too." 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
At. The term "at" means "in," "near," "within," or "about." Its primary idea is nearness, and it is less definite than "in" or "on." 
Captions, maps, etc. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Code and any caption, illustration, map, chart, summary table, or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Tybee Island, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means "The Code of Tybee Island, Georgia," as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either . . . or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singularly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either . . . or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singularly but not in combination. 
Council, city council, governing body, governing authority. The terms "council, " "city council," "governing body" and "governing authority" mean the city council of the City of Tybee Island, Georgia. 
County. The term "county" means the County of Chatham, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Unless restricted by state law, whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Department. The term "department" means an administrative department of city government. When appropriate, the term "department" means the director of the department or the director's designee. A department is not a legal entity capable of suit. 
Educational facility means a structure providing schooling, instruction and training such as a charter or other school which issues degrees or completion certificates. The facility must be solely used for educational or related purposes on a permanent basis. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Includes and including. The terms "includes" and "including" shall not be construed to limit a term to the specified examples, but is intended to extend the meaning of a term to all instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons, or officers, may be executed by a majority of them. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent, or employee. 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, such provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Manager. The term "manager" means the city manager of an administrative department of city government or designee. The term is synonymous with department head and appointing authority. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The term "oath" means and includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read as the term "and," and the term "and" may be read as the term "or," if the sense requires it. 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means any legislation enacted by the city council that is capable of enforcement through the imposition of fines or penalties. 
Other officials, officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., clerk of council, chief of police, etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of the City of Tybee Island, Georgia. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The term "person" means and applies to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations and bodies politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means and includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
Property. The term "property" means and includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means and includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" means and includes lands, tenements, marital interests and hereditaments. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a policy statement or directive or course of action adopted by the city council at a regularly called meeting. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" mean and include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public streets and ways in the city and shall embrace all parts thereof constituting the designated right-of-way, unless otherwise stated. 
Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," as applied to a building or land, mean and include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Until a certain day. The term "until a certain day" means and includes all of such day. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" means and includes printing and all numerals. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1970, § 1-2; Code 1983, § 1-1-2; Ord. No. 23-A-2015 , § 1, 9-10-2015) 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction generally, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, and references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of sections of this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. State law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, or sections are to the chapters, articles, and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1983, § 1-1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1983, § 1-1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 1-1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances and amendments to Code. 
All ordinances and amendments to the Code shall be introduced as provided in the Charter (section 2.22). 
(Code 1983, § 1-1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city, to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 hereof. 
(Code 1983, § 1-1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, such violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, by sentence of imprisonment not exceeding six months and to work on the streets or public works for a period not exceeding 60 days, any or all such penalties in the discretion of the judge. 
(Code 1983, § 1-1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Exceptions. 
In the event of exceptional circumstances or unusual occurrences, monetary penalties less than $15.00 and/or other enforcement provisions may be waived or delayed, in whole or in part, by the city manager; such as in cases when residents are delinquent in meeting a deadline as a result of personal or family illness or death, minor arithmetic errors, unusual postal delays, or unexpected documented hardship. 
(Code 1983, § 1-1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Territorial applicability. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise, this Code only applies in the city limits. 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the mayor and council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings, and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings, and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing legislation. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of legislation existing as of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-13. - Matters not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(2)  Any existing right or franchise granted by the county or city to any person. 
(3)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, defining, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(4)  Any appropriation or ordinance authorizing appropriations. 
(5)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting a plat or subdivision or regulating plats or subdivisions. 
(7)  Any rezoning ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing salaries or compensation of city officers or employees not in this Code. 
(9)  Any ordinance approving the budget. 
(10)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes that have been consummated. 
(11)  Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in nature. 
(12)  Any ordinance that is special, although permanent in nature. 
(13)  Any ordinance levying or otherwise relating to taxes. 
(14)  Any act or ordinance amending any act enacted by the general assembly of the state. 
Sec. 1-14. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Conveyance of property to abutting owners. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a procedure for the conveyance by quitclaim deed of city property to abutting owners who wish to apply for such a conveyance when the conveyance is deemed to be appropriate in all respects, is for adequate consideration, and which will permit the highest and best use of the property. 
(b)  Procedure. 
(1)  Anyone owning real property in the city which abuts real property of the city who wishes to apply for a conveyance of a portion or all of the abutting city property shall first make application to the city by directing a written request to the clerk of council. The request shall be accompanied by a map, diagram or sketch of the property sought to be conveyed and the abutting properties and the writing shall state the reason the applicant believes that the conveyance is appropriate. 
(2)  When the clerk of council receives an appropriate application, the clerk shall distribute copies thereof to the city manager and/or to all department heads of the city as directed by the city manager as well as to the mayor and council. Department heads should comment to the city manager on whether or not, in their opinion, the proposed conveyance is in the best interest of the city. The city manager shall report to the department heads all findings to the mayor and council within 45 days of receipt by the clerk of council of the applicant's written request. 
(3)  At the following meeting of the mayor and council, the matter should be considered and the mayor and council should determine whether the city is or is not preliminarily interested in pursuing the matter further. In the event the mayor and council are receptive to the applicant's proposal, the expression of such interest shall not be binding on the city and the city shall not be committed at any point in the process until after it has expressly agreed to be bound to make the conveyance for a specified consideration. 
(c)  Survey and appraisal; conveyance request submission; decision by mayor and council. 
(1)  Once the city, through the mayor and council, has expressed an interest in the applicant's proposal, the applicant shall, within 60 days of the vote by the mayor and council, expressing such interest, obtain a survey of the affected area as well as an appraisal by a qualified real estate appraiser from a list of acceptable appraisers designated by the city manager to establish the value of the property involved in the conveyance. 
(2)  The applicant shall then submit the request along with the appraisal, survey and related material to the clerk of council who shall refer the matter to the planning commission, which shall review the matter and make a recommendation to the mayor and council. 
(3)  The mayor and council may either approve the conveyance, approve with contingencies, to consider alternatives, or to deny the request. 
(d)  Public hearing. A public hearing shall be conducted by the mayor and council in an open council meeting concerning the applicant's request prior to any conveyance being consummated. The public hearing shall be advertised and conducted by following the procedures used by the city for conducting public hearings on zoning matters. 
(e)  City negotiations; approval. The city is not required to accept the amount of the appraisal and may negotiate for a higher price or reject the proposal entirely or in parts. Once the agreed upon consideration has been paid to the city in connection with an approved conveyance and an appropriate resolution with a plat or survey attached has been adopted, the city may convey by quitclaim deed whatever interest the city might possess in the affected property. 
(Code 1983, § 7-6-1) 
Secs. 2-2—2-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; home rule, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq., Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-36. - Compensation of mayor and councilmembers. 
The mayor shall receive as compensation $700.00 per month. Councilmembers shall receive as compensation $400.00 per month. This compensation is intended to defray expenses incurred. This provision shall have application to the mayor and councilmembers assuming office in January 2016 and thereafter, subject to future amendments. 
(Code 1983, § 2-1-1; Ord. No. 11-2015, § 1, 3-26-2015) 
Sec. 2-37. - Signing of checks. 
The mayor, mayor pro tem, and any other city councilmember; the city manager, the finance director, and the clerk of council are authorized to sign checks on behalf of the city. At least one of the two signatures must be that of an elected official. 
(Code 1983, § 2-1-3) 
Secs. 2-38—2-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS 

Sec. 2-78. - Regular and special meetings. 
Regular meetings of the mayor and council will be held on the second and fourth Thursday of each month at 7:00 p.m. except for the months of November and December when there will only be one meeting on the second Thursday of such months. The mayor and council may hold consent agenda meeting at 6:30 p.m. in advance of regular meetings. The meeting shall be held in city hall or the municipal courtroom or such other location as might be designated by the mayor and council, from time to time. Public hearings under appendix A of this Code shall ordinarily be scheduled for the first meeting of each month; however, special meetings, including any public hearings under appendix A of this Code, may be held as provided by section 2.19 of the city Charter. 
(Code 1983, § 2-1-11; Ord. of 2-9-2006; Ord. No. 05-2015, § 1, 1-15-2015) 
Sec. 2-79. - Adjourned meetings. 
If a quorum shall fail to attend any regular or special meeting of the mayor and council or if for any reason such meeting shall fail to complete transaction of the business before the meeting, the meeting may be adjourned to any date prior to the next regular meeting agreed upon by a majority of the members present. 
(Code 1983, § 2-1-12) 
Sec. 2-80. - Special business; requirements for proposition review by mayor. 
(a)  If the council directs any matter to be the special business of a future meeting, such matter shall have precedence over all other business at such future meeting. 
(b)  No proposition shall be entertained by the mayor until it has been seconded, and every proposition shall, when required by the mayor or any member, be reduced to writing. 
(Code 1983, § 2-1-13) 
Sec. 2-81. - Rules of procedure. 
The mayor and council may, from time to time, adopt rules of procedure which shall govern the conduct of meetings and procedures of the city council. A copy of all such rules shall be maintained by the clerk of council at all times. 
(Code 1983, § 2-1-14; Ord. No. 10-2010, 6-20-2010) 
Secs. 2-82—2-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-106. - Code of ethics for city officials. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The public judges its government by the way public officials and employees conduct themselves in the posts to which they are elected or appointed. 
(2)  All government, of right, originates with the people, is founded upon their will only, and is instituted solely for the good of the whole. Public officers are the trustees and servants of the people and are at all times amenable to them. Ga. Const. art. I, § 2, ¶ 1. 
(3)  The people of this state have the inherent right of regulating their internal government. Government is instituted for the protection, security, and benefit of the people; and at all times they have the right to alter or reform the same whenever the public good may require it. Ga. Const. art. I, § 2, ¶ 2. 
(4)  The people have a right to expect that every public official will conduct himself in a manner that will tend to preserve public confidence in and respect for the government he represents. 
(5)  Such confidence and respect can best be promoted if every public official, whether paid or unpaid, and whether elected or appointed, will uniformly: 
a.  Treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, and equality under the law; and 
b.  Avoid conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest. 
(b)  Purpose. 
(1)  It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for all city officials and employees is adopted. 
(2)  This code has the following purposes: 
a.  To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
b.  To establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city; 
c.  To require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters that affect the city; and 
d.  To serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(3)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports or regulations of political campaigns or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. 
(c)  Scope of persons covered. The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all members of the city council, planning and zoning commission, board of zoning appeals, all advisory commissions, and committee members and all employees of the city. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City official and official , unless otherwise expressly defined, means the mayor, members of the city council, city attorney, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, assistant city managers, city clerk or clerk of council, deputy city clerks, whether such person is salaried, hired or elected, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city Charter, as it may be amended from time to time. City officials, unless otherwise expressly defined, includes individuals appointed by the mayor and city council to all city commissions, committees, boards, task force, or other city bodies unless specifically exempted from this section by the city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Discretionary authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action. 
Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
Immediate family means spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son, or daughter of any city official or employee. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, who would be affected in the same way as the general public. The interest of a councilmember in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges, or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar decision incidental to the extent that the councilmember would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means a known interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; 
(2)  Funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous 12 months or the previous calendar year equaled or exceeded $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees of $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or nonprofessional services, or ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of the for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
Substantial interest in real property means an interest in real property which is an equitable or legal ownership with a market value of $5,000.00 or more. 
(e)  Standards of conduct. 
(1)  Not the mayor, councilmember, city employee, nor member of any board or commission shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for such person or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official responsibilities. 
(2)  Not the mayor, councilmember, city employee, nor member of a board or commission, in any matter before the council, board or commission in which he has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the common good for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote. 
(3)  Not the mayor, councilmember, city employee, nor member of a board or commissionshall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or any board or commission. 
(4)  Not the mayor, councilmember, city employee, nor commissioner shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(5)  Not the mayor, councilmember, city employee, nor member of any board or commission shall enter into any contract with the city except as specifically authorized by statute. Any councilmember or member of a board or commission who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make known that interest in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(6)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(7)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(8)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed or compensation to be received while still a city official or employee, if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair judgment or performance of city duties. 
(9)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the board or commission on which he serves or his supervisor and shall take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(10)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(11)  No city official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(f)  Prohibition of conflict of interest. A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting a person, entity, or property in which the official or employee has a substantial interest. 
(g)  Exemptions. This code shall not be construed to require the filing of any information relating to any person's connection with, or interest in, any professional society or any charitable, religious, social, fraternal, educational, recreational, public service, civil or political organization, or any similar organization not conducted as a business enterprise or governmental agency, and which is not engaged in the ownership or conduct of a business enterprise or governmental agency. 
(h)  Penalty. 
(1)  Any persons violating any provisions of this policy are subject to: 
a.  Written and oral reprimand by the council, board, commission or committee of which said violator is a member. 
b.  A fine greater than $100.00 but less than $500.00 to be imposed by the council, commission, board or committee of which the violator is a member. 
c.  Request for resignation by the council, board, committee or commission of which the violator is a member. 
(2)  Each council, board, commission or committee shall have authority to establish rules and regulations to impose said penalties. 
(Code 1983, § 2-1-18) 
Editor's note— An Ord. of Sept. 27, 2007, § 1.01, states that "the Code of Ethics for City Officials" (Code Title 2 (Government and Administration), Chapter 2 (Mayor and City Council) Section 18) is hereby repealed except that it will continue to be in effect for the purpose of governing the conduct of city officials and employees whose official duties terminated before the enactment of this ordinance." See Ch. 23 for the Code of Ethics and Compliance. 
Sec. 2-107. - City manager; powers and duties; separation of powers. 
(a)  Powers. The city manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city. The manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the manager's charge by the city Charter. As the chief executive and administrative officer, the manager shall: 
(1)  Appoint and, when the manager deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers the manager appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to the Charter. The manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency. 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by the Charter or by law. 
(b)  Duties. The city manager shall: 
(1)  Attend all city council meetings except for closed meetings held for the purposes of deliberating on the appointment, discipline, or removal of the city manager and have the right to take part in discussion but not vote; 
(2)  See that all laws, provisions of the Charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(3)  Prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council; 
(4)  Submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(5)  Make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of the city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the manager's direction and supervision; 
(6)  Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as the manager deems desirable; and 
(7)  Perform other such duties as are specified by the Charter or as may be required by the city council. 
(c)  Separation of powers. 
(1)  Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under section 2.15 of the city Charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager solely through the manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, publicly or privately. 
(2)  The city council shall have the power of inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office or agency thereof, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence without the consent of the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 2-3-1) 
Sec. 2-108. - Clerk of council; duties. 
The clerk of council shall: 
(1)  Exercise any powers and perform any duties charged to the clerk of council by the city Charter or this Code; 
(2)  Be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; 
(3)  Carefully preserve the codes, records and documents belonging to the city which are not assigned to the custody of some other office, and maintain a proper index to all records and documents so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had; 
(4)  Take and maintain the minutes of the city council; 
(5)  Attest to the mayor's signature on all contracts; and 
(6)  Perform any other duties as may, from time to time, be assigned to the clerk of council by the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 2-3-2) 
Sec. 2-109. - City attorney; duties. 
The city attorney or assistants under his direction shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and, in that capacity, shall: 
(1)  Exercise any powers and perform any duties charged to the city attorney by the city Charter or this Code; 
(2)  Advise the city council, the mayor, the city manager, and other officers and employees of the city concerning the legal aspects of the city's affairs; 
(3)  Prepare or revise ordinances when so requested by the city council, the city manager, or any board, commission, committee, or task force appointed by the city council; 
(4)  Give official opinions upon any legal matter or question submitted by a majority vote of the city council; 
(5)  Attend all council meetings for the purpose of giving city council any legal advice requested by its members; 
(6)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party when so requested and approve, as to form, all bonds and city contracts; 
(7)  Defend any and all suits and actions at law or equity brought against the city, unless otherwise directed by the city council; 
(8)  Prepare and file any civil suit or action at law or equity to secure or protect the city's best interest when so ordered by a resolution of the city council; 
(9)  Make immediate report to the city council of the outcome of any litigation in which the city has a direct interest; and 
(10)  Perform any other duties as may be required by the mayor, the city council and the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 2-3-5) 
Sec. 2-110. - Appointment, term and removal of administrative officers. 
All administrative officers established by this article shall be appointed by the city council. They shall serve for an indefinite term and may be summarily removed from office at any time by the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 2-3-6) 
Secs. 2-111—2-163. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-164. - Designation of departments. 
The departments of the city shall include the following: 
(1)  General government; 
(2)  Finance; 
(3)  Inspections; 
(4)  Police; 
(5)  Fire; 
(6)  Public works and sanitation; 
(7)  Water and wastewater; 
(8)  Community and cultural affairs; and 
(9)  Parking. 
(Code 1983, § 2-3-21) 
Secs. 2-165—2-211. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE 

Sec. 2-212. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 and shall end on June 30 of each year. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-1; Ord. of 4-10-2008(1)) 
Sec. 2-213. - Annual budget; appropriations ordinance. 
(a)  An annual budget and appropriations ordinance shall be adopted by the mayor and council prior to the first day of the fiscal year, provided if such budget and appropriations ordinance is not adopted, the previous year's budget and appropriations ordinance shall continue as the budget for the ensuing fiscal year and until the new budget and appropriations ordinance is adopted. 
(b)  The budget as adopted shall be a balanced budget with anticipated revenues equal to appropriated expenditures. 
(c)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance adopting or amending annual budgets or appropriations, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-2) 
Sec. 2-214. - Appropriations policy. 
(a)  Budgeted expenditures. Budgeted expenditures shall be approved in advance by requisition signed by the appropriate department head, and city manager when he so requires. 
(b)  Unbudgeted expenditures. Unbudgeted expenditures exceeding available departmental funds shall be approved by the city manager and city council prior to expenditure by the department head. 
(c)  Emergency expenditures. Emergency expenditures shall be approved by the department head and shall be reported to the city manager and the city council at the next regular meeting. 
(d)  Construction projects. Construction projects must be publicly advertised for bid prior to acceptance of contracts by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-3) 
Sec. 2-215. - Appropriations not expended. 
All appropriations which are not obligated, encumbered or expended at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse and become a part of the unencumbered surplus of the city which may be appropriated for the next fiscal year. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-4) 
Sec. 2-216. - Method of accounting. 
To the extent possible, the modified accrual basis of accounting shall be used so that expenditures, other than accrued interest on long term debt, are recorded at the time liabilities are incurred and revenues are recorded when cash is received, except for material or available revenues which shall be accrued to reflect properly the taxes levied and the revenues earned. All receipts and disbursements shall be posted promptly and at least on a monthly basis. To the extent possible, all interfund transfers shall be cleared by the end of the fiscal year. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-5) 
Sec. 2-217. - Responsibility for financial administration. 
The responsibility for administering the city's financial and fiscal affairs is vested in the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-6) 
Sec. 2-218. - City credit card usage; restrictions. 
(a)  The city has adopted a purchasing card credit card policy which is on file with the clerk of council and which is applicable to the elected officials. Pursuant thereto, no purchasing or debit cards shall be used. The city's policy is that only credit cards will be authorized. Credit cards shall only be used in accordance with the policy at all times. Generally, any elected official using a city credit card, or otherwise making charges on the city's account shall only be entitled to use such credit card or to charge to the account of the city, goods or services directly involving the city's affairs or business. No official using the credit card, or accounts shall charge personal items or services thereto notwithstanding an intention to reimburse the city or to make payment direct to the provider. 
(b)  Except as otherwise authorized or expressly permitted, city credit cards or accounts shall not be used for the purchase of beverages containing alcohol. 
(c)  The city manager of the city has been determined to be the administrator of the purchasing card policy for elected officials. The city manager shall have authority to develop a policy applicable to all city employees upon approval of the manager and the city mayor and council, and such policy shall expressly state that any employee or agent of the city using a city credit card or otherwise making charges on the city's account shall only be entitled to use such credit card, or charge to the account of the city goods or services directly involving the city's affairs or business. Purchasing or debit cards shall not be authorized. No employee or agent using the city's credit card or a city account shall charge personal items or services thereto notwithstanding an intention to reimburse the city or to make payment direct to the provider. Further, no agent or employee may use a city credit card, or account for purposes of purchase of beverages containing alcohol. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-7; Ord No. 2016-08-B , § 1, 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 2-219. - Acceptance of credit cards. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to determine which charges, expenses and taxes, with the exception of ad valorem taxes shall be payable by citizens by way of credit cards; however, no credit card payment shall be accepted for local ad valorem taxes without the agreement of the mayor and council, and further, no credit card payment shall be accepted for any state taxes or fees without formal approval by the state depository board. The city manager is authorized to approve appropriate agreements with credit card issuers or other parties as needed to facilitate the acceptance of credit card payments; however, each such agreement shall be executed by the mayor in accordance with the city's Charter. Any such agreement shall provide that it may be cancelled at anytime by the city manager or the mayor and council as appropriate but such agreement may provide for a reasonable brief period of notice for cancellation. 
(b)  The city manager shall be authorized but not required to impose a surcharge upon the person making payment by credit card to wholly or partially off-set the amount of any discount or administrative fees charged to the city. When a party elects to make a payment to the city by credit card and a surcharge is imposed, payment of such surcharge shall be deemed voluntary by such party and shall be in no case refundable. 
(c)  No person making a payment by credit card to the city shall be relieved from liability for the underlying obligation except to the extent that the city realizes final payment of the underlying obligation in cash or the equivalent. If final payment is not made by the credit card issuer or other guarantor of payment in the credit card transaction, then the underlying obligation shall survive and the city shall retain all remedies for enforcement which would have applied if the credit card transaction had not occurred. No contract may modify the provisions of this subsection. This subsection, however, shall not make the underlying obligor liable for any discount or administrative fee paid to a credit card issuer or other party by the city. 
(d)  Any city employee or officer who accepts a credit card payment in accordance with the provisions hereof and any applicable policies, rules or regulations of the city shall not thereby incur any personal liability for the final collection of such payments. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-8) 
Secs. 2-220—2-262. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND AUTHORITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-263. - Beach task force. 
(a)  Creation and purpose. There is created a commission to be known as the Tybee Island Beach Task Force for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the city and to provide recommendations to the mayor and council of the city regarding issues affecting the beach including but not limited to beach erosion and renourishment, and to perform the functions and duties stated herein. 
(b)  Name. The name of the committee shall be the Tybee Island Beach Task Force and is hereinafter referred to as "the task force." 
(c)  Membership. The beach task force shall consist of not less than ten nor more than 20 members appointed by the mayor and council, such appointees being selected on the basis of their knowledge and interest in protecting and promoting the natural characteristic of the city, especially its beaches and shorelines, to serve three-year terms. 
(d)  Functions and duties. The task force shall: 
(1)  Promote beach preservation and maintenance. 
(2)  Promote beach renourishment. 
(3)  Promote prevention of shoreline erosion. 
(4)  Serve as a consultant body on beach and shoreline issues. 
(5)  Assist other entities in promoting the preservation of the ecology and natural beauty of the city. 
(6)  Report on task recommendations to the mayor and council. 
(7)  Perform other duties related to the above functions as may be directed by the mayor and council or by the city manager. 
(8)  Lobby state and federal entities on behalf of the city's beaches. 
(e)  Administration. The task force shall elect one of its members as chair and one member as vice-chair and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or, with the approval of the mayor and council, may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. 
(f)  Rules of procedure. The task force may establish such rules, bylaws and regulations not inconsistent with the city Charter, ordinances or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such rules, bylaws, and/or regulations shall be filed with the clerk of council. 
(g)  Meetings. Meetings of the task force shall be scheduled as directed by the chair or the membership. All meetings shall comply with the Georgia Open Meetings Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.). 
(Code 1983, § 2-3-30) 
Sec. 2-264. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-13 , § 1, adopted May 26, 2016, repealed § 2-264 which pertained to the creation of an audit committee and derived from § 2-3-31 of the 1983 Code, and an ordinance adopted Sept. 14, 2006. 
Sec. 2-265. - Master plan implementation committee. 
(a)  Creation. pursuant to section 3.11 of the city Charter there is created a master plan implementation committee (hereinafter the "committee") established by the mayor and council. The provisions of section 3.11 of the Charter are incorporated herein. 
(b)  Purpose. The committee shall review the master plan and carrying capacity report and monitor progress on their implementation and recommend strategies and priorities for implementation to the city in reports to the city council. The committee shall issue quarterly reports or such other reports as might be requested by the mayor and council concerning implementation of the master plan, the carrying capacity report and improvements therein and recommendations for the updated master plan to occur in five years. Following the completion of the updated master plan, the committee may be terminated by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Membership. The committee shall consist of not less than six nor more than nine members to be appointed by the mayor and council by a majority vote. Such appointees shall be selected on the basis of their knowledge and interest in creating and conforming to the master plan and familiarity with the carrying capacity report. Members of the committee shall serve five-year terms unless otherwise directed by the mayor and council. 
(d)  Functions and duties. The committee shall: 
(1)  Review the current master plan of the city, which is a long range plan, and to report no less than quarterly to the mayor and council on the implementation thereof. 
(2)  Review the carrying capacity report provided to the city and report, no less than quarterly, on events or changes that have impacted the findings of the carrying capacity report or which are projected to impact the carrying capacity report and findings therein. 
(3)  Recommend strategies and priorities for implementation of the master plan in the committee reports to the city. 
(4)  Serve as a consultant body to the city through the mayor and council on such issues as might be requested by the mayor and council by resolution. 
(5)  Assist with the preparation of the updated master plan at the next required five-year interval. 
(6)  Perform other duties related to the above functions as may be directed by the mayor and council or the city manager. 
(e)  Administration. The committee shall elect one of its members as chair and one member as vice chair and may elect as its secretary one of its members. 
(f)  Rules of procedure. The committee may establish such rules, bylaws and/or regulations not inconsistent with the city Charter, ordinances, or laws as the committee deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such rules, bylaws and/or regulations shall be filed with the clerk of council. 
(g)  Meetings. Meetings of the committee shall be scheduled by the chair or the membership and all meetings shall be conducted in compliance with the Georgia Open Meetings Act and all records of the committee shall be subject to the Georgia Open Records Law. 
(h)  Oath. Each member of this committee shall take an oath of office before each term of service as a member. The mayor is to administer the oath. A written representation of the oath is to be signed by the appointee and retained by the clerk of council as an official city record. The oath shall be administered as follows: 
I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of a member of the Master Plan Implementation Committee of the City of Tybee Island and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America. 
(Ord. No. 31-2016 , § 1, 12-8-2016; Ord. No. 11-2017 , § 1, 7-13-2017) 
Secs. 2-266—2-291. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FINE ART COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-292. - Created. 
A fine arts commission for the city is created which shall be known as the Tybee Island Fine Arts Commission. 
(Code 1983, § 7-4-1; Ord. of 4-29-2005, § 7-4-1) 
Sec. 2-293. - Membership; term of office, qualifications, compensation. 
(a)  Membership and appointment. The fine arts commission shall consist of nine members who shall be appointed by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Term of office. The term of office for each member shall be three years, except that of those first appointed; three shall be appointed for one year, three for two years, and three for three years. When the terms of the first appointed shall expire, all successors shall be appointed for three-year terms which shall begin April 1 and expire March 31 of the appropriate year. No member may serve more than two consecutive three-year terms. 
(c)  Qualifications of members. In selecting persons for appointment to the commission, the mayor and council shall endeavor to provide representation from public and private educational institutions, from business and industry, and from such other groups and citizens as will provide a commission representative of the entire community. Persons selected for appointment shall not be a paid staff member of the city or of an art agency, but shall have an interest in the arts and in programs to use the arts to enhance the quality of life in the community. 
(d)  Compensation. Members of the commission shall not receive compensation for service. 
(Code 1983, § 7-4-2; Ord. of 4-29-2005, § 7-4-2) 
Sec. 2-294. - Officers; meetings; minutes. 
(a)  The fine arts commission shall elect one of its members as chairperson for a one-year term. The commission may elect other officers as it deems appropriate. 
(b)  Meetings shall be held as often as the commission shall decide but not less frequently than once each quarter. 
(c)  The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the matters discussed and the action taken on each matter. 
(Code 1983, § 7-4-3; Ord. of 4-29-2005, § 7-4-3) 
Sec. 2-295. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The fine arts commission shall be an advisory council and shall submit its findings to the mayor and council. 
(b)  The commission shall direct its attention to the following matters: 
(1)  It shall assist the city in developing a comprehensive plan for the arts in the community; 
(2)  It shall help encourage and promote joint community events by the various arts groups in the community; 
(3)  It shall identify community arts needs and suggest programs to meet these needs; 
(4)  It shall encourage the use of the arts in various public service activities and to encourage the use of the arts to improve the aesthetic quality of public buildings and public places; 
(5)  It shall help organize and promote arts programs that will be directed toward improving the quality of life in the community; 
(6)  It shall study and recommend programs through which the arts can be made accessible to the elderly, the handicapped and others with special needs; 
(7)  It shall help to develop information and materials about the arts in the community that can be included with other promotional materials distributed by those agencies in the community involved with economic development. 
(Code 1983, § 7-4-4; Ord. of 4-29-2005, § 7-4-4) 
Sec. 2-296. - City manager to work with commission. 
The city manager shall assist the fine arts commission through consultation and the providing of data pertaining to city operations and facilities. 
(Code 1983, § 7-4-5; Ord. of 4-29-2005, § 7-4-5) 
Secs. 2-297—2-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECREATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-336. - Created. 
The recreation commission for the city shall be known as the Tybee Island Recreation Commission. 
(Code 1983, § 7-4-6; Ord. of 4-29-2005, § 7-4-6) 
Sec. 2-337. - Membership, term of office, qualifications, compensation. 
(a)  Membership and appointment. The recreation commission shall consist of members who shall be appointed by the mayor and council with a member of council and a representative of the YMCA serving as ex officio members. 
(b)  Term of office. The term of office for each member shall be three years, except that of those first appointed; three shall be appointed for one year, for two years and for three years. When the terms of the first appointed shall expire, all successors shall be appointed for three-year terms which shall begin February 1 and expire January 31 of the appropriate year. 
(c)  Qualifications of members. In selecting persons for appointment to the commission, the mayor and council shall endeavor to provide representation from public and private educational institutions, from business and industry, and from such other groups and citizens as will provide a commission representative of the entire community. Persons selected for appointment shall not be a paid staff member of the city but shall have an interest in recreational commission programs to enhance the quality of life in the community. 
(d)  Compensation. Members of the commission shall not receive compensation for service. 
(Code 1983, § 7-4-7; Ord. of 4-29-2005, § 7-4-7) 
Sec. 2-338. - Officers; meetings; minutes. 
(a)  The recreation commission shall elect one of its members as chairperson for a one-year term. The commission may elect other officers as it deems appropriate. 
(b)  Meetings shall be held as often as the commission shall decide but not less frequently than once each quarter. 
(c)  The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the matters discussed and the action taken on each matter, and shall provide to the mayor and council copies of such minutes within 30 days following each proceeding. 
(Code 1983, § 7-4-8; Ord. of 4-29-2005, § 7-4-8) 
Sec. 2-339. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The recreation commission shall be an advisory commission and shall submit its findings to the mayor and council. 
(b)  The commission shall direct its attention to the following matters: 
(1)  It shall assist the city in developing a comprehensive plan for recreational programs in the community; 
(2)  It shall help encourage and promote joint community events by the various recreational groups in the community; 
(3)  It shall identify community recreational needs and suggest programs to meet these needs; 
(4)  It shall encourage the use of recreational concepts in various public service activities and to encourage the use of recreational concepts to improve the aesthetic quality of public buildings and public places; 
(5)  It shall help organize and promote recreational programs that will be directed toward improving the quality of life in the community; 
(6)  It shall study and recommend programs through which recreational programs can be made accessible to the elderly, the handicapped and others with special needs; 
(7)  It shall help to develop information and materials about the recreational programs in the community that can be included with other promotional materials distributed by those agencies in the community involved with economic development. 
(Code 1983, § 7-4-9; Ord. of 4-29-2005, § 7-4-9) 
Sec. 2-340. - City manager to work with commission. 
The city manager shall provide staff to meet with the recreation commission, shall assist in obtaining such information as it needs in its deliberations, and shall perform such other duties for the commission as the mayor and council shall approve. 
(Code 1983, § 7-4-10; Ord. of 4-29-2005, § 7-4-10) 
Secs. 2-341—2-363. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TYBRISA PARK COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-364. - Creation; purpose; members. 
(a)  Creation. There is created a Tybrisa Park Commission to consist of six members and two to four ex officio members. 
(b)  Purpose. The commission shall study and develop proposals for the highest and best use taking into account economic, esthetics, planning and other considerations for property located at Highway 80 and Inlet Avenue at its convergence near Tybrisa Street, Tybrisa Street and ocean front parking lots, and the strand from 14th to 18th Streets. 
(c)  Duty. The commission shall develop recommendations to be submitted to the city council for approval. 
(d)  Term of office. Members of the commission shall serve for a period of two years unless such other time is prescribed by the city council. 
(e)  Compensation. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation; however, they may be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses in connection with performing their responsibilities. 
(f)  Vacancies. Any vacancy on the commission shall be filled for the expired term by appointment by the city council. 
(g)  Oath. Each member of the commission shall file with the clerk of council an oath obligating himself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of a member of the commission and such oath is to be administered by the mayor. 
(h)  Removal. All members of the commission serve at will and may be removed at any time by a majority vote of the city council. 
(i)  Officers. The members of the commission by majority vote shall elect one of its members as chair and one member as vice-chair and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint an employee of the city to act as secretary. 
(j)  Adoption of bylaws, regulations, etc. In the event the commission elects to adopt bylaws, rules or regulations, copies of such shall be filed with the clerk of council. 
(Code 1983, § 7-5-1) 
Secs. 2-365—2-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ETHICS ADVISORY BOARD (RESERVED)[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Sept. 27, 2007, repealed Div. 5, §§ 2-391—2-398, which pertained to the Ethics Advisory Board and derived from Ord. of Apr. 13, 2006. 

Secs. 2-391—2-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PROCUREMENT 

Sec. 2-400. - Applicability. 
This article applies to contracts for the procurement of supplies, services and construction, entered into by the city after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. It shall apply to every foregoing expenditure of public funds for public purchasing irrespective of the source of the funds. When the procurement involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the procurement shall be conducted in accordance with any mandatory applicable federal law and regulations. Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift or bequest that is otherwise consistent with law. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-401. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter: 
Committee means the committee on standards and specifications. 
Finance department means the department in which the purchasing division is assigned. 
Goods and services means the tangible items and/or labor and materials provided by outside contractors and professionals necessary to provide an effective and economically responsible delivery of services by the city and for which financial appropriations have been made by the governing authority. 
(1)  Supplies, materials or contractual services means all tangible equipment, commodities, repairs or nonprofessional services necessary to operate the government. 
(2)  Professional services means services provided by the following licensed professionals need not be subject to competitive bidding: practitioners of law, medicine, podiatry, dentistry, optometry, psychology, veterinary medicine, physiotherapy, public accounting and civil, mechanical, hydraulic or electrical engineering, architecture or professional consultations. 
Finance director/purchasing administrator means the individual who is assigned the general duties and responsibilities of supervising and administering the provisions of this chapter. The responsibility of purchasing administrator is designated to the finance director. 
Using department means any department, division, bureau, council, board, authority, task force or other unit of the city government that uses goods and services to carry out the duties and responsibilities of such functions and for which financial appropriations have been made by the governing authority. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-402. - Purchasing functions and purchasing administrator. 
The finance director as the purchasing administrator shall administer the policies, regulations, and procedures governing the purchase of all goods and services for the city. The purchasing administrator shall exercise general supervision of all functions pertaining to purchasing, subject to the review of the finance committee and mayor and council of the city. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-403. - Duties of finance director as purchasing administrator. 
The purchasing administrator shall have the following authority, responsibility and duties: 
(1)  To carry out the policies, regulations and procedures for purchasing all goods and services required by the using agencies of the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and other directives of the governing authority or the city manager not in conflict with this chapter. 
(2)  To obtain the highest quality of goods and services for the most economical costs which will provide the most effective operations of the city. 
(3)  To discourage restrictive bidding and specifications and to promote open competition. 
(4)  To maintain up-to-date files of all vendors known to the governing authority who are reputable and responsible vendors of goods and services, prices and discounts as may be available. 
(5)  To establish a standard uniform list of nomenclature of all goods and services regularly used by the city, to be distributed to all using agencies and suppliers, in order to achieve uniformity of common purchases among the various using agencies. 
(6)  To take advantage of all exemptions, discounts and special offers to which the city may be entitled, to ensure the most economical purchase without sacrificing quality, including the availability of "bulk" purchases. 
(7)  To ensure that all purchases are in compliance with the city's budgeting and accounting policies and procedures. 
(8)  To develop and prescribe such forms as may be necessary to effectively and efficiently carry out the purchasing procedures of the city and to require that such forms be utilized by all using agencies. 
(9)  To ensure that all goods and services purchased by the city are properly received and are representative of and in accordance with the prescribed terms and specifications of the purchase agreement. 
(10)  With the approval of the city manager, to declare ineligible any vendor that misrepresents or defaults on any quotation, bid or purchase agreement with the city and to disqualify such vendor from doing further business with the city for a specified period of time. 
(11)  To promulgate policies and procedures, with the advice and approval of the city manager, to administer and carry out the provisions of this chapter or other policies established by the city pertaining to governmental purchases, and to develop and maintain a uniform purchasing manual which shall include all such policies and procedures to be followed by all using agencies. 
(12)  To prepare and submit reports on the purchasing activities of the city in a manner to be prescribed by the city manager, finance committee and/or mayor and council. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-404. - Committee on standards and specifications—Established; members; meetings; authority. 
There is hereby established a committee on standards and specifications which shall include the city manager, or designee, as chairman and other such government officers and department directors as determined and appointed by the city manager. The purchasing administrator shall serve as an ex officio member and secretary to the committee. The committee shall hold such meetings from time to time as deemed necessary by the city manager and shall be authorized to enlist the advice and assistance of any other government officer, employee, specialist or technician as may be deemed appropriate to carry out the duties and responsibilities of the committee. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-405. - Same—Duties. 
The duties and responsibilities of the committee on standards and specifications shall be as follows: 
(1)  To review purchasing policies and procedures to ensure that the process of acquisition of goods and services is carried out effectively. 
(2)  To review the classification of all goods and services commonly used by each using department. 
(3)  To review and approve standard minimum specifications for all like goods and services commonly used by all using agencies striving to meet the common needs of the majority of such agencies. 
(4)  To review and approve standard minimum qualities, quantities, sizes and varieties of goods and services to be purchased by the city consistent with the desired efficiency of governmental operations, the particular needs of a using department and the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  To ensure that all standards and specifications are reasonable, nonrestrictive and certain to promote open competition among vendors. 
(6)  To review special needs of any using department to identify noncompetitive types and kinds of goods and services and to exempt such items from the list of standard purchases. Any such exemption shall include documentation of the reasons for the exemption. 
(7)  To periodically review the standards and specifications, or exemptions, established by the committee and to promptly provide any additions, deletions or other changes and to avoid unnecessary delays in the purchasing process. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-406. - Applicability of standards. 
Each standard specification, until revised or rescinded, shall apply alike in terms and effect to the purchase or contract for the item or service described in such specifications. However, if any item requested by a using department is not on the standard list or listed as an exemption, the purchasing division administrator shall be authorized to exempt the item based on sufficient justification being provided by the requesting using department. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-407. - Substitution for brand names. 
If a requisition is submitted for a "brand name" item or service, the purchasing administrator shall notify the requesting department of acceptable and approved comparable goods or services which meet the requirements of the specifications. The department director and the purchasing administrator shall jointly decide on the items to be purchased. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-408. - Uniform purchasing manual. 
The uniform purchasing manual shall include a step-by-step description of the proper procedures for purchasing goods and services, samples of all forms used in the purchasing process, and a clearly defined explanation of the proper use of such forms and procedures. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-409. - Purchase orders. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, all purchases for goods and services for the city shall be on an official city purchase order. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-410. - Budget review prior to issuing purchase orders. 
Except as otherwise provided for in emergencies, no purchase order shall be issued unless there is a sufficient unencumbered appropriation, in excess of all unpaid obligations, of the using department to cover the amount of such purchase. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-411. - Sole-source purchases. 
The city manager shall be authorized to designate a sole source for any item or service, the purchase of which, due to special scientific, technology or extraordinary specifications and circumstances, is available from only one vendor. Any such purchase shall be documented as to the reasons for the sole source and shall be maintained in the office of the purchasing division. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-412. - Award of contracts. 
The city manager shall be authorized to award a contract for purchase of goods and services to the lowest, best and most responsible bidder or vendor when approved in the budget or approved project resolution up to $19,999.99. The city manager shall be authorized to delegate authority to award contracts more than $1,000.00 and less than $3,000.00 to the purchasing administrator. The approval of the mayor and council shall be required before the award of a contract over $10,000.00 that is in excess of the budget or approved project resolution. The mayor and council shall approve all contracts $20,000.00 or above. The city manager shall report all contracts awarded above $10,000.00 to the mayor and council for information. Should any question or discrepancy arise in any bid or contract, the disposition of such purchase shall be determined by the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-413. - Competitive quotations for bids over $20,000.00. 
Competitive quotations for bids over $20,000.00 shall [be] awarded by competitive sealed bidding except as provided in sections regarding competitive sealed proposals, small purchases, sole source procurement, and emergency procurement. 
(1)  Invitation for bid. An invitation for bid shall be issued and shall include specifications and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. 
(2)  Public notice. Public notice of the invitation for bid shall be given not less than 15 calendar days prior to the date set forth therein for the opening for bids. Such notice shall state the place, date, and time of bid opening. Such notice shall be published in the legal organ of the county, or on the city's website, and be posted conspicuously at city hall. 
(3)  Bid tendering. All bids shall be tendered to the city official stated in the bid documents. If no person is identified, then the bids shall be tendered to the clerk of council. 
(4)  Bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of two or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bid. There shall be no discussion during the bid opening. 
(5)  Bid tabulation. The bids shall be tabulated and ranked on a bid tabulation sheet and immediately posted at city hall or on the city's website. 
(6)  Award. The award shall be made to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. 
When it is determined that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city, a contract may be entered into by use of the competitive sealed proposals method. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-414. - Competitive quotations for proposals over $20,000.00. 
Unless otherwise required by other applicable law, and when it is determined that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city, any supply, material or contractual service to be purchased by the city which has an estimated cost of $20,000.00 or more may be entered into by use of the competitive sealed proposals method. 
(1)  Request for proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals. 
(2)  Public notice. Public notice of not less than 15 calendar days shall be given for request for proposals in the same manner as provided for competitive sealed bidding. 
(3)  Evaluation factors. The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors. 
(4)  Receipt of proposals. All proposals shall be delivered and maintained by the city official named in the request, otherwise to the clerk of council, until the advertised opening date and time. No proposals shall be handled so as to permit disclosure of the contents of any proposal to competing offerors during the process of negotiation. A register of proposals shall be prepared containing the name of each offeror, the number of modifications received, if any, and a description sufficient to identify the item offered. The register of proposals shall be open for public inspection only after contract award. 
(5)  Discussion with responsible offerors and revisions to proposals. As provided in the request for proposals, no discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals, and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. 
(6)  Tabulation of proposals. The proposals shall be tabulated and ranked on a proposal tabulation sheet. After an award has been made and a contract entered, the proposal tabulation sheet shall be immediately posted at city hall or on the city's website. 
(7)  Award. An award will be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. No other factors or criteria will be used in the evaluation. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-415. - Competitive quotations under $19,999.99. 
Unless otherwise required by law, or by the mayor and council or city manager, any supply, material or contractual service to be purchased by the city which has an estimated cost of not less than $1,000.00 and not more than $19,999.99 shall be purchased on the open market without regard for advertising. Unless impossible to secure enough quotes, upon the receipt of documented written price quotations from at least three reputable vendors, the purchasing administrator shall award the contract. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-416. - Small purchases; purchases of less than $1,000.00. 
Any supply, materials or contractual service which has an estimated cost of less than $1,000.00 may be purchased from any approved vendor recommended by the using department or, in the absence of such recommendation, from any approved vendor selected by the purchasing administrator. Each such purchase shall be authorized by the head of the using department. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-417. - Rejection of bids, proposals or quotations. 
The city manager shall be authorized to reject any or all bids, in whole or in part, when in his or her judgment the terms, conditions or specifications received are not in compliance with those in the city bid/proposal solicitation. In such event, the city manager shall document the circumstances of such rejection and reissue the solicitation as he or she deems appropriate. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-418. - Emergency purchases. 
The city manager shall be authorized to waive any or all bidding requirements for the purchase of necessary goods or services whenever an emergency condition exists which presents a threat to the safety, health and welfare of the citizens of the city and whenever such requirements would cause undue delay in the delivery of essential services under such conditions. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-419. - Deposits; bid bonds; security. 
Bid security, performance and/or payment bonds, or other security may be required for contracts and bids as the purchasing administrator or city manager deems advisable. Any such bonding requirements shall be set forth in the solicitation. Bid security, performance and/or payment bonds, or other security shall not be used as a substitute for a determination of a bidder's or offeror's responsibility. No bid shall be read aloud or considered when a bid security specified in the solicitation has not been provided. Notice of a bond or deposit shall be included in the public notice and bidding specifications. Contracts over $100,000.00 shall require a bid bond or deposit. Such bond or deposit shall not exceed 100 percent of the bid amount. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-420. - Vendors in default. 
The purchasing administrator shall not accept any bid or quotation from nor issue any purchase order to any vendor or contractor that is in default on the payment of any taxes, license fees or other monies due the city. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-421. - Records to be maintained. 
A record and description of all requisitions, competitive bids and quotations, purchase orders, receiving reports and other pertinent documentation of purchasing shall be maintained by the purchasing administrator in accordance with regulations and procedures prescribed in the purchasing manual and shall be public record. 
( Ord. No. 15-2015, § 1, 5-28-2015 ) 
Chapters 3—5 - RESERVED 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Business hours specified; responsibility for compliance. 
(a)  The mayor and council of the city, in adopting this section decree that the provisions, rules and regulations herein shall be applicable to all establishments and bars within the limits of the municipality; shall control and govern the operation of those establishments, shall be reduced to written form, distributed and served on all licensees of such establishments within the city, and the violation of any such provisions, rules and regulations shall be subject to the penalty herein prescribed. 
(b)  The following rules and regulations shall apply for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages, fortified wine, malt beverages, distilled spirits or spirituous liquors for beverage purposes by the drink. These sales are for consumption on the premises only: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person or business to sell, offer to sell, give away or otherwise dispense any alcoholic beverages, fortified wine, malt beverages, distilled spirits or spirituous liquors for beverage purposes by the drink for consumption on the premises (as those terms are defined by O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2) during the following times, except as provided in subsection (b)(3) of this section: 
a.  Sunday: 2:56 a.m. to 12:01 a.m. Monday; 
b.  Monday: 3:01 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Monday; 
c.  Tuesday: 3:01 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Tuesday; 
d.  Wednesday: 3:01 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Wednesday; 
e.  Thursday: 3:01 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Thursday; 
f.  Friday: 3:01 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Friday; 
g.  Saturday: 3:01 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Saturday. 
Within 15 minutes following the closing times described above, said business will be vacated by all persons not currently employed by that business, and those employees who remain shall be engaged in the activities necessary for closing, such as cleaning and closing of the cash register, and shall have on them suitable picture identification, such as a city-issued bar card, attesting to that fact. 
(2)  Said business will close and shall not open and operate between the hours of 2:56 a.m. on Sunday and 9:00 a.m. on Monday of each week. 
(3)  Any licensed eating establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food is allowed to open for the sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine for consumption only on the premises on Sunday between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(4)  Any licensed eating establishment referred to herein shall have an area specifically designed, set aside, set up and operating to serve meals and foods on the premises and shall have a fully equipped commercial kitchen, to include an appropriate stove, refrigerator, food preparation area, sink, and other items required by the county health department for the preparation of foods, and such commercial kitchen shall meet all of the requirements set forth by the county health department. Further, any licensed eating establishment referred to herein shall have a printed or posted menu from which selection of prepared meals can be made. 
(5)  The intent of this section is to allow those full-service restaurants that serve the public as part of this city's tourism business and as part of this community's local citizens' service to serve alcoholic beverages with the meals on Sunday. It is not the intent of this section to encourage or to permit neighborhood taverns and bars to serve alcoholic beverages on Sunday via the mechanism of serving incidental meals on Sunday. 
(6)  Any licensed eating establishment as described herein, shall only sell or serve distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine during those hours on Sunday in which such sales are otherwise permissible and during which such licensed eating establishment has its food service operation open, operating and serving meals or available for serving meals with a full selection of menu items and prepared meals. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-1) 
Sec. 6-2. - B-girl drinking or B-drinking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who is an employee of any licensee within the municipality or any other person to engage in any activity generally known as "B-girl drinking" or "B-drinking," that is the solicitation of alcoholic beverages or distilled spirits for public consumption by the employee or any other person and it shall be further unlawful to dispense or consume any beverage under the pretense that it is alcoholic beverages or distilled spirits for public consumption by an employee on the premises, or any other person within licensee's establishment. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-3) 
Sec. 6-3. - Gambling, prostitution, pimping, etc., prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, employee or any other person to engage in gambling, keeping a gambling place or possession of a gambling device or equipment, prostitution, pimping or keeping a place of prostitution within licensee's establishment, and it shall also be unlawful for an owner, operator, employee or any other person within the establishment of licensee. The terms "gambling," "prostitution," "pimping," or "keeping a place of prostitution" shall be defined as set forth by law. Any person, owner, operator or employee so convicted of any illegal activity shall be subject to the penalties herein provided in addition to any other penalty provided by law, code or ordinance. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-4) 
Sec. 6-4. - Responsibility and penalty for violations. 
The mayor and council adopt all laws, rules and regulations as set forth in state laws. Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined in a sum not exceeding $100.00 or to be imprisoned not exceeding 30 days, either or both, or any portion of either or both in the discretion of the judge, and further, upon the conviction of any holder of any alcoholic beverage license for violation of this article, the mayor and council in their discretion, if they see fit and proper, shall be authorized to revoke the license of said person. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-5) 
Sec. 6-5. - Reporting to police department—Licensee. 
(a)  Prior to or at the time of submitting an application, the applicant for a license or permit issued under the terms of this article and the owner of the proposed business shall submit themselves to the police department for fingerprinting. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or the holder of any wholesale liquor, beer or wine licenses or the holder of any retail liquor, beer or wine licenses to operate thereunder any place of business without having a registration card signed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-6) 
Sec. 6-6. - Same—Employees. 
(a)  All employees shall within 72 hours after the date of their first work in an establishment covered under the terms of this article report to the police department for the purpose of being fingerprinted. 
(b)  The chief of police shall furnish to each qualified employee an identification card with pertinent information thereon relating to the height, weight, hair color, eye color, date of birth, social security number, photograph of the holder of such identification card. A fee in the amount of $10.00 shall be charged for the preparation of such identification card. It shall be the responsibility of the employer to see that the employees are carrying with them an identification card at all times they are working. Said identification card will expire on December 31 of each year, and the employee must renew said identification card, and said card must, at all times, be in the possession of such person affected hereunder for him to be eligible to engage in such business. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-7) 
Sec. 6-7. - Same—Notice of employee terminations. 
It shall be unlawful for the holder of any bar identification card set forth in section 6-6 to fail to notify the chief of police or his representative when transferring from the place of employment shown on the bar registration card to another place of employment requiring a bar identification card under this article. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-8) 
Sec. 6-8. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public areas. 
(a)  Except as specifically authorized herein, the consumption of alcoholic beverages in public areas including in parking lots, sidewalks, walkways, or public beaches of the city shall be prohibited. Alcoholic beverages may be consumed from a metal can or a non-glass cup with a capacity of 25.4 fluid ounces or less, in public areas; however, the mayor and council may designate areas of public property where all consumption of alcohol is prohibited and/or may limit the type of containers that are prohibited or permissible in any particular areas of the city by amendment hereto or in connection with the approval of any special event or application for a special event. 
(b)  Any person violating any provisions, rules or regulations of this article, upon conviction, shall be subject to punishment as provided in Section 1-8 and as provided by law. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-9; Ord. No. 12-2013-D, § 1, 4-11-2013) 
Sec. 6-9. - Prohibitions applicable to minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to buy from any person spirituous, malt or vinous liquors or any intoxicants. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to drink or possess any alcoholic beverages or any other intoxicants except as expressly authorized by state law. 
(c)  No person under 21 shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatsoever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any spirituous, malt or vinous liquors or any intoxicants. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to assist any person under the age of 21 in any way in buying from any person any spirituous, malt, or vinous liquors or any intoxicants. 
(e)  No person knowingly, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any spirituous, malt or vinous liquors or any intoxicants unless prior to such furnishings, such person has demanded and been presented with proper identification verifying that the person to whom the spirituous, malt or vinous liquors or intoxicants are sold or otherwise furnished, is 21 years of age. Proper identification means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, a person's photograph, or both and giving such person's date of birth, and to include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. § 40-5-104. It shall not include a birth certificate. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-10; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 6-10. - Minors on premises where alcohol is sold/consumed. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who has not reached the age of 18 years to be permitted to remain in a bar or cocktail lounge while selling and consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-10D) 
Sec. 6-11. - Regulation of sales by the drink. 
Any person issued a permit under the provisions of this article for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be subject to the following regulations, to wit: 
(1)  All of the laws of the state pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages by retail liquor dealers. 
(2)  Shall not serve or sell to any intoxicated person. 
(3)  Shall not serve or sell to any minor. 
(4)  Shall keep their place of business or establishment sufficiently lighted to discourage any disorderly conduct on the premises. 
(5)  The mayor and council reserve the right to promulgate additional regulations or ordinances pertaining to the conduct of the business of selling distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages for beverage purposes by the drink and any person licensed hereunder shall be subject to such additional regulations that may be promulgated from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(6)  All establishments duly licensed hereunder must fully comply with all sanitary requirements promulgated by the city. 
(7)  All musical units or amusement machines installed in any establishments licensed hereunder must be properly registered with the clerk of council. 
(8)  All transactions conducted on the premises of any establishment licensed hereunder involving the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages must be for cash or its equivalent. Credit transactions are declared to be illegal. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-24) 
Sec. 6-12. - Liquor prohibited at special events. 
Except as expressly permitted by the mayor and council for special events on private property, no liquor may be sold, poured, or distributed at special events as provided in sections 54-70 et seq. of this Code. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2008(2); Ord. of 9-25-2008(1)) 
Sec. 6-13. - Reporting of disciplinary actions. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.1, the city shall be required to provide notification to the state department of revenue within 45 days of any officer, department, agency, or instrumentality of the municipality taking disciplinary action against any person issued a license to operate any premises at which 75 percent or more total gross annual revenue is derived from the sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  The notification required under paragraph (a) of this code section shall be in the format for the reporting of disciplinary actions set by the state department of revenue. 
(c)  For purposes of this code section "disciplinary action" shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.1(a)(1), which includes any citation or arrest arising out of the violation of any law, rule, regulation, resolution, or ordinance of a governmental entity relating to the manufacture, distribution, sale, or possession of alcoholic beverages against a licensee, any employee of a licensee, or any person holding a financial interest in the license of a licensee on the premises or place of business of any licensee. 
(Ord. No. 20-2016 , § 1, 8-25-2016) 
Secs. 6-14—6-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIQUOR PERMITS 

Sec. 6-48. - Application for license for liquor sales. 
Every person engaged within the city limits or that is engaged hereafter, intending to carry on any one or more such business shall, before engaging or continuing in said business, file with the city an application for permit or license to conduct and carry on such business; said application shall set forth the location of the building where such business is to be conducted. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-21) 
Sec. 6-49. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  The city shall grant a license or permit hereunder when the same is found to be in the public interest and general welfare of the citizens of the city. All persons to whom such permit or license shall be issued shall take such permit or license subject to the same being revoked at any time as herein provided; such permit shall not be transferred. Permits or licenses so granted shall expire at the end of each calendar year, and may be renewed only in the manner and form as provided for originally granting permits and licenses. 
(b)  The city, in determining whether or not any license or permit applied for hereunder shall be granted, shall consider the following standards as indicative of whether or not the granting of said license or permit is in the public interest and general welfare: 
(1)  The applicant's reputation, character and mental and physical capacity to conduct a business engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of neighborhood, and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values; 
(3)  The number of licenses previously granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought; 
(4)  The proximity of the location of said establishment to schools, churches, libraries and other public buildings in the surrounding area; 
(5)  If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic liquors, whether or not the applicant or his establishment has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business; and 
(6)  If applicant was a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic liquors, the manner in which business was conducted thereunder requiring unusual police observation and inspection including the number and frequency of complaints filed by citizens objecting to the manner of conducting business at said location. 
(c)  The mayor and council may delegate, by resolution, to the city manager, the authority to issue temporary alcoholic beverage permits for special events. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-22) 
Sec. 6-50. - License fees. 
Every person engaged in, or who shall offer to engage in, or transact, or offering to transact, any of the kinds of business provided for in this chapter, shall pay the license fees provided for in chapter 58. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-23) 
Sec. 6-51. - Transferability of license. 
No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(1)  In the case of the death of a licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of death or until expiration of the license, or until approval of new licensee, whichever shall first occur. Provided that no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall make application for authorization with the city. 
(2)  In the event that a license is surrendered, or a licensee severs his association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of surrender, or from the date determined by the city to be the date of severance. Provided, no such sale shall be authorized until such time as a new application for a license is made, said application indicating that no change in ownership has occurred, except as provided herein. Upon approval by the mayor and council, a new license shall be issued. A regulatory transfer fee of $500.00 shall be paid. No additional regulatory fee shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit one or more of the partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. This section shall not prohibit the transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporation at the time of issuance of the license, nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing his stock holdings to a total of ten percent or more of any class of stock. 
(4)  Except as provided above, any change in the ownership of the entity owning a licensed establishment shall cancel and revoke any license hereunder automatically, without the necessity of any hearing. 
(5)  Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the license being used, and a fine on the new ownership and the old ownership of not less than $300.00 and/or 30 days in jail. No license will be issued to the old or new owner within the city limits for a period of one year from the date of violation. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-23.1) 
Sec. 6-52. - Revocation of license or permit. 
(a)  Grounds. The following shall be grounds for revocation of all alcoholic beverage licenses: 
(1)  Failure of wholesaler or retailer to pay license or excise taxes. 
(2)  Commission of any act in violation of the federal, state or local law or ordinances which would disqualify a person from obtaining a license. 
(3)  Selling, distributing or buying alcoholic beverages on which no local or state tax has been paid. 
(4)  Commission of any acts in violation of federal, state or local laws or ordinances or running of a licensed business where such violations frequently or regularly occur so as to cause the chief of police to recommend a revocation of the license. 
(5)  The change in any circumstances of any licensee in such way that had such circumstance existed when the application was filed, a license would not have been granted. 
(6)  Any recurrent breaches of the peace, disturbances or altercations occurring on licensed premises or the failure of the licensee or his employees promptly to report to the chief of police any violation of the laws or ordinances governing the licensing and sale of beer, wine or alcoholic beverages of which he has knowledge. 
(7)  Any conduct on the part of the license holder or his employees contrary to the public health, safety, health or morals of the city's citizens. 
(8)  Failure to abide by any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Procedures. The following procedures shall be followed in revoking all permits granted hereunder: 
(1)  Notice shall be given to the holder of a permit at least five days in advance that the mayor and council will hear a recommendation that the license be revoked, and this notice shall include the specific grounds on which this recommendation to the mayor and council will be made. 
(2)  The clerk of council shall notify the permit holder and the chief of police as to the time that a recommendation for revocation will be heard. 
(3)  The mayor and council shall hear a recommendation for revocation at one of its regular meetings or at a special meeting where notice has been given as required herein at which time the holder of said permit and any other interested parties will be heard. 
(4)  No permit shall be revoked until a majority of the mayor and council so decide at the time of or subsequent to the hearing on the recommendation for revocation. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-25) 
Secs. 6-53—6-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MALT BEVERAGE LICENSES AND PERMITS 

Sec. 6-88. - Application required. 
Every person engaged within the city limits in carrying on the business of handling or selling malt beverages, as allowed by the act of the state legislature approved March 23, 1985 (known as the Beer License Act), at wholesale, or retail, and every person hereafter intending to carry on such business in said city, as aforesaid, shall before continuing said business, or engaging therein, file with the clerk of the city an application for a permit to conduct and carry on such business; said application shall set forth the location and building where such business is being conducted or is to be conducted. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-31) 
Sec. 6-89. - Issuance. 
(a)  The city shall grant a license or permit hereunder when the same is found to be in the public interest and general welfare of the citizens of the city. All persons to whom such permit or license shall be issued shall take such permit or license subject to the same being revoked at any time as herein provided; such permit shall not be transferable. Permits or licenses so granted shall expire at the end of each calendar year, and may be renewed only in the manner and form as provided in this article for the ordinal granting of permits and licenses. 
(b)  The city, in determining whether or not any license or permit applied for hereunder shall be granted, shall consider the following standards as indicative or whether or not the granting of said license or permit is in the public interest and general welfare: 
(1)  The applicant's reputation, character and mental and physical capacity to conduct a business engaged in the sale of malt beverages; 
(2)  The location for which the license is sought relative to traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood and the effect such as establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property value; 
(3)  The number of licenses previously granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought; 
(4)  The proximity of the location of said establishment to schools, churches, libraries and other public buildings in the surrounding area; 
(5)  If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell malt beverages, whether or not the applicant or his establishment has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business; and 
(6)  If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell malt beverages, the manner in which business was conducted thereunder requiring unusual police observation and inspection including the number and frequency of complaints filed by citizens objecting to the manner of conducting business at said location. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-32) 
Sec. 6-90. - License fees. 
Every person engaged in, or who shall offer to engage in, or transact, or offering to transact, any of the kinds of business provided for in this chapter shall pay the license fees provided for and previously adopted by ordinance or license fee schedule. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-33) 
Sec. 6-91. - Rules and regulations. 
The following rules and regulations are established and shall govern the conduct and operation of every such place of business and of every person owning and operating such place of business: 
(1)  No malt beverages provided for in the article shall be kept for sale, or given away, in any building, storehouse, place of business, or vehicle located within 100 yards of any school ground or college campus. 
(2)  All boisterous, noisy and disorderly conduct in any place of business, or other place where the beverages provided for in this article are permitted to be sold, is expressly forbidden by this article, and every person conducting any place of business for which a permit or license has been granted and for which the license fee has been paid shall be subject to have the permit or license revoked, in the manner provided for in this article, for permitting any such boisterous, noisy, or disorderly conduct in such place of business. 
(3)  All health ordinances and regulations of the city relative to the dispensing, sale, and handling of foods, as well as to the place of business where the foods are dispensed, and to the persons in attendance who handle, sell or dispense such beverages, especially any and all state laws pertaining to cleanliness and sanitary conditions including odors, and storing of garbage in closed containers for the protection of the health of said community; all establishments duly licensed hereunder must fully comply with all sanitary requirements promulgated by the county health department. 
(4)  All musical units or amusement machines installed in any establishment licensed hereunder must be properly registered with the office of the clerk of the city. 
(5)  All transactions conducted on the premises of any establishment licensed hereunder involving the sale or transfer of malt beverages must be for cash or its equivalent. Credit transactions are declared to be illegal. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-34) 
Sec. 6-92. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Grounds. The following shall be grounds for revocation of all malt beverage licenses: 
(1)  Failure of wholesaler or retailer to pay license or excise taxes. 
(2)  Commission of any act in violation of the federal, state or local laws or ordinances which would disqualify a person from obtaining a license. 
(3)  Selling, distributing or buying malt beverages on which no local or state tax has been paid. 
(4)  Commission of any acts in violation of federal, state or local laws or ordinances or running of a licensed business where such violations frequently or regularly occur so as to cause the chief of police to recommend a revocation of the license. 
(5)  The change in any circumstances of any licensee in such way that had such circumstances existed when the application was filed, a license would not have been granted. 
(6)  Any recurrent breaches of the peace, disturbances or altercations occurring on licensed premises or the failure of the licensee or his employees promptly to report to the chief of police any violation of the laws or ordinances governing the licensing and sale of beer, wine or alcoholic beverages of which he has knowledge. 
(7)  Any conduct on the part of the license holder or his employees contrary to the public health, safety, health or morals of the city's citizens. 
(8)  Failure to abide by any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Procedures. The following procedures shall be followed in revoking all permits granted hereunder: 
(1)  Notice shall be given to the holder of a permit at least five days in advance that the mayor and council will hear a recommendation that the license be revoked, and this notice shall include the specific grounds on which this recommendation to the mayor and council will be made. 
(2)  The clerk of council shall notify the permit holder, and the chief of police of the time that a recommendation for revocation will be heard. 
(3)  The mayor and council shall hear a recommendation for revocation at one of its regular meetings or at a special meeting where notice has been given as required herein at which time the holder of said permit and any other interested parties will be heard. 
(4)  No permit shall be revoked until a majority of the mayor and council so decide at the time of or subsequent to the hearing on the recommendation for revocation. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-35) 
Sec. 6-93. - Prosecution of violators. 
For the purposes of prosecution of violators of this article, each and every violation of every separate section hereof shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-36) 
ARTICLE IV. - SUNDAY RETAIL SALES 

Sec. 6-111. - Hours allowed for Sunday sales. 
Properly licensed retailers of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits are authorized to engage in and conduct sales of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 50-2011, 12-8-2011) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of July 12, 2007, amended Ch. 10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 10, §§ 10-1—10-58, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1970, §§ 4-1—4-7; Code 1983, §§ 4-4-1—4-4-7, 4-4-9, 4-4-11—4-4-14, 4-4-21—4-4-28b, 4-4-32, 4-4-33; Ord. No. 2005-11C, adopted June 21, 2005; and Ord. of Oct. 12, 2006. 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretations and enforcement of this chapter: 
Animals shall mean horses, ponies, mules, cattle, sheep, goats, swine, dogs, cats, domestic rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters and similar animals. 
Dog park is an authorized public fenced facility where dogs are allowed to be unleashed. 
Enclosures shall mean any uncovered enclosed parcel of land where animals or fowl are kept. 
Fowl shall mean chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons and similar fowl. 
Health officer shall mean the commissioner of health of Chatham County, or his authorized representative. 
Housing shall mean any building, shed, cage, pen or similar structure used for the housing of animals and fowl. 
Nuisance shall mean whatever is dangerous or detrimental to human life, welfare or health and whatever renders or tends to render soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or agency. 
Pet means a domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. 
Poison is a substance that through its chemical action usually kills, injures, or impairs an organism. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-2. - Restriction on dogs running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any dog to be on public streets, lanes, highways, roads, parks, beaches, or other public property of the city or loose on vacant lots or unenclosed lots so that the dog may freely have access to such property, unless that dog is held firmly on a leash held by a person or is firmly under the control of the person or is confined within an authorized dog park of the city. It shall be the duty of any owner or possessor or any person who harbors or keeps any dog to confine securely the same within the limits of the owner's premises and not to permit that dog to run or have access to run the public streets, lanes, highways, roads, parks, beaches, or other public property or other peoples property except as set forth above. 
(b)  All pets, whether or not on a leash shall be prohibited on the beach under subsection 12-1(a)(4). 
(c)  The owner or person in charge of any such dog shall be fined or imprisoned or both as otherwise provided in this chapter or as provided in subsection 12-1(a)(4) as appropriate. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-3. - Keeping of animals; sanitation. 
(a)  Any housing or enclosure used for the keeping of animals shall be well drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. 
(b)  Animal excrement shall be disposed of in an appropriate manner and in an appropriate container so as not to be detrimental to health or comfort. All animals which are housed or enclosed shall be provided with a source of potable water. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-4. - Distance of animal enclosures from buildings. 
Any housing or enclosure used for the keeping of animals and fowl shall be kept at least 25 feet from any occupied building, except the dwelling unit of the owner, unless the permission of the occupant of the adjacent building and the health officer is given for a lesser distance. 
(1)  [Other animals.] Other animals not specifically mentioned in this section shall be kept at minimum distances deemed reasonable and necessary by the health officer. 
(2)  Commercial establishments. In case of bona fide licensed pet shops, veterinary hospitals, and similar commercial establishments, city staff may modify these requirements where undue hardship would result from their strict enforcement. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-5. - Nuisances. 
(a)  The owner or person that is the custodian of animals shall be responsible for correcting and abating any nuisance that may arise from the keeping of said animals. 
(b)  No person shall allow any animal which howls, barks or emits audible sounds that are unreasonably loud or disturbing and which are of such character, intensity and duration to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. For the purposes of this chapter, "barking dog" shall mean a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls continuously for one-half hour or more at any time of day or night regardless of whether the dog is physically situated on or upon private property; provided, however, that a dog shall not be deemed a "barking dog" for purposes of this regulation, if, at the time the dog is barking or making any other noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the dog is situated or for any other illegitimate cause which teased or provoked the dog. A dog will not be deemed a barking dog if the barking is in response to unusual circumstances in the vicinity. 
(c)  The owner or custodian of a barking dog as defined herein shall be subject to fine or fines as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-6. - Horses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have or keep any horse or pony or to ride or drive any horse or pony at any place within the city except in connection in with a special event approved by the mayor and council; however, amusement ponies used in connection with birthday parties and similar events for periods not exceeding four hours shall be allowable so long as not conducted on a regular basis. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007; Ord. of 8-9-2007(1)) 
Sec. 10-7. - Special events. 
Animals of any type that are not under any quarantine status may be temporarily permitted within the city limits in connection with a special event or activity such as demonstrations, petting zoos, and the like, following appropriate application and approval. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2008(1)) 
Sec. 10-8. - Wildlife. 
All complaints and matters concerning animals not of a domestic nature and complaints involving game animals or protected species and/or hunting shall be forwarded to appropriate state and federal authorities for the proper disposition compliance, apprehension and controlling enforcement as may be necessary and provided by state law or federal regulations, including but not limited to the Migratory Bird Treaty or Act. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-9. - Birds and wildlife protected; abatement of condition creating nuisance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, or shoot, or attempt to trap, or shoot, or molest in any manner any bird or wildlife that would result in injury or destruction of said bird or wildlife, or to rob birds' nests or wildlife habitats; provided, however, if birds or wildlife are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper authorities of the city, such authorities shall meet with representatives of the federal or state government, if appropriate, the Audubon Society, bird club, or such similar club, or humane society, or as many of such clubs as are found to exist in the city and/or county, after having given at least two weeks actual notice of the time and place of said meeting to the representatives of said clubs and to the public. 
(b)  If, as a result of said meeting, no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, said birds or wildlife may be relocated in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the authorities under the supervision of the city manager. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-10. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  A person commits an act of animal cruelty when such person causes the death or unjustified physical pain and suffering of an animal or maliciously causes the death, physical harm to the animal rendering parts of the animal useless or seriously disfigured or with knowledge or intent commits any of the acts set forth in section 10-13. This provision shall not apply to any authorized person euthanizing an animal due to a disease or action taken to avoid pain and suffering. Any person convicted of a violation of this subsection shall be fined or imprisoned or both not less than $1,000.00 and/or six months or as provided by state law. 
(b)  Subsection (a) above does not apply to the killing of animals raised for the purpose of providing food, nor does it apply to any person who hunts wild animals in compliance with the fish and game laws of this state. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-11. - Poisoning animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to put out or cause to be put out any poison within the city for the killing of any bird, wildlife, or animal, whether domesticated or wild with the exception of rodent poison placed in dwellings. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-12. - Dogfighting. 
Dogfighting is unlawful and shall be enforced as provided by state law. 
Cockfighting is deemed unlawful and any violation shall be subject to penalty under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-13. - Animal neglect. 
A person that is the owner or custodian of any animal may be found to be guilty of animal neglect by a finding that any one or more of the following conditions were allowed to exist: 
(1)  Lack of immediately available proper drinking water or inadequate supply of drinkable water. 
(2)  Lack of wholesome, palatable, free from contamination food or sustenance to be provided in sufficient quantity. 
(3)  Failure to provide an animal sufficient space to stand to full height, turn around, lie down and make normal postural adjustments for comfort. 
(4)  The lack of providing a stationary shelter from weather such as sun, rain, wind or inclement weather or to maintain said shelter in a clean, sanitary condition free of excrement and unreasonable objectionable odors. 
(5)  To have an animal in possession that is known to or suspected to have an injury, accidental or deliberate, or to exhibit any signs of disease, shock, temperature fluctuations, tremors, swelling, open wounds, inability to eat, blistering or abnormal bleeding, partial paralysis, discharging blood or mucus without the animal being under the care of a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-14. - Tethering. 
It shall be prohibited in the city limits to restrain or confine to property dogs or cats in a manner achieved by stationary or non-stationary dog houses, barrels or other stationary object as such means of confinement within the property unless the owner is outside with the animal. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-15. - Animal transported by vehicle. 
No animals shall be transported on a public road in an open vehicle including an open-top vehicle or open truck bed unless secured with a seatbelt harness or housed in a secured container designed for that purpose and having a provision for adequate ventilation, food and water. Said container shall have an open grille on one end, a solid top and bottom and a minimum of 15 percent total accumulated side areas incorporated into an open grille for air circulation provisions. The animal control officers shall be entitled to impound and cite the owner or custodian of any animal being transported in violation of the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-16. - Animal confinement and left unattended in parked car. 
To prevent animals from suffering physical distress from dangerous temperatures, it shall be unlawful to leave an animal unattended in a parked vehicle under such conditions as to reasonably demonstrate a risk of harm to the animal. Tybee Island Animal Control, city law enforcement officers, or any other law enforcement shall take such action as is necessary including entry of the vehicle by any means to remove an animal from such jeopardy and may impound said animal and secure medical treatment for said animal as needed at the owner's expense. Tybee Island Animal Control officers may take possession of any deceased animal found in any parked vehicle for purposes of determining the cause of death in question pursuant to animal neglect or cruelty of this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-17. - Vicious animals. 
(a)  Dangerous/potentially dangerous dogs. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section, and the following words shall have the following meanings: 
Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property; or 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or animals without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Owner means any person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within this state. 
Potentially dangerous dog means any dog, according to the records of an appropriate authority, that: 
(1)  Without provocation, bites a human being on public or private property; or 
(2)  Without provocation, repeatedly chases any human being upon the street, sidewalk or any public or private property. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records of a dog control officer provided for in this chapter. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
Substantial chain or leash means a device used to restrain a dog that cannot be broken by the dog under its own power. 
(b)  Exemptions; investigation of reports. 
(1)  A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this chapter. A dog shall not be a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this chapter if the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(2)  Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the city limits from a law enforcement agency, animal control agency, rabies control officer, or county board of health, an animal control officer shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Notice generally. When an animal control officer classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, the animal control officer shall notify the dog's owner in writing by certified mail to the owner's last known address of such classification or reclassification. Such notice shall be complete upon its mailing. In the alternative, at the sole discretion of the animal control officer, a personal service may be made. 
(d)  Scope of procedures. As applied to the owners of potentially dangerous dogs, the procedures provided for in this chapter shall be carried out as a necessary condition for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter against such owners. As applied to the owners of dangerous dogs, the procedures provided for in this chapter shall not be an essential element of any crime provided for in this chapter. 
(e)  Notice to owner of classification. When a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is classified as such, the animal control officer shall notify the dog's owner of such classification. 
(f)  Requirements of notice to owner. The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address or hand delivered; 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the health department; 
(5)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog shall become effective for all purposes under this chapter on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the health department and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the agency. 
(g)  Hearing. When the health department receives a request for a hearing as provided in this chapter, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The health department shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be sent by certified mail or personal service to the dog owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, and in addition thereto the health department shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the health department may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the dog. 
(h)  Notice of determination after hearing. Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the health department shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the effective date will be 15 days from the date of the hearing. 
(i)  Certificate of registration. It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within this state a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The owner shall provide a proper enclosure to confine the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(2)  Any dog classified as dangerous or potentially dangerous shall be required to be microchipped for permanent identification by a licensed veterinarian at the owner's expense. 
(3)  Any animal found to be a potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog shall be spayed or neutered within 15 days of the health department's determination that said dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog. 
(4)  The owner shall be required to post the premises where the animal is located with a clearly visible sign, issued by the animal control agency, containing a symbol designed to warn all citizens, including children, that there is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog on the property; the number of signs will be determined by the animal control officer. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to display the above dangerous dog sign at locations or on premises where no such dangerous or potentially dangerous dog exists or is located. 
(6)  The registration fee shall be $150.00 for a potentially dangerous dog annually and $250.00 for a dangerous dog annually. It shall be a requirement that one warning sign shall be included in this fee and additional signs as may be required shall cost an extra $35.00 per sign. 
(7)  In addition to the requirements above, the owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the animal control officer evidence that the dog has been spayed or neutered, and evidence of: 
a.  A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $25,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog; or 
b.  A surety bond in the amount of $25,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog. 
(8)  The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer as soon as possible, but in any case less than 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the animal control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(9)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer if the owner is moving from the dog control officer's jurisdiction. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the State of Georgia shall register the dog as required in this Code section within 30 days after becoming a resident. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who moves from one jurisdiction to another within the State of Georgia shall register the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days after becoming a resident. 
(10)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of certificate of registration by Savannah-Chatham Metropolitan Police Department Animal Control Unit shall not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
(11)  An animal control officer shall be authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section. Law enforcement agencies of local governments and the sheriffs of counties shall cooperate with animal control officers in enforcing the provisions of this section. 
(j)  Restraint of dangerous dog. It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person. 
(k)  Restraint of potentially dangerous dog. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person. 
(l)  Confiscation of dangerous dog. A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the animal control officer if the: 
(1)  Owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or bond required in this chapter; 
(2)  Dog is not validly registered as required; 
(3)  Dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(4)  Dog is outside a proper enclosure without specified restraints. 
(5)  Should the owner fail to provide the documents outlined in subsection (i) or the provisions of this subsection, the dangerous dog shall be impounded. The dangerous dog shall be held for ten days during which time the owner may demonstrate compliance with subsection (j) and subsections (1) through (4) above. Should the owner fail to comply with any provision of the aforementioned section and subsections, then the dog shall be subject to euthanasia. 
(m)  Confiscation of potentially dangerous dog. A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if the dog is: 
(1)  Not validly registered as required; 
(2)  Not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(3)  Outside a proper enclosure without specified restraints. 
(n)  Return after confiscation. Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of this chapter shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this chapter and upon the payment of reasonable confiscation costs. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this chapter within ten days of the date the dog was confiscated, said dog shall be put to death in accordance with an approved AVMA method of euthanasia administered by a certified technician. 
(o)  Liability. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be solely liable for any injury to or death of a person caused by such dog. Under no circumstances shall a local government or any employee or official of a local government which enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of this chapter be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog that has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog or by a dog that has been reported to the proper authorities as being a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog or by a dog that a local government has failed to identify as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog or by a dog which has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog but has not been kept or restrained in the prescribed manner or by a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or surety bond as required. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-18. - Registration of dogs and cats. 
Each owner or possessor and any person who harbors or keeps any dog or cat four months or older within the limits of the city shall cause that dog or cat to be registered with the Savannah-Chatham Metropolitan Police Department Animal Control Unit. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-19. - Rabies inoculations; required for dogs and cats. 
All dogs and cats four months or older within the city shall be required to be adequately inoculated against rabies in accordance with the laws of the state applicable thereto. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-20. - Notification regarding tag requirement. 
Where any dog or cat four months or older is found within the city without wearing a license tag, as hereby required, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer to verbally notify the person in charge of the premises whereon the dog is found to come forward and produce a tag. Microchips embedded with license information will satisfy this requirement. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-21. - Same; duty animal control officer. 
Upon the failure of a person to comply with the notice given him as provided under this chapter, within 24 hours after receiving same, or should the person in charge of the premises upon which an unlicensed dog or cat is found disclaim ownership of that dog or cat by himself or any member of his household when notified, it shall thereupon become the duty of the animal control officer to go upon the premises and take charge of and impound the dog or cat. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-22. - Impoundment of dogs. 
Any dog found upon the right-of-way of public streets, lanes, highways, roads, parks, beaches or other public property within the city in violation of this chapter, shall be caught by a police officer, or the animal control officer, or their assistants, and impounded. A police officer, animal control officer, or their assistants, shall have the specific right to enter upon any unenclosed private property when in hot pursuit of any dog in violation of this chapter to secure, capture and impound that dog. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-23. - Pets kept five days. 
Any pet impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall be kept for five days in some convenient place, to be known as the animal shelter at the city police station, or animal pound, located in Chatham County. All impounded animals will be scanned for microchip I.D. 
Within five days after a pet is impounded, the owner or possessor shall come forward and pay the annual license fee, if he has not paid the same, and an impoundment fee. Impoundment shall be paid before an impounded animal shall be released to the owner or possessor. 
(1)  The impoundment fee shall be $35.00. 
(2)  The boarding fee shall be $10.00 per day. 
In the event the judge of the municipal court shall find in his discretion that the city has incurred expenses for temporarily sheltering any abused animal, said fine may be increased up to $20.00 each day per animal for temporarily sheltering the animal with said funds to be used for reimbursement of said expenses incurred. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-24. - Disposition. 
If a pet is not claimed by its owner within five days, then the city through the county or as otherwise authorized shall be authorized to dispose of the pet in as humane and painless a manner as possible. All animals will be scanned for microchips prior to being euthanized. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-25. - Delegation of shelter for impounded pets. 
The shelter and impounding of any pet found within the city in violation of this chapter, may be delegated to and performed by any organization selected by a police officer or the animal control officer known to be an official humane shelter. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-26. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-27. - Sanitary requirements for a dog's waste; owner's responsibility; disposition. 
It shall be unlawful for a dog owner to walk a dog, in accordance with applicable sections of this chapter, without a device with which to remove the dog's waste and a container within which to place the dog's waste. It shall be the responsibility of the dog's owner to ensure that the waste is properly and sanitarily disposed of either in a city receptacle or the dog's owner's trash can. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-28. - Dead animals. 
(a)  No person shall intentionally abandon a dead animal on any private property belonging to another unless the person so doing shall have first obtained permission from the owner of the property on which the animal is left. 
(b)  No person shall abandon a dead animal on any public property or rights-of-way unless the place in which the animal is left is a public dump or other facility designed for receiving such and designated by Tybee Island as public facility for receiving trash or refuse. 
(c)  Tybee Island Public Works Department is authorized to remove dead animals from public property including public schools, parks and roadways. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or put onto the streets, lanes, squares or other common public property of Tybee Island, any dead animal. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-29. - Rabies cases to be reported. 
(a)  All animals, such as dogs, cats, horses, cattle, mules, goats, foxes, swine, raccoons, and other animals of like species, showing symptoms of or having rabies within unincorporated Chatham County shall be immediately reported to the Chatham County Health Department, the animal control center, or Chatham County Humane Shelter by the owner or the person having custody or any citizen having knowledge of these facts. It shall be the duty of every person having this knowledge to make immediately his/her report. 
(2)  Dogs, cats or any animal being held under quarantine by the owner or by a veterinary hospital, boarding or breeding kennel, or any other person at any other place shall immediately upon discovery of the existence of rabies or its symptoms be reported to the Chatham County Health Department, animal control or Chatham County Humane Shelter with a history of the case and information regarding the name and address of the owner. It shall be the duty of every person having knowledge of the facts to see that the report required by this subsection is made. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-30. - Quarantine. 
(a)  For any dog, cat or animal that bites or inflicts injury upon a human, said dog, cat or animal shall be quarantined for ten days at such place as designated by the Chatham County Health Department or Savannah-Chatham Metropolitan Police Department Animal Control Unit for purposes of observing the health condition and temperament of said dog, cat or animal. The health department may increase or diminish the period as, in its sole discretion, the public safety and health may require. 
(b)  Where rabies has been found to exist in any warm-blooded animal or where its existence is suspected, the health department may designate an area within which quarantine shall be maintained as provided by the terms of this chapter. Every such animal shall thereupon be immediately confined to the premises designated by the health department, whether or not the animal has been vaccinated against rabies. 
(c)  No animal shall be removed from a quarantined area and no animal shall be brought into a quarantined area without written permission of the health department. The application for such permission shall be in writing, filed with the health department detailing the reason for movement and the location at which the animal will be confined after movement. 
(d)  When an animal has been suspected of having rabies or has rabies symptoms, the area or premises where such animals are kept shall be posted by the health department with signs to read as follows: "rabies suspected" or "rabies, keep away from animals." Such signs shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises, printed with type that is easily legible, and shall remain on the premises for the duration of the quarantine. 
(e)  Persons living within a quarantine area having in their possession an animal subject to rabies or to the terms of this chapter shall be given written notice of the quarantine, the animals subject thereto and an order to confine their animals so subject to the premises of the owner, together with any other information the health department deems advisable. Such notice shall be signed by a duly authorized agent of the health department. 
(f)  The violation by any person of any quarantine order issued by the health officer shall be a violation of this chapter, and the person so violating shall be subject to all the penalties prescribed by law for a violation. 
(g)  The heads of all domestic animals and of all wild animals suspected of having rabies before their death or having rabies at time of death shall be submitted to the state laboratory for examination. Either human or animal exposure to these animals shall constitute sufficient reason for laboratory examination. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-31. - Penalties for violations of chapter. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter upon a first conviction in a municipal court [shall] be fined not less than $20.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and/or imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90 days, either or both, plus court costs, and for a second offense within five years of a previous conviction, such person shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00, and/or imprisoned for a term not exceeding 120 days, plus court costs, either or both, in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court. 
In the event the judge of the municipal court shall find in his discretion that the city has incurred expenses for temporarily sheltering any abused animal, said fine may be increased up to $20.00 each day per animal for temporarily sheltering the animal with said funds to be used for reimbursement of said expenses incurred. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2007) 
Chapter 12 - BEACHES AND WATERWAYS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Use of municipal beaches and facilities. 
(a)  Rules and regulations. All persons entering upon the public beaches, or structures erected thereon, shall comply with the following rules and regulations, and failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this article: 
(1)  Swimming area. It shall be unlawful for any person to swim outside of the area extending 50 yards from the water's edge. 
(2)  Placement of litter. It shall be unlawful to throw, place, deposit, sweep or scatter, or cause to be thrown, placed, deposited, swept, or scattered, any paper, food, cigarette butts, bottles, cans, trash, fruit peelings or other refuse upon the beaches or structures erected thereon. Beach goers must have their trash in a container at all times. 
(3)  Glass or breakable containers. It shall be unlawful for any person to take or carry upon the beaches or structures erected thereon any glass or breakable containers. 
(4)  Pets. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, is in control of, or is in charge of, any dog or other pet, to allow or take that dog or other pet upon the beaches or structures erected thereon. This does not include properly certified guide dogs, or similar animals assisting the blind, deaf, or other physically handicapped persons. 
(5)  Motorized vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to take any motorized vehicle on to the beaches or structures erected thereon. This includes automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, all-terrain-vehicles and similar motor driven vehicles and craft. This does not include properly marked emergency vehicles while in the course of an emergency operation, or maintenance/utility vehicles in the employ of the city or similar governmental entity and engaged in a legitimate operation. 
(6)  Motorized watercraft. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized watercraft, such as a jet ski, motorboat, and similar craft, within 1,000 feet of the waterline on any part of the beach between the north and south rock jetties. 
(7)  Fires. It shall be unlawful for any person to build or maintain any type of open fire on the beach, including any type of charcoal fire, whether or not in a grill or similar container. 
(8)  Disturbing dune vegetation. It shall be unlawful for any person to pick, gather, remove, walk in the dunes, or otherwise disturb the vegetation present on sand dunes, including sea oats. 
(9)  Surfboarding and fishing. Surfboarding and fishing shall be permitted only in designated areas. No person shall operate a surfboard/paddle board unless it is equipped with an appropriate leash which is used at all times. No person shall fish except in areas designated for such purposes. Fishing is prohibited within the 60-foot right-of-way on Alley #3 Back River boat ramp. 
(10)  Commands of lifeguards. It shall be unlawful for any person to deliberately disobey any reasonable command of a duly appointed and identified lifeguard while in the legitimate performance of his duty, such commands being intended to ensure the safety of persons using the beach and any structures erected thereon. 
(11)  Disorderly conduct; endangerment of self or others. It shall be unlawful for any person to come upon the beaches or structures erected thereon, and individually or in concert with others, do any act or create any condition which does or is calculated to encourage, aid, abet, or start a riot, public disorder or disturbance of the peace; and it shall not be necessary to prove that that person was solely responsible for that riot, public disorder or disturbance of the peace, but only that his appearance, manner, conduct, attire, condition, status or general demeanor was a motivating factor that resulted in the riot, public disorder or disturbance of the peace. Any person who refuses when commanded by a police officer or other enforcement official of the city to leave the beach or structures erected thereon immediately, shall be guilty of an offense for refusal to obey the order or command of a police officer or other enforcement official of the city, and deemed to be a rioter or disturber of the peace. It shall also be unlawful for any person to come upon the beaches or structures erected thereon and act in any way which is likely to cause endangerment to himself or others. 
(12)  Nudity. No nudity on beaches. 
(13)  Beer kegs. The presence of beer kegs on the beach is often associated with underage drinking, littering, public intoxication and disorderly conduct and because such activities are in direct conflict with family recreation, such containers and similar devices for dispensing of large quantities of alcoholic beverages are expressly prohibited. 
(14)  Jumping or diving from pier or public structure. It shall be unlawful for any person to jump or dive from any pier or public structure except those that might be specifically built for that purpose and as may be specifically authorized in connection with a properly authorized special event. 
(15)  Walking or climbing on public structures. It shall be unlawful to walk or climb upon the rocks, jetties, or other manmade structures which are marked with appropriate signage. 
(16)  Bathing in restroom facilities prohibited. It shall be unlawful for anyone to use public restrooms on the pier, the beach, strand, or adjacent areas, except where a shower facility exists and is operational, to bathe or attempt to bathe, shower or wash by use of the sinks in bathroom facilities or other fixtures therein, except for showers, and further sink facilities shall not be used for rinsing, washing off except for a person's face and hands. No such fixtures or facilities shall be used for the washing off of property including, but not limited to, clothing, toys, coolers, recreational equipment, chairs, floats, and any similar items, nor for cleaning of fish, shells, sand dollars, or other sea animals or items, living or dead. 
(17)  Removal of live animals. It shall be unlawful to remove any non-regulated live animals including shells, sand dollars and hermit crabs and other invertebrates from the beach. Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting recreational fishing or crabbing for blue crab as permitted by the Department of Natural Resources fishing regulations. 
(l8)  Sales or soliciting sales on the beach. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, or food on the beach, or to solicit from any person for the purchase of any goods, wares, merchandise, or food on the beach. 
(19)  Obstructions and equipment on the beach prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave an item of personal property unattended on any portion of the sand beach from 9:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m. except as otherwise permitted by law or by permit granted by the city manager on application. City personnel are authorized to remove any unattended personal property, including any type of personal property including, as way of example and not limitation, tents (including frames), canopies, cabanas, umbrellas and other shading devices, picnic tables, volleyball nets, beach chairs, coolers, kayaks, canoes, catamarans, floats, sail boards, surf boards, kits, jet skis, sail boats and other water craft. 
(b)  Exception to the rules. Exceptions to any of the above rules and regulations may be allowed by way of a special permit granted by the mayor and council or by a permit granted by the city manager pursuant to his or her authority to grant a commercial film production permit. In the case of the overnight storage of unattended personal property, a permit to do so may be granted when special circumstances exist as determined by the city manager who shall be authorized to issue such permits. 
(c)  Enforcement of rules and regulations. Enforcement of these rules and regulations shall be by employees of the city police department or the city marshal and/or the designees of either the police department or the city marshal. The police department employees and the city marshal and the designees of either are authorized to require persons using the beach or structures erected thereon to obey reasonable commands designed to protect the public and public property, and the failure to obey any lawful command of those individuals shall be a violation of this section. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months and to perform community service for a period not exceeding 60 days, any or all such penalties in the discretion of the judge. When found by an employee as described above, the person responsible for the violation will be issued a citation and subpoena which names the violation and establishes a date for the violator to appear in court to answer the charge. Violators may elect to pay the fine without appearing in court; such action shall constitute a plea of guilty to the charge. When confronted with a violation, enforcing officers may exercise discretion to the point of transporting violators without delay to the police station for the purpose of posting bond in order to ensure their appearance in court. 
(e)  Penalty for pet prohibition . The fine for the offense of violating subsection (a)(4) of this section prohibiting pets on the beach, shall not be less than $200.00 for the first offense plus applicable court fees, and not less than $400.00 for subsequent offenses, plus applicable court fees for any subsequent offense occurring within a 12-month period of a preceding offense. 
(f)  Penalty for litter. The fine for the offense of violating subsection (a)(2) of this section prohibiting litter on the beach, shall be not less than $100.00 plus applicable court fees and not less than $200.00 for subsequent offenses plus applicable court fees for any subsequent offense occurring within a 12-month period of a preceding offense. 
(g)  Penalty for abuse of restroom facilities. The fine for the offense for violation of subsection (a)(16) of this section prohibiting bathing in inappropriate restroom facilities, shall be $100.00 plus applicable court costs. 
(Code 1983, § 9-5-1; Ord. No. 2005-11B, 6-21-2005; Ord. of 6-8-2006; Ord. of 4-26-2007(1); Ord. of 6-11-2009(1); Ord. No. 29-2011A, 7-28-2011; Ord. No. 33-2011, 8-11-2011; Ord. No. 36-2011, 9-8-2011; Ord. No. 41-2014, § 1, 8-14-2014; Ord. No. 12-2015, § 1, 4-9-2015; Ord. No. 26-2015 , § 1, 9-10-2015; Ord. No. 16-2016 , § 1, 6-23-2016) 
Sec. 12-2. - Shark fishing prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to fish for sharks of any species on or from any of the public beaches, docks or piers of the city. 
(b)  Violations shall be punishable by fines not to exceed $300.00 and/or imprisonment not to exceed six months and/or to perform community service for a period not exceeding 60 days, any or all such penalties in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(Code 1983, § 9-6-1) 
Secs. 12-3—12-27. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATERCRAFT 

Sec. 12-28. - Powered (motorized) watercrafts—Restrictions; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, borrowing, leasing, or renting a powered (motorized) watercraft to: 
(1)  Ingress or egress the waters surrounding the city other than at the municipal boat ramp on the Back River at Chatham Avenue, a private residential dock, or a commercial marina; or 
(2)  Approach closer than 1,000 feet from the mean high water mark of the municipal beach extending from the rock jetty at Nineteenth Street north to the rock jetty at the confluence of the Atlantic Ocean and the Savannah River at Fort Screven. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the lifeguards and/or other city officials to notify the coast guard or the department of natural resources concerning violations of this section, and where possible, within the city limits, the chief of police or any law officer shall have the arresting authority for violators of this section. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the use of a powered (motorized) watercraft engaged in an activity authorized under state law. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction before the court of the city, be fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00. 
(Code 1983, §§ 7-3-6, 7-3-7) 
Chapter 14 - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 14-1. - Qualification for office—Mayor. 
To be eligible for election to, and to hold at any time, the office of mayor, a person shall be at least 21 years of age, shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of the election for the office of mayor, and shall be duly registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the city and the state. 
(Code 1970, § 6-1; Code 1983, § 2-2-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Same—Councilmembers. 
To be eligible for election, and to hold at any time, the office of councilmember, a person shall be at least 21 years of age, shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of the election for the office of councilmember, and shall be duly registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the city and the state. 
(Code 1970, § 6-2; Code 1983, § 2-2-2) 
Sec. 14-3. - Election officials. 
The mayor and council shall by resolution annually appoint a municipal election superintendent, election manager, registrars, absentee ballot clerk and any other officials as are necessary, all of whom shall exercise those powers and duties set forth in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. and other applicable provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
(Code 1983, § 2-2-3) 
Sec. 14-4. - Superintendent to incur expenses. 
The election superintendent is authorized to incur expenses in the preparation and conduct of an election including the cost of purchasing identification badges for poll officers, the printing of ballots and voter's certificates, and the purchasing of all other supplies necessary for the conduct of an election. The superintendent is further authorized to incur all necessary expenses to provide voting booths for the proper conduct of all elections. 
(Code 1970, § 6-4; Code 1983, § 2-2-4) 
Sec. 14-5. - District; polling places. 
The area within the corporate limits of the city shall constitute an election district within the city. Persons shall vote at city hall, the community center or at such other locations as may be established by the municipal elections superintendent or the board of elections. All polling places shall be provided with sufficient light and heat. 
(Code 1970, § 6-5; Code 1983, § 2-2-5; Ord. of 4-27-06(1)) 
Sec. 14-6. - Voter qualifications. 
(a)  A person shall be eligible and qualified to vote in any election of the city when he shall be: 
(1)  A citizen of the state and of the United States; 
(2)  At least 18 years of age; 
(3)  A resident of the city; 
(4)  Possessed of all other qualifications prescribed by law; and 
(5)  Registered as an elector in the manner prescribed by law. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any person who was not qualified and registered to vote at the time of the adoption of this section shall not be required to re-register under the terms of this section unless that person shall have become or becomes disqualified to vote by reason of having been purged from the list of electors or for any other reason whatsoever, in which event those persons shall, in order to become registered to vote, re-register under the terms of this section. 
(Code 1970, § 6-6; Code 1983, § 2-2-6) 
Sec. 14-7. - Application for registration; time limit. 
A resident of the city who desires to vote in a municipal election must apply to be registered as an elector with the board of registrars of the city at least 30 days prior to that election. The applicant must appear in person before the registrar and must possess those qualifications herein prescribed in order to qualify as an elector of the municipality. The procedure and form of the registration card shall conform to the provisions prescribed by the O.C.G.A. § 21-2-219 et seq. 
(Code 1983, § 2-2-7) 
Sec. 14-8. - Procedure for challenging registration of a voter. 
Any elector of the municipality shall be allowed to challenge the right of registration of any person whose name appears upon the electors list or who is applying for registration with the registrar. The elector making the challenge shall appear before the registrar on or before the election day, and state the grounds for the challenge in writing. The initial decision shall be made forthwith by the registrar with a right of appeal to the governing body of the city. If possible, the registrar will notify the challenged elector and provide him with an opportunity to answer the challenge. If a registrar does not find probable cause for sustaining the challenge, the challenged elector will be given the right to vote or the right to be registered to vote. If in doubt as to the merit of a challenge, the registrar shall notify the chief manager in the challenged elector's election district, and the challenged elector shall be allowed to cast a challenged ballot. 
(Code 1970, § 6-8; Code 1983, § 2-2-8) 
Sec. 14-9. - Notice of candidacy; time periods. 
Each candidate or a designee shall file a notice of candidacy in the office of the municipal clerk of such candidate's candidacy. 
(1)  In the case of a general election held in an odd-numbered year, no earlier than 8:30 a.m. on the second Monday in September immediately preceding the general election and no later than 4:30 p.m. on the following Friday. 
(2)  In the case of a special election, not earlier than the date of the call and at least 25 days prior to the election. 
(Code 1983, § 2-2-9) 
Sec. 14-10. - Designation of office sought; election of councilmembers. 
A candidate seeking one of two or more public offices each having the same title and to be filled at the same election by the vote of the same electors shall not designate the specific office he is seeking. The six candidates for city council receiving the highest number of lawful votes cast shall be elected as the six councilmembers of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 6-11; Code 1983, § 2-2-10) 
Sec. 14-11. - Election to be nonpartisan. 
All elections held for the purpose of filling municipal offices in the city shall be nonpartisan, and no political party shall conduct primaries for the purpose of nominating candidates for any municipal elections. 
(Code 1970, § 6-12; Code 1983, § 2-2-11) 
Sec. 14-12. - Plurality required to elect; election of mayor. 
A candidate for municipal office shall be elected in a general or special election by receiving a plurality of the votes cast to fill that public office. The candidate for mayor receiving the highest number of lawful votes cast shall be elected as mayor. 
(Code 1970, § 6-13; Code 1983, § 2-2-12) 
Sec. 14-13. - Tie votes; runoff election. 
In event of a tie vote in any election between two or more candidates for any office, whether mayor or councilmember, a new election between only the candidates thus tied in number of votes for the particular office shall be ordered held by the mayor and council on the 14th day after the holding of the first election in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 21-2-501, and the person who shall receive the highest number of votes cast in the second or runoff election, shall be declared to have been elected to the office. 
(Code 1970, § 6-14; Code 1983, § 2-2-13) 
Sec. 14-14. - Secret ballots; use of voting machines. 
All votes cast in every municipal election held in the city whether that election be regular, special, general or other shall be by secret ballot; but the ballots or votes in any such municipal election may, at the option of the mayor and council be cast, registered, recorded and counted by means of voting machines meeting the requirements of voting machines that are allowed to be used as provided by the provisions of statute. 
(Code 1970, § 6-15; Code 1983, § 2-2-14) 
Sec. 14-15. - Absentee ballots. 
Absentee ballots shall be used in all municipal elections. The use of absentee ballots shall be governed by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-280 et seq. 
(Code 1970, § 6-16; Code 1983, § 2-2-15) 
Sec. 14-16. - Contested elections. 
The procedure for contested elections shall be as provided by state law. 
(Code 1970, § 6-17; Code 1983, § 2-2-16) 
Sec. 14-17. - Qualifying fee. 
A qualifying fee shall be paid to the municipal city clerk or a designee at the time a candidate files the candidate's notice of candidacy. Such fee shall be three percent of the annual salary of the office if a salaried office. 
(Code 1983, § 2-2-17) 
State Law reference— Qualification fees generally, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131. 
Sec. 14-18. - Time of regular election; succession by incumbent. 
On the first Tuesday in November of each odd-numbered year, beginning in 1983, a regular election shall be held in the city at the city hall or at such other place as the city council may designate for the election of a mayor and six councilmembers, who shall have the qualifications specified in this chapter to hold such office. Any incumbent mayor or incumbent councilmember who shall qualify as a candidate and meet the qualifications to hold such office may be a candidate to succeed himself for office or for office as a member of the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 2-2-18) 
Chapter 18 - DISASTER RECOVERY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 58-A-2014, § 1, adopted December 12, 2014, repealed ch. 18, arts. I—III, §§ 18-1, 18-26—18-28, 18-60—18-66, 18-81—18-88, in its entirety; and enacted a new ch. 18 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 18 pertained to emergency management and emergency services and was derived from Code 1983, §§ 4-1-6, 4-3-1—4-3-3, 4-3-10—4-3-15; Ord. of 7-13-2006(1) and Ord. No. 34-2010, adopted January 23, 2011. 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The words "shall," "will," and "must" are mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. As used in this chapter, the term: 
Declaration of local emergency means the condition declared by the mayor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency in any part of the city is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by the city to supplement the efforts and available resources of the several localities and relief organizations in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Disaster means any happening that causes great harm or damage. 
Emergency means any extraordinary condition in which there exists the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or event, including an energy emergency as defined in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and any amendments thereto, which may result in the large scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction, or in the major disruption of routine community affairs or business and government operations, and is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by the city and other agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources. 
Emergency interim successor means a person designated pursuant to this chapter, in the event an officer is unavailable to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of an office, until a successor is appointed or elected and qualified as may be prescribed by the Constitution, statutes, laws, charters, and ordinances of the state and its political subdivisions, or until the lawful incumbent or the successor is able to resume the exercise of the powers and the discharge of the duties of the office. 
Emergency management means the preparation for, and the carrying out of, all emergency and disaster functions, as more fully defined by this chapter. 
Emergency standing operating procedures (SOP) means the standing operating procedures developed by each emergency response unit for the purpose of preplanning the unit's response to a request for emergency assistance. 
Energy emergency means a condition of danger to the health, safety, welfare, or economic well-being of the citizens of this city arising out of a present or threatened shortage of usable energy resources; also any condition of substantial danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of this city resulting from the operation of any electrical power-generating facility, the transport of any energy resource by any means whatsoever, or the production, use, or disposal of any source material, special nuclear material, or by-product, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 68 Stat. 919, 42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.; also any nuclear incident, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, occurring within or outside this state, substantially affecting the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of this city. 
Energy resources means all forms of energy or power including, without limitation to, oil, gasoline, and other petroleum products; natural or synthetic gas; electricity in all forms and from all sources; and other fuels of any description, except wood. 
Natural disaster means any hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water, wind-driven water, tidal wave, tsunami, earthquake, volcanic eruption, landslide, mudslide, snowstorm, drought, fire, or other catastrophe which causes, or which may cause, substantial damage or injury to civilian property or persons. 
Political subdivision means cities, counties, towns, villages, authorities, and any other bodies created by the state and exercising any of the governmental powers of the state. 
State of emergency means the condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency in any part of the state is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by the state to supplement the efforts and available resources of the several localities and relief organizations in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Technological or human-caused disaster means the application of one or more modes of harmful force to the environment. These include but are not limited to contamination (as in the case of chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear hazards), energy (explosives, arson, and even electromagnetic waves), or failure or denial of service (sabotage, infrastructure breakdown, and service disruption) including theft or disruption of cyber networks and transportation media. 
Tybee Island emergency operations plan means the officially adopted, and Georgia Emergency Management Agency approved, emergency operations plan for Tybee Island, Georgia. 
Unavailable means either that a vacancy in an office exists as the result of any emergency as defined in this section and there is no deputy or other successor authorized to exercise all of the powers and discharge all of the duties of the office, or that the lawful incumbent of the office, including any deputy exercising the powers and discharging the duties of an office because of a vacancy, and his duly authorized deputy are absent or unable to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office. 
(Ord. No. 58-A-2014, § 1, 12-12-2014) 
Sec. 18-2. - Emergency management function defined. 
Emergency management means the preparation for, and the carrying out of, all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or other state and federal agencies are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of technological or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation to, fire-fighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
(Ord. No. 58-A-2014, § 1, 12-12-2014) 
Sec. 18-3. - The emergency operations plan. 
(a)  The city shall develop and periodically update the city emergency operations plan (EOP) for the purpose of establishing policies, procedures, programs, and projects to implement this chapter and enable the city to respond to natural and technological emergency situations. 
(b)  The director emergency management is responsible for the development, execution, and coordination of the city EOP. This plan shall be developed in close coordination with the State Office of Homeland Security/Georgia Emergency Management Agency. It shall also be based on recommended principles and practices promulgated by the Federal Department of Homeland Security and other recognized emergency and disaster preparedness agencies and organizations. 
(c)  The plan shall be submitted to the city manager, the county emergency management agency director, and Georgia Office of Homeland Security/Georgia Emergency Management Agency for review, comment, and recommendation to the city council. The plan shall be adopted by the city council by resolution and may be changed and updated periodically by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 58-A-2014, § 1, 12-12-2014) 
Sec. 18-4. - Activation of the EOP. 
The EOP shall become operative as follows: 
(1)  Automatically by the declaration of a "state of emergency" by the governor of the state as either a state-wide, regional, or local area emergency or emergency alert; or 
(2)  Automatically by the declaration of local emergency by the mayor. 
(3)  On order of the mayor, provided that the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency has been declared by the governor of Georgia; or that the mayor is acting as the designee of the governor. 
a.  The mayor is hereby authorized to order the mobilization of any appropriate emergency response organization, or any portion thereof, as required to provide for increased readiness in the event of the threatened existence of an emergency prior to the activation of the EOP. 
b.  The city emergency management director is authorized to order the activation of the full EOP and all emergency response organizations in the event that an emergency has already occurred but neither the mayor nor his successor are available, nor can they be communicated with in a timely fashion; or, upon the request of the mayor, legally appointed successor, or the governing body of the city. 
(Ord. No. 58-A-2014, § 1, 12-12-2014) 
Sec. 18-5. - Role of the county and municipal governments during non-emergency periods. 
(a)  General powers and duties of local governments. 
(1)  It is the duty of government to provide for the public health, safety, and welfare of its citizens by making provisions for emergencies and disasters that may occur at some future date. The county and the city are authorized and empowered by the Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, as amended, to make, amend, and rescind such orders, rules, and regulations as may be necessary for emergency management purposes. All such orders, rules, and regulations must be consistent with any orders, rules, or regulations promulgated by the governor or by any state agency exercising a power delegated to it by the governor. 
(2)  All orders, rules, and regulations so promulgated shall have the full force and effect of law when a copy thereof is filed in the office of the city clerk. Laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations inconsistent with the Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981 or with any order, rule, or regulation issued under the authority of the Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981 or this chapter shall be suspended during a declaration of local emergency to the extent that the conflict exists. 
(3)  In order to attain uniformity so far as practicable throughout the United States in measures taken to aid emergency management, all actions taken under the authority of the Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981 and this chapter and all orders, rules, and regulations made pursuant thereto shall be taken or made with due consideration to the orders, rules, regulations, actions, recommendations, and requests of federal authorities relevant thereto and, to the extent permitted by law, shall be consistent with such orders, rules, regulations, actions, recommendations, and requests. 
(Ord. No. 58-A-2014, § 1, 12-12-2014) 
Sec. 18-6. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction, or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the city and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the mayor may declare a local emergency for the city. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided by this code section. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the mayor may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the city to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
a.  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the mayor finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the mayor shall execute and file with the city clerk a document marking the end of the declaration of local emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the mayor. The city council may, by resolution, end a declaration of local emergency at any time. 
(3)  Effect of declaration of local emergency. 
a.  Activation of the EOP. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the mayor shall automatically activate the city EOP and shall be the authority for deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
b.  The mayor shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred upon the emergency management agency, including the implementation of the EOP, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
c.  In responding and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations, the mayor or his/her designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting sites involved with emergency management functions. The mayor is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the city; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification at a meeting of the city council. 
d.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
(4)  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of local emergency and during the continuance of such declaration, the mayor is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the mayor may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate as well as any other emergency powers conferred upon the mayor by law. If any of these sections are included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
The powers shall include the ability to authorize the taking of such steps as are necessary and appropriate to ensure the life, health, safety and welfare of all citizens irrespective of whether such hazards that threaten the life, health, safety and welfare are found, during and/or after such an emergency or disaster event. 
(5)  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of local emergency, the city council is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of this chapter as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(6)  Additional emergency powers. The mayor shall have, and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
a.  To enforce all laws, rules, and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control of all civil forces and helpers in the city; 
b.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
c.  To control ingress and egress to and from a disaster area, the movement of persons within the area, and the occupancy of premises therein; 
d.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
e.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
f.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any county departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
g.  To utilize all available resources of the city and subordinate agencies over which the city has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; to include but not be limited to the city's state of local emergency compensation policy; 
h.  To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of city business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any city agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
i.  To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
j.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during and following a major disaster or emergency; 
k.  To conduct the affairs and business of the city at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the mayor and council shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
l.  To contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). 
m.  To suspend the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies. City officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
n.  To temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
o.  Authority to remove debris. The city, and its agents, subcontractors, employees or other designees, are hereby authorized to enter upon and remove debris from public and private roads, rights of way, storm drainage easements, including entry into private or gated communities for the purposes of emergency travel, storm water conveyance, protecting health and safety, facilitating response and recover operations, and for any other purpose the city determines is necessary to remove an immediate threat to life, public health, safety and economic recovery of both public and private property. This authority is directly associated with an emergency or disaster event which causes an immediate threat to life, public health, safety or the economic recovery of the city and is not considered part of the city's normal day to day uniform level of services. 
p.  To coordinate the exercise of the above emergency powers within the city. 
(7)  Format of declaration of local emergency. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "declaration of local emergency" shall be signed and filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. All emergency powers permitted under the state statutes contained in O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27 et seq., and as set forth in section 4-310(d) of the city's ordinance regarding emergency management, shall be in full force and effect during the declaration of local emergency and shall be implemented as needed to address any emergency or disaster. 
(8)  Overcharging prohibited. In order to preserve, protect or sustain the life, health or safety of persons, or their property, within the city limits designated in a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful, during the duration of the emergency or subsequent recovery period, for any person, firm or corporation located or doing business within the city limits to overcharge for any goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses, sold or rented, within the city. 
a.  Definitions. 
1.  Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses, which are in excess of the customary charges by 25 percent or, inapplicable cases, in excess of the suppliers' or providers' costs for such goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses, by 25 percent. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a 25 percent increase in the price at which the merchandise or rate, fee, cost/rental of housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in cost to the supplier directly attributable to the higher cost of material, supplies and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
2.  Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area designated in the declaration of local emergency, but shall not exceed six months after the declaration of local emergency has been terminated. 
This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of local emergency and the signing of a declaration stating that it is in effect. 
(9)  Zoning regulations suspended. 
a.  In order to preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within the city limits designated in a declaration of local emergency, temporary mobile/ manufactured/ industrialized homes, travel trailers, recreational vehicles, campers or mobile/manufactured/industrialized home parks, campgrounds or other living areas may be located on property approved by the city council in any zoning district. The parks, campgrounds or other living areas shall be designed by an engineer and plans shall be approved by the city planning and zoning department. Permits may be issued by the planning and zoning department to establish temporary mobile/manufactured/industrialized homes or mobile/manufactured/industrialized home parks for a period not to exceed 18 months. Such approval may only be extended by the city council beyond 18 months after a public hearing and a demonstrated finding of necessity on behalf of the city council. Except as provided herein, the city's land development code shall remain in full force and effect. 
b.  This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of local emergency and the signing of a declaration stating that it is in effect. 
(10)  Emergency business license. 
a.  Before conducting any business within an area within the city limits designated in a declaration of local emergency, a business license shall be obtained and posted at the work site. Said business license shall expire at the end of 12 months. The cost of the emergency business license shall be equal to the cost for a license issued under current regulations for the business conducted. 
b.  Applicants shall provide the following information when applying for a temporary business license: 
1.  Name of applicant; 
2.  Permanent address and telephone number of applicant; 
3.  Local address and telephone number of applicant; 
4.  Applicant's date of birth and age, if an individual; 
5.  Applicant's social security number or federal employer identification number; 
6.  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
7.  Tag registration for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
8.  List of cities where business has been conducted by the applicant within the past 12 months; 
9.  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
10.  Georgia state business license number, if required; 
c.  The temporary business license application shall be signed under oath by the applicant. 
d.  This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of local emergency and the signing of a declaration stating that it is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 58-A-2014, § 1, 12-12-2014; Ord. No. 09-2017 , §§ 1, 2, 4-27-2017) 
Sec. 18-7. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of local emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the mayor until the curfew is lifted. 
(1)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the mayor shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The mayor shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the city emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(2)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
a.  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
b.  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
c.  Authorized and essential personnel of the city; 
d.  Authorized national guard or federal military personnel; 
e.  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
f.  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
g.  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through the county emergency management agency (CEMA); 
h.  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
i.  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
j.  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by EMA, the city manager, and/or chief of police. 
(3)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(4)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of local emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 58-A-2014, § 1, 12-12-2014) 
Sec. 18-8. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. The city police department, and the officers of any other law enforcement agency authorized by the police chief and approved by the mayor to provide aid and assistance shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the mayor or local governing authority during an emergency. 
(1)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing additional charges under state law. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the mayor or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Each person assisting in the commission of a violation shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the mayor is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this code, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Liberality of construction. This chapter shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body of the city and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 58-A-2014, § 1, 12-12-2014) 
Sec. 18-9. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this article, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 58-A-2014, § 1, 12-12-2014) 
Sec. 18-10. - County ordinance controls. 
It is the intention of this chapter to be consistent in all respects with the county emergency management ordinance and the disaster recovery provisions thereof. Any inconsistency between this chapter and the county ordinance on the same subject matter is unintentional. The interpretation of this chapter is to be consistent with the ordinance of the county and the state laws pertaining to this subject matter. Each section of this chapter will defer, in the event of any conflict with the ordinance of the county, to the county ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 58-A-2014, § 1, 12-12-2014) 
Chapter 22 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Landscape contracting permit. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "landscape contractor" means any person engaged in the business of contracting for yard maintenance, tree removal or trimming, landscaping activities, mowing or the like. 
(b)  No person engaged in landscape contracting shall dispose of yard and/or tree trimmings at the city's facility without a permit issued by the city. Permits shall be issued annually at the cost established by the mayor and council. The cost shall be on file in the office of the city clerk 
(Ord. of 12-8-2005) 
Sec. 22-2. - Tobacco free environment. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Tobacco product. Smokeless tobacco, cigars, and cigarettes. 
Prohibited areas. Use of tobacco products shall be prohibited in the following areas: 
(1)  Within any city-owned facility at any time. This includes but is not limited to common work areas, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, hallways, lobby areas, restrooms, lunch/break rooms, and any enclosed areas. This applies to employees, visitors, and customers. 
(2)  Tobacco use shall not be allowed within any city-owned vehicle. 
Designated areas/designated times. Employees may only use tobacco products in designated areas at designated times: 
(1)  Each city facility will have a designated area located outside of the building where tobacco use will be allowed. 
(2)  Employees may use tobacco products during their morning, lunch, and afternoon breaks. No more than these three breaks may be taken per eight-hour shift. 
(3)  All materials used for smoking, including cigarette butts and matches, will be extinguished and properly disposed of in appropriate containers. If the designated tobacco use area is not properly maintained, it may be eliminated. 
(4)  Employees may not use tobacco products while performing their job. 
(b)  Employee assistance program. The city will assist any employee interested in quitting the use of tobacco through the employee assistance program. 
(c)  Violations. Any violation of this policy by an employee will be handled through standard disciplinary actions. 
(Ord. of 8-24-2006) 
Editor's note— Ord. of Aug. 24, 2006, §§ 1—3, set out provisions intended for use as § 23-1. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion with the concurrence of the city, these provisions have been included as § 22-2. 
Secs. 22-3—22-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES 

Sec. 22-29. - Nuisances declared. 
The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewerage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limitation, unusual or loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
(8)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent such activities; 
(10)  Refrigerators, stoves and other household appliances placed outside of structures controlled by the owner or tenant thereof; 
(11)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; and 
(12)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Code 1983, § 11-2-1; Ord. No. 08-2017 , § 1, 4-13-2017) 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-30. - Complaint of nuisance; hearing. 
Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the city marshal-health officer, who shall investigate and give notice to the violator to abate the nuisance within five calendar days, if a notice is so provided. If the person to whom said notice is provided wishes to appeal the notice of abatement, said person shall appeal to the city manager within the five-calendar-day abatement period. The city manager shall conduct a hearing within five calendar days of being so notified, and issue a final decision within five calendar days of the hearing. If abatement is decided, such shall be accomplished within five calendar days of the city manager's decision. 
(Code 1983, § 11-2-2) 
Sec. 22-31. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the city manager, that it must be immediately abated, the city manager may issue an order to the chief of police directing the nuisance to be abated. The chief of police, in such case, shall keep a record of the expenses and cost of abating same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues. 
(b)  Other city departments shall assist the chief of police as is necessary in abating nuisances hereunder. 
(Code 1983, § 11-2-3) 
Sec. 22-32. - Offense; penalty. 
It is declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense, subject to the general penalty set forth in section 1-8. 
(Code 1983, § 11-2-4) 
Secs. 22-33—22-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 22-68. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article shall be to require the maintenance of premises to retain property values and to protect the general environment and appearance of neighborhoods within the community. 
(Code 1983, § 5-3-1) 
Sec. 22-69. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory building means a carport, garage, storage building or other such not-for-habitation building on the premises. 
Boats, derelict, means a craft intended for water transportation which: 
(1)  Is unusable or unsafe for operation due to damage or disrepair or because one or more of its major parts has been removed or destroyed; or 
(2)  Constitutes a nuisance or health or safety hazard. 
Established driveway means an area that is paved, graveled, bare of vegetation, or otherwise clearly indicative of the area that is normally used for vehicles to enter onto or exit from real property onto a public or private street. 
Front yard means any portion of the property between the right-of-way line of an abutting street and the building line for the principal building on the lot and extending from property line to property line along such building line. If there is no building on the property, the entire property shall be deemed the front yard. 
Object means any item of personal property, other than a vehicle, boat or trailer-type vehicle, which is not related to the use and purpose for which the real property is occupied or owned or permitted by the applicable zoning classification. Examples for the purpose of this article shall include: junk materials, appliances or other household items, machinery and equipment, fallen trees or tree limbs, or other materials not forming part of a structure or landscaping. 
Person means any natural person, corporation, partnership, authority created by statute, association or other entity or combination thereof. 
To place means to establish the presence on property of an object which: 
(1)  Is not affixed to the real property and thus is capable of being moved or removed; 
(2)  Is present for a period of 30 consecutive days whether or not the location on the property is changed. 
Vehicle, automotive, means an automobile, truck, van or other motorized vehicle designed and intended to be used for transporting people or goods. 
Vehicle, derelict automotive, means a vehicle which: 
(1)  Is unusable or unsafe for operation due to damage or disrepair or because one or more of its major parts has been removed or destroyed; or 
(2)  Constitutes a nuisance or health or safety hazard. 
Vehicle, derelict, trailer-type, means a trailer-type vehicle which: 
(1)  Is dismantled or partially dismantled, deteriorated or not safe for use due to disrepair or damage; or 
(2)  Constitutes a nuisance or health or safety hazard. 
(Code 1983, § 5-3-2) 
Sec. 22-70. - Occupants or owners to keep premises free of litter, debris and junk materials. 
It shall be unlawful for the occupant or owner of premises to have or to place any of the following on the premises to the extent and in a manner that could threaten or endanger the public health, safety or welfare or could adversely affect and impair the economic value of adjacent property: 
(1)  Any accumulation of litter, debris, refuse, garbage or animal excrement on any front side or rear yard or on any porch, or underneath any building or in any accessory building. 
(2)  Any object, as defined by this article, on the front yard or on a front porch. 
(3)  Any object, as defined by this article, on the side or rear yards, or on side or rear porches or underneath any building or in any accessory building unless covered or enclosed so as not to be visible from a street or lane. 
(4)  Any derelict automotive vehicle, boat or trailer-type vehicle. 
(Code 1983, § 5-3-3) 
Sec. 22-71. - Occupant or owners to keep premises free of derelict vehicles and boats. 
It shall be unlawful to place, keep, store or allow to remain any derelict automotive vehicle, or derelict boat or trailer-type vehicle or parts thereof on a front yard or on an established driveway of a front yard and it shall be unlawful to place, keep, store or allow to remain any derelict automotive vehicle or derelict boat or trailer-type vehicle, or parts thereof, on the side or rear yards if visible from a street, lane or adjoining property unless enclosed in an accessory building so as not to be visible from the street, lane or adjoining property. 
(Code 1983, § 5-3-4) 
Sec. 22-72. - Construction activity exempt. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to material which is being used in construction activity taking place on the premises provided the construction activity complies with applicable ordinances and is being diligently pursued. 
(Code 1983, § 5-3-5) 
Sec. 22-73. - Enforcement. 
Owners or occupants of premises on which there is a violation of this article will be given written notice to abate the violation within 30 days. Failure to abate the violation within the 30-day period will result in a subpoena being issued for an appearance in court on a misdemeanor charge. In cases involving immediate health, safety and welfare violations the immediate issuance of a summons is permitted. 
(Code 1983, § 5-3-6) 
Secs. 22-74—22-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISES 

Sec. 22-110. - Definitions. 
Definitions of technical terms used which are not herein defined shall be obtained from publications of acoustical terminology issued by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) as its successor body. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ambient sound level means the noise associated with a given environment, exclusive of a particular noise being tested, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources near and far, exclusive of intruding noises from isolated identifiable sources. 
A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities, or similar property. 
Decibel (dB) means a logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure used in describing the relative loudness of level of sound. 
Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical or psychological trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
Emergency work means any work performed for the purpose of alleviating or resolving an emergency. 
Impulsive sound means a sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts, and the discharge of firearms. 
Motor vehicle means any motor-operated vehicle licensed for use on the public highways, but not including a motorcycle. 
Motorboat means any vessel which operates on water and which is propelled by a motor, including, but not limited to, boats, barges, amphibious craft, water ski towing devices and hover craft. 
Motorcycle means any motor vehicle having a saddle or seat for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground. The term shall include, but not be limited to, motorized bicycles and motor scooters. 
Noise means any sound which disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
Noise control officer means the person designated by the city having responsibility for the enforcement of any provision of this article. 
Noise disturbance means any sound which endangers or injures the welfare, safety or health of human beings, or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or devalues or injures personal or real property, or is hereinafter defined. 
Noise sensitive activities means activities which should be conducted under conditions of exceptional quiet including, but not limited to, operation of schools, libraries open to the public, churches, hospitals, and nursing homes. 
Noise sensitive area means any area designated for the purpose of ensuring exceptional quiet and clearly posted with "noise sensitive area" signs, because of the noise sensitive activities conducted therein. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, operative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivisions of this state, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
Powered model vehicle means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne, or land borne model plane, vessel, or vehicle, which is not designed to carry persons, including, but not limited to any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, lane or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Public space means any real property, including any structure thereon, which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Pure tone means any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or a set of single pitches. 
Real property boundary means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intra-building real property divisions. 
Receiving land use means the use or occupancy of the property from which a complaint is made concerning noise which received the transmission of sound as hereinafter defined, however, the allowable decibel levels are based on the zoning district as opposed to the use of the receiving land. 
Recreational vehicle means any race car, motorcycle, or any other motorized vehicle equipped for use in racing or other recreational events or uses off of public rights-of-way on public or private property. 
Residential means any property on which is located a building or structure used wholly or partially for living or sleeping purposes. 
Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
Sound level means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B, or C as specified in American National Standards Institute Specifications for Sound Level Meters (ANSI S1.41971, or the latest approved revision thereof). If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply. 
Sound level meter means an instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time average, output or display meter, and weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels, which complies with American National Standards Institute Standard 1.4-1971 as revised. 
Sound pressure means the instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by sound energy. 
Used and occupied mean and include the words "intended," "designed," or "arranged to be used or occupied." 
(Code 1983, § 11-3-2) 
Sec. 22-111. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency. 
(2)  The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. 
(3)  Agricultural activities, exclusive of those involving the ownership or possession of animals or birds. 
(4)  Public mass transportation vehicles. 
(5)  Church or clock carillons, bells, or chimes. 
(6)  The emission of sound in the discharge of weapons or in fireworks displays for which a permit has been issued. 
(7)  Public works projects specifically approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1983, § 11-3-3) 
Sec. 22-112. - Noise disturbance prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, except as permitted, any noise disturbance, or any noise in excess of the limits for such noise established in this section. 
(b)  Maximum permissible sound levels . With the exception of sound levels elsewhere specifically authorized by this article, table 1 sets forth the maximum permissible sound levels allowed at or within the real property boundary of a receiving land use. Any activity or use that produces a sound in excess of such noise levels for a receiving land use shall be deemed a noise disturbance and is in violation of this article. 
(c)  Measurement of sound . The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a sound level meter meeting the standards prescribed by the American National Standards Institute or its successor body. The instrument shall be maintained in calibration and good working order. Octave band corrections may be employed in meeting the response specification. A calibration check shall be made of the system at the time of any noise measurement. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the noise source. The microphone used during measurement shall be positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured noise. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used when required. Traffic, other transportation noise sources and other background noises shall not be considered in taking measurements except where such background noise interferes with the primary noise being measured. It is the intention that this sound to be measured is what is being created by the sound complained of excluding intruding noises from isolated identifiable sources, but including ambient sound level. The measure of all sound levels shall be made as close to the property line of the receiving land use as is practical. 
TABLE 1  Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use 

 
(1) As set forth in the Land Development Code. 
(2) Any zoning district containing the letter "R." 
(3) Unless otherwise stated in this article. 
(4) For any source of sound which emits a pure tone, the maximum sound level limits set shall be reduced by five dBA. 
(d)  Equipment use restrictions. Regardless of decibel levels, the following equipment may not be operated between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.: Monday—Friday and on Saturday and Sunday 8:00 p.m. to 10:00 a.m.: 
(1)  Electrical power tools. 
(2)  Motor powered, muffler equipped lawn, garden, and tree trimming equipment except residential lawn mowers. 
(3)  Construction equipment, which includes landscaper's lawn mowers and other landscaping motorized equipment. . 
(Code 1983, § 11-3-4; Ord. of 4-29-2005; Ord. of 7-26-2007) 
Secs. 22-113—22-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SOLID WASTE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 22-148—22-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; litter control generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 22-166. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ashes means and includes the waste products from coal, wood and other fuels used for cooking and heating from all public and private residences and establishments. 
Building rubbish means waste material resulting from construction, remodeling, repairs and demolition operations on houses, commercial buildings and other structures, including driveways and walks, and it comprises waste and rejected matter such as excavated earth, stones, bricks, plaster, wallpaper, sheetrock and lathes, lumber, shingles, tile, concrete and waste parts occasioned by the installation or replacement of plumbing, heating systems, electrical work and roofing. 
Garbage means waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used for or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Industrial waste means waste materials from factories, processing plants, wholesale establishments, assembling plants or shops and garages, such as paper, cardboard, cartons, food processing wastes, cinders and ashes, lumber scraps, sawdust excelsior, shavings, floor sweepings, metal scrap and shavings, glass and other waste products. 
Rubbish means a variety of combustible and noncombustible waste not subject to rapid decomposition derived from places such as residences, commercial areas and institutions and shall include paper, rags, plastics, cartons, boxes, cans, bottles, glass, crockery, excelsior, rubber, discarded clothing and similar materials. 
Scale means that certain measuring device maintained by the city at the department of public works transfer station used to calculate the amount and/or quantity of solid waste for purposes of disposal and/or recycling. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible waste, except human body waste, and includes garbage, rubbish, paper cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, tin cans, glass, crockery, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, waste materials generated in industrial operations, residue incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, construction wastes and any other wastes in a solid or semi-solid state, not otherwise defined in this section. 
Standard container means a standard, uniform rollout container with a capacity of between 90 and 105 gallons and attached lid, furnished by the contractor. 
Waste means unwanted or discarded material, except human body waste. 
Yard rubbish means tree branches, stumps, twigs, grass and shrub trimmings, bushes, weeds, leaves and general yard and garden waste materials and includes stone and dirt raking and any waste materials resulting from landscaping. 
(Code 1983, § 5-2-1; Ord. No. 25-2015 , § 1, 9-10-2015) 
Sec. 22-167. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any filth of any kind or slops, garbage, paper, bottles, tin cans, broken glassware or crockery upon the strand or upon any street, lane, thoroughfare or public place within the corporate limits. Every tenant or occupant of a house or other premises opposite or nearest to which any filth, slops, garbage, paper, bottles, tin cans, broken glassware or crockery may be found shall be presumed to be the offender. 
(Code 1970, § 8-1; Code 1983, § 5-2-2) 
Sec. 22-168. - Signs, notices and handouts. 
(a)  It is unlawful to attach signs, placards or banners on trees or poles on rights-of-way or on any public property within the city without a permit from city hall. 
(b)  It is unlawful to place leaflets, advertisements, circular or similar matter on vehicles. All such handouts must be delivered to individuals in person. 
(Code 1983, § 5-2-3) 
Sec. 22-169. - Building waste—Accumulations prohibited. 
(a)  Any person who has contracted with any other person within the city, either on an hourly basis or a job contract price, whose work produces an accumulation or volume of building rubbish shall be required to remove and dispose of any such accumulation resulting therefrom. All construction and demolition contractors must have on-site receptacles or containers. The site must be kept in a reasonably clean and litter-free condition. Yard rubbish and yard trimmings shall be disposed of per subsection 22-192(d), by placing same adjacent to refuse carts. 
(b)  On any construction site at which a container is used to store debris and trash during the project, whether such container be a dumpster or other container of any sort, when active work ceases on the project for every day, or any given day, a secure cover shall be placed over the dumpster or container so as to prevent trash or construction debris to be subject to being blown out of the dumpster or container. 
(c)  On construction sites where no container or dumpster is used, a confined storage area must be established and appropriate measures shall be taken to prevent trash and debris from being subject to being blown out of a confined area. 
(Code 1970, § 8-2; Code 1983, § 5-2-4; Ord. of 5-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-170. - Authority to order removal. 
The city marshal or the public works superintendent of the city shall have the authority to direct the removal, placing, disposition and disposal of any accumulation or volume of brush, bric-a-brac, scrap lumber, trash or rubbish resulting from any job or contract mentioned in section 22-191. 
(Code 1970, § 8-3; Code 1983, § 5-2-5) 
Sec. 22-171. - Penalty for violation. 
In the event any accumulation or volume of brush, bric-a-brac, scrap lumber, trash or rubbish mentioned in section 22-191 is not removed within ten days after completion of that job or contract, or within ten days after a work stoppage occurs on an incomplete job or contract, a person having contracted, as well as the person within the city contracted with, either or both, jointly or severally committing a violation, shall be cited to appear in court for that violation and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1970, § 8-4; Code 1983, § 5-2-6) 
Sec. 22-172. - Weeds and other growths—Notices to cut or remove. 
(a)  Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of ten inches (254mm). All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
(b)  Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation. Rodents as used herein, shall only include house rats of the following species: Black rats, Rattus rattus, and Norway rats, Rattus norwegicus. 
(c)  Exemptions from weed restrictions. The following situations are exempt from any provisions of the weed ordinance: 
(1)  Xerophytic plantings established to conserve water resources. 
(2)  Lawns or gardens planted or established to preserve wild flowers or other native vegetation or gardens established to attract birds or butterflies. 
(3)  Natural ecosystems such as maritime forests (trees plus understory shrubs and vines) and marsh edge areas including wax myrtle (Myrica cerifera), Redcedar (Juniperus silicola), Toothache tree (Xanoxylum clava-hercules), and Bumelia trees plus the natural vines. 
(4)  Any land protected by conservation easements. 
(5)  Marshes and dunes and interdune meadows protected by state and local ordinances. 
(d)  Buffer requirement. Notwithstanding the exemptions in subsection (c)(1)—(5), any such land, planting, or ecosystem that directly abuts developed property is required to have a five-foot buffer zone that complies with the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Trimming of certain trees conditional. Trimming of wax myrtles (Myrica cerifera) or other trees or shrubs in interdune areas is allowed only under the following conditions: 
(1)  That permits to trim are obtained from the zoning department of the city and the state department of natural resources. 
(2)  That no wax myrtle or any other shrub or tree in this area is trimmed lower than five feet. 
(3)  That such trimming is only allowed in the fall or winter. (Many birds including the at-risk Painted Bunting use the natural shrubs for nesting and breeding during spring and summer.) 
(Code 1970, § 8-6; Code 1983, § 5-2-8; Ord. of 11-9-2005; Ord. of 8-10-2006) 
Sec. 22-173. - Failure to remove weeds; removal and assessment by city. 
If the property owner, his duly authorized agent or occupant, after receiving notice of a violation of section 22-172 fails to have the weeds or rank vegetation cut or removed from his property within the time period provided within the notice, the governing body may order the cutting and removal or shall cause it to be cut and the same removed and charge the expenses thereof, including inspection, advertising, labor and equipment costs, to the owner, his duly authorized agent or occupant. 
(Code 1970, § 8-7; Code 1983, § 5-2-9) 
Sec. 22-174. - Issuance of execution; lien on property. 
If charges prescribed in section 22-173 are due and remain unpaid for a period of 30 days after any work is completed, the treasurer shall issue an execution against the owner, his duly authorized agent or occupant of any property from which any growth has been cut and removed, or any other persons as may be liable therefor, which execution shall be a lien upon the premises and, when recorded in the general execution docket of the county, shall be a lien on all of the property of the defendant in execution from the date of that record. 
(Code 1970, § 8-8; Code 1983, § 5-2-10) 
Sec. 22-175. - Levy of execution. 
Execution provided in section 22-174 shall be levied and the property sold in the manner now provided for the levy and collection of executions issued by the treasurer for taxes, and the proceedings and provisions for the filing of an affidavit of illegality by the defendant in execution, as well as the proceedings for the filing of a claim to the property levied upon by a third person, shall in all respects be similar to the proceedings and provisions of the law applicable to the levy of executions for taxes. 
(Code 1970, § 8-9; Code 1983, § 5-2-11) 
Sec. 22-176. - Penalty. 
Violators of sections 22-167—22-175 are subject to fines under the general penalty of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 5-2-12) 
Sec. 22-177. - Use of DPW transfer station. 
(a)  City residents may use the department of public works transfer station for dry trash and recycling material at a rate to be set by the mayor and council and on file with the clerk of council and the department of public works. 
(b)  Residents may bring dry trash and recycling, and contractors and residents involved in small renovation projects, such as door replacements, deck repairs, or plumbing, may also use the transfer station at the fee set by the mayor and council. However, contractors and residents involved in new construction and renovation of rooms, homes, buildings, or other structures creating construction debris may not use the transfer station but are to comply with section 22-169. 
(Ord. No. 27-2015 , § 1, 9-10-2015) 
Secs. 22-178—22-190. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Refuse Collection 

Sec. 22-191. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apartments, roominghouses, hotels, tourist courts and motels mean and includes those facilities licensed as such by the city in which two or more units are rented or offered to the public for rental. 
Ashes means the residue resulting from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible material. 
Building rubbish means waste material resulting from construction, remodeling, repairs and demolition operations on houses, commercial buildings and other structures, including driveways and walks, and it comprises waste and rejected matter such as excavated earth, stones, bricks, plaster, wallpaper, sheetrock and lathes, lumber, shingles, tile, concrete and waste parts occasioned by the installation or replacement of plumbing, heating systems, electrical work and roofing. 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Disposal means and includes the storage, collection, disposal or handling of refuse. 
Family dwelling unit means a structure providing housing for a collective body of persons forming one household under a common head. 
Garbage means all animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooling and consumption of foods. 
Industrial waste means waste materials from factories, processing plants, wholesale establishments, assembling plants or shops and garages, such as paper, cardboard, cartons, food processing wastes, cinders and ashes, lumber scraps, sawdust excelsior, shavings, floor sweepings, metal scrap and shavings, glass and other waste products. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvacultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludge or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Person means and includes any natural person, association, partnership, firm or corporation. 
Privacy fence means a wood, metal or masonry structure not to exceed eight feet in height from average adjacent grade. 
Refuse means all solid wastes, except body wastes, and shall include garbage, ashes and rubbish. 
Rubbish means and includes glass, metal, paper, or nonputrescible solid wastes. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputresible waste, except human body waste, and includes garbage, rubbish, paper cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, tin cans, glass, crockery, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, waste materials generated in industrial operations, residue incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, construction wastes and any other wastes in a solid or semi-solid state, not otherwise defined in this section. 
Standard container means a standard, uniform roll out container with a capacity of between 90 and 105 gallons and attached lid, furnished by the contractor. 
Waste means unwanted or discarded material, except human body waste. 
Yard rubbish means tree branches, stumps, twigs, grass and shrub trimmings, bushes, weeds, leaves and general yard and garden waste materials and includes stone and dirt raking and any waste materials resulting from landscaping. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvacultural operations. 
(Code 1970, § 8-17; Code 1983, § 5-2-21) 
Sec. 22-192. - Storage practices. 
(a)  Preparation of refuse. Residential refuse shall be placed in uniform roll out carts/standard containers as provided. 
(b)  Refuse containers. 
(1)  Commercial refuse and commercial solid waste shall be placed in a commercial dumpster of sufficient size to handle the amount of refuse generated by said commercial establishment. In the event that a commercial establishment cannot have a dumpster placed on-site, sufficient uniform roll out carts shall be used. 
(2)  Commercial dumpsters shall be enclosed by a privacy fence not less than six feet or more than eight feet in height. Flooring shall be a concrete masonry pad sufficient to place the required size of the dumpster on. Enclosures shall be constructed to include cement filled steel posts with a minimum height of five feet to be placed three feet from the sides of enclosure. Enclosures shall be a minimum of 11 feet wide and 11 feet in depth with a front clearance for gating to be 180 degrees, with an access lane of no less than 100 feet of unobscured finished surface. Dumpster flooring shall be placed at the same elevation as finished grade of lot surface. 
(c)  Storage of refuse. 
(1)  Each householder, commercial establishment or person having refuse shall provide himself with approved refuse containers. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to place refuse in any street, alley or any other public place, or upon private property, whether owned or not, unless that refuse is placed in an approved container, as provided in this division. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to place refuse in any stream or body of water, or in any place inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Solid waste or recycling carts shall not be placed in the city right-of-way before 12:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled pickup day and shall be removed from the city right-of-way no later than 12:00 p.m. the day after the scheduled pickup day. Each resident, property owner, agent, manager and/or occupant of a property is responsible for compliance with this provision. The penalty for a violation of this subsection shall be $50.00 per citation. 
(d)  Storage of yard trimmings and yard rubbish. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings and yard rubbish with municipal solid waste within the city. 
(2)  Yard trimmings and yard rubbish shall not be disposed at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city. 
(3)  Yard trimmings and yard rubbish shall be sorted and stored in the following manner: yard trimmings and yard rubbish which have not been utilized for composting mulch, or otherwise revised/recycled shall be placed adjacent to refuse containers to be readily accessible to the collector, as follows: 
a.  Leaves, yard clippings, paper, straw shall be placed in watertight bags or other suitable containers which, when full, do not exceed 35 pounds in weight. 
b.  Palm fronds shall be stacked and placed adjacent to 90-gallon roll out containers so that three palm fronds may be picked up conveniently. 
c.  Heavy brush and tree branches no longer than four feet in length and six inches in diameter shall be placed in a pile no larger that 4' x 4' x 4'. Brush will be placed adjacent to the cart. 
(Code 1970, § 8-18; Code 1983, § 5-2-22; Ord. of 4-10-2005(01), § 1; Ord. No. 04-2005, 5-26-2005; Ord. No. 18-2012, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 22-193. - Containers; collection practices. 
It is the city's intention to provide each residential and commercial unit within the city one uniform rollout container for which a monthly fee shall be set by the mayor and council. Customers requiring additional containers will arrange through the city for such additional containers and pay a monthly fee set therefor by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1983, § 5-2-23; Ord. of 11-27-2006) 
Sec. 22-194. - Disposal of refuse. 
It shall be unlawful to dump, burn, bury, destroy, or otherwise dispose of refuse within the jurisdictional limits of the city except at the city approved refuse disposal site or, in the case of vegetable waste, in a home, business, or community composting system. 
(Code 1970, § 8-20; Code 1983, § 5-2-24; Ord. No. 02-2015, § 1, 1-15-2015) 
Sec. 22-195. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates provisions contained in sections 22-192—22-194 of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $300.00 and a jail term not to exceed 20 days, either or both, all at the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1970, § 8-23; Code 1983, § 5-2-25) 
Sec. 22-196. - Recycling. 
Each residence and commercial unit that utilizes the city waste removal contracted services is to be provided with a recycle bin at such cost as may be determined by the mayor and council on file in the office of the clerk of council. The charge shall be added to the billing for the water/sewer services. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, a recycling cart is to be provided to each residence qualifying for the city's senior homestead exemption pursuant to section 58-30 at no cost. 
(Code 1983, § 5-2-26; Ord. of 10-9-2008(2); Ord. No. 04-2015, § 1, 1-15-2015; Ord. No. 10-2016 , § 1, 8-11-2016) 
Chapter 23 - ETHICS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 54-2011, adopted July 28, 2011, repealed former Ch. 23, Arts. I, II, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as set out in the attachment to said ordinance. Former Ch. 23 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord.(4) of Dec. 11, 2008. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City official shall be any person who is an elected official of the City of Tybee Island and anyone appointed by the mayor and council of the city to any board, commission, authority, or position of the city. City official shall not include paid employees of the city who come under the city manager's control or the city manager, city attorney, city clerk, or a municipal court judge. A paid employee under the control of the city manager, the city manager, the city clerk, the city attorney and the municipal court judges shall be held to the same ethical standards as a "city official." 
Government or city shall be construed to mean the City of Tybee Island, Georgia government. 
Immediate family shall apply to blood or marital relationships of the city official, including a city official's spouse, children, parents and siblings and shall further include any member of an official's household. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011; Ord. No. 05A-2017 , § 1, 7-13-2017) 
Sec. 23-2. - Acceptance of gifts. 
With exception of campaign contributions which shall be reported in accordance with Georgia Laws, no city official shall solicit or accept directly or indirectly anything of value from any person, corporation, or group which has, or is seeking: 
(1)  To obtain, contractual or other business or financial relationships with the City of Tybee Island; 
(2)  Where in exchange for the thing of value one seeks to have a city official exercise a matter of discretion in his or her favor; or 
(3)  Where in exchange for the thing of value one seeks to have or has interests which may be affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duty of the city official, accomplished, defeated, deferred or otherwise acted upon. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-3. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this section that city officials avoid any action whether or not specifically prohibited by section 23-2 which might result in, or create the appearance of, the following: 
(1)  Using public office for private gain; 
(2)  Impeding government efficiency or economy; or 
(3)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the government; or 
(4)  Purposefully or intentionally violating laws involving moral turpitude as defined by Georgia law. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-4. - Financial interests of members. 
City officials may not: 
(1)  Have direct or indirect financial interests that conflict substantially with their responsibilities and duties as government servants; or 
(2)  Engage in, directly or indirectly, financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained from their office. Aside from these restrictions, city officials are free to engage in lawful financial transactions to the same extent as private citizens. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-5. - Use of public property. 
A city official shall not use city government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor direct employees to use such property for the personal purposes of such official. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-6. - Use of confidential information. 
A city official shall not directly or indirectly, make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, official information not made available to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-7. - Coercion by city official. 
A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to him or her or persons within his or her immediate family, or those with whom an official has business or financial ties. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-8. - Voting in matters of personal interest. 
A city official shall not participate in any matter and shall recuse him/herself on an ordinance or amendment in a meeting that would directly affect his or her private business, business interests, property; nor such interests of his or her immediate family. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-9. - Unauthorized purchases. 
A city official shall not order any goods and services for the City of Tybee Island, nor obligate the city funds for any payment, without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-10. - Meetings of the council. 
Meetings of the council shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A., Tit. 50, Ch. 14, as amended, and O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1, as amended, as it applies to municipalities. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-11. - City attorneys used for private business. 
A city official shall not use the attorney or attorneys who are under retainer by the City of Tybee Island for personal or private business without paying just compensation. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-12. - Unauthorized use of public employees. 
A city official shall not use his or her superior position to request or require an employee to: 
(1)  Do clerical work on behalf of his or her family, business, social, church or fraternal interests; 
(2)  Purchase goods and services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; 
(3)  Work for him or her personally without offering just compensation; and/or 
(4)  Perform work allegedly for the benefit of the city without prior official authorization. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-13. - Travel expenses. 
A city official shall not draw per diem or expense monies from the City of Tybee Island to attend a seminar, convention, or conference and then fail to attend the seminar, convention, or conference without refunding the pro-rata unused per diem or expense monies of the city. This not to include cancellation fee(s) for good cause. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-14. - Presumption. 
In reference to acts or omissions on which the city attorney has given an opinion, an official acting consistently with the opinion shall be presumed to be acting in accordance with the obligations imposed under the ethics ordinance and not in violation thereof, however the final determination as to whether or not a violation has occurred is to be determined by the ethics commission and/or city council as otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-15. - Penalties. 
The code of ethics to be observed by city officials are set forth herein, and any violation thereof, shall subject the offender to disciplinary action which may include censure and either public or private reprimand. Power to administer a greater punishment shall include power to administer the lesser. Further, in cases involving intentional acts, the general penalties of the Code of Tybee Island may be used as disciplinary action for violations of the code of ethics. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Secs. 23-16—23-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ETHICS COMMISSION 

Sec. 23-31. - Creation and composition. 
(a)  There is hereby created the ethics commission, an agency of the City of Tybee Island. By creating the commission, council intends to: 
(1)  Enhance the public's confidence in the integrity of city government and management; and 
(2)  Provide a facilitative and advisory resource that assists the city council, the city manager and others to leverage, implement, administer and enforce this code. 
(b)  The commission is to be composed of seven. Members of the commission are to be appointed by city council as set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  As used within this chapter, "commission" means "the ethics commission" or any subset of the ethics commission acting on behalf of the whole commission. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-32. - Duties and powers. 
(a)  The ethics commission has the duty and authority to: 
(1)  Establish (and amend as needed) bylaws, policies and procedures consistent with this Code that govern internal organization and conduct of commission affairs; 
(2)  Schedule and hold commission meetings as needed to discharge duties; 
(3)  Receive and consider complaints that this code was violated; 
(4)  Interpret this code as it applies to complaints of violation and other issues in order to reach opinions as to whether certain actions, behaviors, or conduct constitute violation of this code; 
(5)  Formally present or deliver the commission's opinions to council; 
(6)  Make proposals or recommendations to the city council for the adoption of any revisions or amendments to this ethics code; 
(7)  Publish opinions and other documents related to this code; 
(8)  Engage in training activities; 
(9)  Issue advisory opinions as provided in this chapter; 
(10)  Initiate any investigation or perform any other function determined by the commission to be essential to fulfilling its purpose or discharging duties established within this code. 
(b)  Members of the commission are subject to this code. Each has special responsibility to identify and acknowledge any conflict of interest in commission matters and abide by the rules of recusal when he/she has a conflict of interest in a pending commission decision. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-33. - Member qualifications. 
(a)  Upon appointment to the commission, a person must have resided in the city for at least one year, be registered to vote in city elections and have signed a statement of qualification. 
(b)  For the duration of service on the commission a member must: 
(1)  Reside in the City of Tybee Island; 
(2)  Be registered to vote in city elections; 
(3)  Not hold any other elected office or become a candidate for elected office of the United States, this state, this county, or the city; 
(4)  Not be a city employee; and 
(5)  Exhibit strong moral character and good citizenship. 
(c)  Statement of qualification: 

 
(d)  Statements of qualification are to be retained by the clerk of council as official city records. 
(e)  As a member of a city agency having semi-judicial function, a person is to take an oath of office before each term of service as a commission member. The mayor is to administer the oath. A written representation of the oath is to be signed by the appointee and retained by the clerk of council as an official city record. 
(f)  If member becomes disqualified, he or she must resign from the commission. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-34. - Terms of service. 
(a)  Those members of the commission currently serving as of the adoption of this chapter shall continue to serve under their original appointment and for the full term thereof. 
(b)  Council intends for commission members to serve two "staggered" terms. 
(c)  Members having odd position numbers are to serve terms expiring on the day before the annual meeting in odd-numbered years. Members having even numbers are to serve two-year terms expiring on the day before the annual meeting in even-numbered years. 
(d)  Removal of members of the ethics commission other than by resignation or expiration of term shall be for cause as determined by the mayor and council following a public hearing. As used herein, "cause" shall include but not be limited to, failure to attend meetings of the ethics commission on a regular basis; when there is a recommendation from the ethics commission for conduct allegedly reasonably calculated to result in the ethics commission, the city or the city council being held up to ridicule; while a member, conviction of a crime which is a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or dishonesty, or of an ordinance violation involving moral turpitude or dishonesty; a lack of qualification as determined by the ethics commission and/or the mayor and council; and conduct or circumstances determined by the mayor and council to justify removal in the best interest of the city. There is no property right in an appointment and the existence of cause as grounds for removal is not to be considered as creating any property right in the appointed position, nor is the existence of any hearings or procedures to be deemed or considered as creating any property right. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-35. - Voting. 
(a)  "Voting panel" means the group of commission members entitled to participate in a commission matter. 
(1)  When the commission is not in session (i.e., meeting), the voting panel is composed of members. 
(2)  During a commission meeting or hearing and for a particular matter, the voting panel is composed of Members in attendance. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-36. - Meetings. 
(a)  Except as allowed or required by state law, all meetings of the ethics commission are to be open to the public, publicized as required by state law and compliant with all requirements imposed by the Georgia open records and meetings laws. 
(b)  The ethics commission is to hold an annual meeting in February. 
(c)  The presiding officer or a majority of the voting panel may call additional meetings on an as-needed basis. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-37. - Appointments and nominations. 
(a)  Appointments to fill vacancies. 
(1)  Each vacated commission position is to be filled by council appointment based on majority vote or other method adopted by council. 
(2)  No person appointed to serve on the first commission or any commission thereafter is to be considered "the appointee" of a particular council member. 
(b)  Annual appointments. This topic does not encompass mid-term vacancies. 
(1)  On the day before the annual meeting in 2009 and on each such day thereafter, the terms of five members expire. At the last regular council meeting in January of each year after 2008, council is to appoint five members to fill the positions with expiring terms. 
(2)  Members associated with expiring terms may be reappointed. 
(3)  The mayor is to assign odd position numbers to the members appointed during odd-numbered years. Likewise, the mayor is to assign even position numbers to members appointed during even numbered years. 
(4)  Commission bylaws or policies are to give guidance to situations and circumstances that are not covered in preceding items of this topic. 
(c)  Mid-term vacancies. 
(1)  When any member vacates or announces intention to vacate a commission position before the associated term of service expires, the presiding officer is to request council to appoint a member to the position. The request may be accompanied by nominations from the voting panel. 
(2)  A person appointed by council to fill a vacated position assumes the status, position number and the unexpired portion of the term associated with the former member. 
(d)  Nominations. 
(1)  Any person interested in serving on the commission may nominate themselves by submitting a completed qualification form to the clerk of council. This applies to incumbent members occupying commission positions with approaching term expiration dates. 
(2)  Council may solicit additional nominations for commission membership from the general public, from council members or from the ethics commission. The clerk of council is to contact such nominees for the purpose of determining their interest and/or to have them sign a statement of qualification. 
(3)  Council intends that the appointment process not interfere with the effectiveness of the commission. Ideally, at any point in time, there will be several nominees so that, when necessary, the appointment process will be expedited. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-38. - Officers. 
(a)  At each annual meeting after February 2009, the voting panel is to elect two members to serve as chairperson and vice-chairperson of the commission. These officers are to serve as such until the next annual meeting. If for some reason the voting panel fails to elect a chair or vice-chair at an annual meeting, the incumbent may remain in office until a successor is properly elected by the members. 
(b)  An incumbent may be re-elected to serve as an officer. 
(c)  If the chair or vice-chair leaves office before the term of office expires but remains on the commission, the voting panel is to elect a principal member to serve in the office until the next annual meeting. 
(d)  If an office becomes vacant because of a principal position vacancy, the voting panel is to elect a replacement officer after the principal position is filled by council appointment. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-39. - Compensation, expenses and staffing. 
(a)  Members of the ethics commission are not to be compensated. 
(b)  A member may request the city for reimbursement of reasonable expenses incurred as a direct result of performing commission duties. 
(c)  The city manager is to assign a capable staff member to serve as recording secretary and to make available appropriate and sufficient meeting space. 
(d)  The clerk of council or designee is to serve as the filing clerk for the commission, receive complaints and to publish notices of ethics commission meetings upon request of the commission's presiding officer. 
(e)  The clerk of council and the city manager are to provide other support requested by the commission and approved by council. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-40. - Counsel. 
(a)  The city attorney is to be the legal advisor for the ethics commission except in circumstances where doing so would result in the city attorney's conflict of interest in a complaint involving a council member as respondent, complainant, or otherwise. 
(b)  If the commission requires legal services that the city attorney cannot provide or is not available to provide, the commission is to be represented and assisted in carrying out its responsibilities by an attorney appointed by the ethics commission and confirmed by council. A person serving as commission attorney is subject to this code. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-41. - Limitation of liability. 
To the fullest extent permitted by law, no member of the ethics commission, or any person acting on behalf of the ethics commission, is to be liable to any person for any damages arising out of the enforcement or operation of this ethics code except in the case of willful or wanton misconduct. This limitation of liability is to apply to the city, the members of the ethics commission and any person acting under the direction of the ethics commission. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-42. - Advisory opinions. 
(a)  The commission may render an advisory opinion based on a real or hypothetical set of circumstances and the commission's interpretation of this code as it applies to the circumstances. 
(b)  An advisory opinion is to be rendered only in response to a written request (from a city official) that fully describes the circumstances and the question to be answered. The request must be signed. 
(c)  A member of the commission may submit a request for an advisory opinion. 
(d)  Such advisory opinions are to be formulated during formal commission meetings and are to be made part of the commission's open records. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-43. - Complaints. 
(a)  In general. 
(1)  For this code to be most effective, the public and city officials must have access to a fair, expedient, effective and evolving complaint process that is not encumbered by the need to amend this code. To that end, the commission is to develop, publish and maintain a complaint policy that explains procedures to be followed, timeframes to be honored and the roles, responsibilities and rights of the complainant, city official alleged to have violated this code and members of the commission. 
(2)  The policy may include steps, options or requirements beyond the general provisions contained in this chapter. If, at any point in time, such policy does not address the requirements of a particular complaint, the commission is to make formal adjustment to the policy to ensure the fair and appropriate handling of the complaint and such complaints thereafter. As the complaint policy evolves, revisions are subject to the approval of the city attorney and/or city council. The essential components of the complaint policy are outlined in the following provisions of this section. 
(b)  Restraints. The policy is to specify the restraints, if any, that apply to the commission, the complaint and/or the person against whom a complaint is filed (the respondent). 
(c)  To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, complaints may not be accepted against any person, whether currently serving as a city official or not, from 90 days prior to the beginning of the qualifying process for the elected office at issue through the date the election results for that office are certified. The time for filing complaints will not run during this period. Properly filed complaints will be accepted and processed after the election results have been certified. 
(d)  Submission and qualification. 
(1)  A person (complainant) alleging that a city official (respondent) violated any provision of this code may submit a written and signed complaint declaration to the clerk of council. The declaration, a written statement made under penalty for false swearing, must meet the qualifications described in the complaint policy. 
(2)  The clerk of council's office is to deliver the declaration of complaint to the presiding commission officer who thereafter communicates the complaint to commission members. 
(3)  Subsequently commission members, in a manner consistent with the complaint policy, are to determine if the complaint qualifies for further action. 
(4)  A disqualified complaint declaration is to be returned to the complainant and otherwise dealt with in a manner consistent with the complaint policy. 
(5)  A disqualified declaration may be corrected by the complaint and resubmitted as de novo declaration. 
(e)  Qualified complaints against city officials. 
(1)  The commission has the responsibility to investigate, hear, validate, and dispose of complaints against city officials in a manner consistent with this code and the complaint policy. 
(2)  The commission is to inform (by registered mail) the respondent of the complaint and of a reply due date and a case review date. The complaint and other pertinent documents are to be attached to this correspondence. 
(3)  The complaint policy is to provide details for handling a case for which the respondent agrees that he or she has violated this code. 
(4)  Unless the respondent's reply agrees that a violation occurred, there is to be a case review to determine whether specific substantiated evidence from a credible source(s) exists to support a reasonable belief that there was a violation of this code. The case is to be dismissed unless a majority of the voting panel agrees that such evidence exists. The complaint policy is to provide details for closing a dismissal. 
(5)  If the case is not dismissed, the commission is to hold a hearing at a public meeting for the purposes of reaching a complaint opinion (decision) as to whether or not the respondent violated the code. The hearing is to be conducted in accordance with those conventionally associated with hearings at public meetings. The complainant and the respondent are to have the opportunity to be heard and to have witnesses at the hearing. 
(6)  After the hearing, voting panel members are to reach a decision (complaint opinion) as to whether or not the respondent violated this code. Such decision is to be based on: 
a.  Preponderance or greater weight of the evidence presented at the hearing; and 
b.  The declarations submitted by the complainant and respondent; and 
c.  Panel member's conscientious and compliant interpretation and application of this code to the evidence. 
(7)  The complaint opinion is to be documented consistent with the complaint policy. This documentation is to include a statement of remedial or consequential actions that the commission deems appropriate. Such actions may be applicable to the respondent or to the complainant. Consequences for a city official may include, but are not limited to, private warning, training on the subject of the violation, public warning or reprimand, public censure and/or apology and/or restitution. Consequences for a malicious or frivolous complaint from a person other than a city official may include misdemeanor charges. 
(8)  The documented opinion is to be forwarded to clerk of council who will distribute the opinion to council members, the complainant, the respondent and the city attorney in preparation for a final and concluding action on the part of council. 
(f)  A person (complainant) alleging that the city manager, the city attorney, the city clerk, or a municipal court judge violated any provision of his code may submit a written and signed complaint to the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall consider such complaint and follow the procedure for investigation and holding a hearing in the same or similar fashion as the ethics commission as set forth in subparagraphs (e)(1)—(7) hereinabove. 
Complaints against a city employee under the control of the city manager shall be forwarded to the city manager for his or her review and consideration with the city manager following the procedure for investigation and holding a hearing in the same or similar fashion as the ethics commission as set forth in subparagraphs (e)(1)—(8) hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011; Ord. No. 05A-2017 , § 1, 7-13-2017) 
Sec. 23-44. - Final and concluding action on complaint cases. 
Final and concluding decisions for complaint cases are to be made at the final council meeting of each month. Advisory opinions related to such decisions are to be listed as main agenda items for this meeting. The city attorney is to develop and implement a process for council to consider the opinions. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-45. - Right to appeal. 
Any final decision by the city council pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the Superior Court of Chatham County. The review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry to whether there was any evidence before the city council which supported the decision of the city council. Provided however, no action of the city council refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 54-2011, (Attach.), 7-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-46. - Legal fees. 
The city council may direct the payment of legal fees for a city official who successfully defends an ethics complaint up to a maximum of $5,000.00 upon a determination that the city official acted in good faith and that the services of an attorney were appropriate and reasonably necessary under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 05A-2017 , § 1, 7-13-2017) 
Chapter 26 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Tampering with a fire hydrant prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, damage or cause to be damaged any fire hydrant within the corporate limits of the city. For purposes of this section, the term "tampering" shall mean any act directed toward the opening, the defacing or the removing of any part of a fire hydrant that interrupts or interferes with the general and specific function of that hydrant as furnishing a source of water for firefighting purposes. Nothing contained within this section shall prohibit those members of the fire department from acting in their official capacity, nor shall it prohibit other persons specifically authorized by the city manager to use the fire hydrants. 
(Code 1970, § 7-8; Code 1983, § 4-2-5) 
Sec. 26-2. - Tampering with alarm system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or mischievously interfere or tamper with any fire alarm box or any of the appliances or apparatus connected therewith, located within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1983, § 4-2-6) 
Sec. 26-3. - Driving over fire hose. 
No person shall drive or operate any vehicle at any time over or across any fire hose in or upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public ways of the city at any place where this hose is being used by the fire department. 
(Code 1983, § 4-2-7) 
Sec. 26-4. - Interfering with equipment. 
No person other than a duly enrolled member of the fire department shall ride upon the fire trucks of the city at any time, nor use, borrow or interfere with any fire department equipment, or attempt to use the equipment at the scene of a fire unless authorized to do so by the fire chief. 
(Code 1983, § 4-2-8) 
Sec. 26-5. - False fire alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or mischievously turn or give or cause to be turned in or given a false fire alarm within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1983, § 4-2-9) 
Sec. 26-6. - Propane gas tanks; identified; inventoried; updated. 
(a)  Each aboveground propane gas tank that is owned by a propane gas firm shall be identified with the name of the firm, and firm's telephone number. It shall be the responsibility of the propane gas firm to inventory each tank that the distributor services; letter each with the name of the distributor's firm and 24 hour emergency telephone number; record it; and provide the city marshal with the original copy of the inventory with updates as they occur. Distributors shall include the location of underground propane gas tanks on their lists, but do not have to mark the tanks. 
(b)  Each propane gas tank serviced by a distributor but owned by the resident shall be so identified on the distributor's inventory. Neither the distributors nor the owners need letter these propane gas tanks, unless the owners and distributors so agree. 
(Code 1983, § 4-2-10) 
Secs. 26-7—26-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 26-36. - Office of chief created. 
The office of chief of the fire department is created. The chief shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 4-2-1) 
Sec. 26-37. - Department controlled by chief. 
The fire chief shall direct all employees and activities of the city fire department involving the effective operations of the fire and first responder functions, under the general direction of the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 4-2-2) 
Sec. 26-38. - Volunteers—Compensation. 
All work or services done by volunteers shall be without compensation unless otherwise authorized by the city manager or his designee. 
(Code 1983, § 4-2-3) 
Sec. 26-39. - Same—Employee status for purposes of workers' compensation. 
All persons designated as firefighters and who are engaged in any capacity in firefighting activities on behalf of the city are designated and classified as municipal employees to the extent that any accident in which they may be involved while engaged in firefighting activities on behalf of this municipality shall be covered by all provisions of the workers' compensation acts and state statutes. 
(Code 1983, § 4-2-3.1) 
Sec. 26-40. - Same—Under direction of chief; consent to engage in work. 
All persons volunteering for service in the fire department or engaged in the work of the department shall be under the sole direction and control of the fire chief during the period of that work or service, except that the absence of a member at two consecutive meetings of the department may be grounds for his removal by the governing body. No person is to engage or do any work of the department without the consent of the chief, and no person is to become a member of the department without having been approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 4-2-4) 
Sec. 26-41. - Fire subscription rates. 
(a)  Schedule of fees. Fees for subscribers and fees for nonsubscribers shall be according to the schedule on file with the clerk of council. For the years 2014 and beyond, each January, the subscription rate and fees for nonsubscribers shall be adjusted by the change in the consumer price index for the immediate 12-month period. As used herein, "consumer price index" shall mean and refer to that table in the consumer price index published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, known as the "consumer price index" for all urban consumers. If such index referred to shall be discontinued, then any successor consumer price index of the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, or successor agency thereto, shall be utilized. 
(b)  Exemption from subscription fee. Active members of the city fire department and retired members of the city fire department or their widows. 
(c)  Time period. The subscription rate shall be for the calendar year from January 1 to December 31. This fee is nontransferable and is not pro-ratable. 
(Code 1983, § 4-2-11; Ord. No. 37-2013, § 1, 12-12-2013) 
Sec. 26-42. - Fire subscription available outside city limits; agreement and payment. 
(a)  Property owners living outside the city limits may subscribe for fire services. Service is to be provided when available under normal operating conditions. 
(b)  Subscribers must sign an annual subscription agreement and prepay the annual subscription fee. 
(c)  In the event a non-subscriber is provided services by the city fire department, the owner/occupant of the property shall be responsible for reimbursing the city for the cost involved in providing fire fighting or other emergency services on an hourly basis at the then current rate of service provided by the department. 
(Code 1983, § 4-2-2012; Ord. No. 36-2013, § 1, 12-12-2013) 
Secs. 26-43—26-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 25-2012, adopted August 23, 2012, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III, §§ 26-69—26-71, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1970, § 7-4; Code 1983, §§ 4-2-21, 4-2-24, 4-2-25. 

Sec. 26-69. - Adoption. 
There is adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code, as may be amended, or by specific modifications as per section 26-70 which code and amendments not less than three copies have been and now are on file in the office of the clerk of council, and this code is adopted and incorporated fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this article shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 25-2012, 8-23-2012) 
Sec. 26-70. - Amendments and modifications to Fire Prevention Code. 
The following provisions shall amend and modify the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code and, if in conflict with the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code, shall control and prevail: 
(1)  No building or structure shall be erected hereafter closer than ten feet (measured from the closest point of the structure footprint to the property line) to the adjacent property line except the following: 
a.  An accessory building not more than one story in height, located on the same lot with a dwelling, provided that building shall be placed at least five feet from any lot line. 
b.  A building so constructed that the exterior walls that adjoin adjacent property be built to form a firewall and/or have a sprinkler system installed. 
(2)  The walls that separate units in any building constructed with two or more units that may be sold as individual units, such as in condominiums, shall be firewalls. 
(3)  Where more than one building or structure is built on a single lot, there shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between structures unless separated by firewalls. 
(4)  Any building erected with the purpose of accommodating more than one commercial establishment shall have firewalls to separate each establishment unit. 
(5)  Wood shingles, treated or untreated, shall not be accepted as an approved material for a roof covering. All roofing shall be classified a class A, class B or class C under the test specifications of Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc. 
(6)  Any person or entity owning or operating business or commercial buildings shall be governed by the standards provided by the International Fire Code, Life Safety Code, and other standards as adopted. 
(7)  Common walls, that separate two or more units or two or more stories in a multi-unit structure, shall be firewalls. 
(8)  In all multi-family structures of two or more units, each dwelling unit shall be separated as required by the following: 
a.  Two family structures shall be separated as required by the latest edition of the International Residential Code as adopted. 
b.  Multi-family structures shall be separated as required by the latest edition of the International Building Code and the International Fire Code as adopted. 
(Ord. No. 25-2012, 8-23-2012) 
Sec. 26-71. - Fires made within city prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to build or make fires within the city except as follows: 
(1)  Outdoor fires are to be used only for cooking and/or warmth; 
(2)  Outdoor fires are only to be built with the permission and under the supervision of the property owner or occupant or, if on public property, must be approved in advance by the city manager; 
(3)  There must be an adequate water supply immediately available; and 
(4)  Picnic grilling in city parks is allowed. 
(b)  This section is not to be construed to prohibit outdoor functions involving cooking such as oyster roasts, barbeques, etc. Further, outdoor fires in approved containment devices shall be permissible on the premises of commercial establishments subject, however, to all ordinances prohibiting the creation or maintenance of a nuisance and subject to the conditions stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 25-2012, 8-23-2012; Ord. No. 20-2013, § 1, 7-11-2013) 
Chapter 30 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 30-24. - Chief of police; powers and duties. 
The chief of police plans, directs, organizes and coordinates the activities of the city police department in accordance with city ordinances and state law under the general supervision of the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 4-1-1) 
Sec. 30-25. - Patrol and arrest powers. 
The police officers of the city shall be clothed, in addition to such authority as shall be given by the mayor and council, with all the authority as to the enforcement of the law, the preservation of the peace and the upholding of the dignity of the state and the city as municipal police officers and other law enforcement and peace officers are now clothed by law, and it shall be the duty of such city police officers to patrol the city as they shall be directed; to enforce all rules and ordinances as shall be made and promulgated by the mayor and council; to arrest persons for violations of state laws, city or county ordinances, or who are charged with violations of state laws, city or county ordinances; to execute criminal warrants; to preserve order; to discharge in the city such duties as are usually performed by police in cities and other peace officers, and generally to obey all lawful orders of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 4-1-2) 
Sec. 30-26. - Officer restrictions—Use of ID cards, badges. 
(a)  No police officer shall use official position or official identification cards or badges: 
(1)  For personal or financial gain; 
(2)  For obtaining privileges not otherwise available to the officer except in the performance of duty; or 
(3)  For avoiding consequences of illegal acts. 
(b)  Police officers may not lend their identification cards or badges to another person, or permit them to be photographed or reproduced without the approval of the chief. 
(Code 1983, § 4-1-3) 
Sec. 30-27. - Same—Relating to certain charges. 
Police officers shall not convert to their own use, manufacture, conceal, falsify, destroy, remove, tamper with, or withhold evidence or information or make false accusations of a criminal or traffic charge. 
(Code 1983, § 4-1-4) 
Chapter 34 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Decal required for vehicles involved in transportation business. 
Every person transacting or offering to transact the business of transporting or carrying goods, etc., passengers or baggage for hire by vehicles and the means of transportation herein specified on the streets shall, upon paying the tax prescribed in this article, be furnished with a street decal by the city clerk for each vehicle to be so used and employed, which number of vehicles shall be stated on oath by such person or representative of the person so engaged in such business. Such decal shall be placed on the lower right side of the front windshield of such vehicle, or if not equipped with a front windshield, then in a conspicuous place on such vehicle. 
(Code 1970, § 11-41; Code 1983, § 9-3-1) 
Sec. 34-2. - Sale of items designed or marketed for use with illegal drugs; regulations; violation and penalty. 
(a)  License required . It shall be unlawful for any person as principal, clerk, agent or servant to sell any items, effect, paraphernalia, accessory or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs, as defined by state law, without obtaining a license therefor. Such license shall be in addition to any or all other licenses held by applicant. 
(b)  Applications . Application to sell any item, effect, paraphernalia, accessory or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs shall, in addition to already existing requirements, be accompanied by affidavits by applicant and each and every employee authorized to sell such items that such person has never been convicted of a drug-related offense. 
(c)  Minors . It shall be unlawful to sell or give items as described above in any form to any male or female child under 18 years of age. 
(d)  Records . Every licensee must keep a record of every item, effect, paraphernalia, accessory or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs which is sold, and this record shall be open to the inspection of any police officer at anytime during the hours of business. Such record shall contain the name and address of the purchaser, the name and quantity of the product, the date and time of the sale, and the licensee or agent of the licensee's signature; such records shall be retained for not less than two years. 
(e)  Regulations . The applicant shall comply with all applicable local and state laws. 
(f)  Fees . The license fee required herein shall be $150.00. 
(g)  Penalty . Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 for the first offense and succeeding offenses during the same calendar year and each day that such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1983, § 9-3-71) 
Sec. 34-3. - Police/fire alarm security service fee. 
(a)  Fee established. To discourage excessive false alarms at any single commercial/residential location, enhance the safety of officers of the Tybee Island Police Department and Tybee Island Fire Department, protect the lives and property of the citizens of Tybee Island, reduce unnecessary use of police/fire resources, and produce revenues to defray the costs of police/fire responses to false alarms, a false alarm security service fee is hereby established. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention by the Tybee Island Police/Tybee Island Fire Departments. 
(2)  False alarm means a bell, mechanical, electrical, or telephone apparatus, or combination thereof which is activated for the purpose of summoning the Tybee Island Police Department/Tybee Island Fire Department to respond to a hold-up, break-in, burglary, fire, unauthorized entry, destruction of property, or other event requiring police/fire response when, in fact, the service called for is not needed. 
(3)  Rate and base. The owner or lessee of any property with an alarm system shall pay to the city a false alarm security service fee, based upon the total number of false alarms at such location during the preceding calendar year. The false alarm security service fee shall be charged as shown in the following schedule: 

 
(c)  Exceptions. Each of the following circumstances shall not constitute a false alarm and no fee shall be assessed: 
(1)  Alarm system malfunctions, if corrective measures have been instituted within a 72 hour period with notification to the Tybee Island Police Department documenting repair service to remedy the malfunction. 
(2)  Alarm conditions activated by a person working on the alarm system with prior notification to the Tybee Island Police Department. 
(3)  Alarms which can be substantiated as being activated by disruption or disturbance of utility company facilities by accident or storm conditions. 
(d)  Appeal. Any owner or lessee of an alarmed premises may appeal the assessment of a false alarm security service fee to the Chief of the Tybee Island Police Department. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the police chief within ten days of notification of the assessment. 
(e)  Shut off requirement. Alarm systems on commercial/residential premises employing audible signals shall be equipped with shut-off devices that automatically silence the audible signal 20 minutes after the alarm is initially activated. 
(f)  Maintenance and operation. The owner or lessee of any commercial property with an alarm system shall (1) maintain the premises and alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarms, (2) respond or cause their representative to appear at the system location within a reasonable period of time when notified by the Tybee Island Police Department or monitoring company to provide access to the premises, deactivate the alarm system, or provide security at the alarm location. 
(g)  Administration. The police department is responsible for monitoring and documenting false alarm incidents. The police department is responsible for collecting false alarm security service fees. 
(h)  Due date; late payment; penalties. False alarm security service fees shall be due and payable within 30 days after billing. Fees not paid by the due date shall be subject to execution fees and interest charges. 
(i)  Payment of fee condition for doing business. Payment of false alarm fees, as documented by the Tybee Island Police Department and billed to a business, is a condition of that business operating within the city. The city is authorized to withhold issuing or renewing a license to a business which has failed to pay a false alarm security service fee. Any business which operates or continues to operate within the city when its license has been withheld under the provision shall be deemed to be operating without a license and shall be subject to the penalties resulting therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04 , § 1, 3-10-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-04 , § 1, adopted March 10, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as Art. VI, § 34-90. In order to maintain subject consistency in this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said ordinance has been codified herein as § 34-3. 
Secs. 34-4—34-27. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSES 

Sec. 34-28. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the city manager or his designee shall be the administrator for the licensing and regulation of businesses under this article. 
Business means any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or calling of any kind for gain or profit, directly or indirectly; provided that this shall not include any business, trade, profession and the like licensed by the state unless city licensing is allowed by state law, nor shall it include any business operating solely under a franchise granted by the city. 
Engaged in business means any person subject to the requirements of this article when he performs any act of selling any goods or services or solicits business or offers goods or services for sale for payment in an attempt to make a profit, including the sales or services of the character as made by a wholesaler or retailer or involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, either as an owner, operator or agent in any business within this city. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or group of individuals, or their representatives, acting as a unit. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1-1) 
State Law reference— State business licenses, local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 
Sec. 34-29. - License required. 
Every business in this city or doing business or engaged in business within the city is required to have a business license from the city for the privilege of engaging in a business, profession or occupation within the corporate limits, unless city licensing is prohibited under state law or the activity is exempted by this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1-2) 
Sec. 34-30. - Separate businesses. 
Where a person conducts a business at more than one store, location or place, each store, location or place shall be considered a separate business under the terms of this article and a separate license shall be required. Should more than one business on which a business tax is levied by this Code conducted in or in conjunction with one place or kind of business, each business shall be separately licensed under this article. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1-3) 
Sec. 34-31. - Application; required information. 
Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this Code shall submit an application for the license to the administrator, which application shall conform to the requirements of this section in addition to any other provisions of this Code. 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided in this Code, each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the city and submitted ten days prior to opening a new business. 
(2)  Each application shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and home address of the applicant if an individual or home office address if a corporation or partnership; 
b.  Place where the proposed business is to be located; 
c.  Kind and class of business to be carried on; 
d.  Name and home addresses of the partners, if a partnership; 
e.  Names and home addresses of the officers and directors, if a corporation; 
f.  Any information as may be required by the administrator for the purpose of determining the amount of any business taxes to be collected under this Code; and 
g.  Any additional information which the administrator may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this part of the Code which may include a complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer or director of the applicant for violations of any and all laws and ordinances of the city, state or federal government other than minor traffic violations. 
(3)  Each application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner if a partnership, or by an officer if a corporation. 
(4)  All information furnished or secured under the authority of this chapter shall be kept in strict confidence by the city, shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall be utilized solely by the officers of the city responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter and the city's business taxes. 
(5)  False statements on any application for a license shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the license or denial of the application. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1-4) 
Sec. 34-32. - Administration and violation of article. 
(a)  The administrator shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the application for and issuance of business licenses and the regulation of businesses under this article. 
(b)  The administrator shall seek out violations of this Code, particularly those of this article, and may issue to any business found to be in violation of the Code a notice or demand to appear before the court for a determination of the matter by the municipal judge. 
(c)  Any notice or demand to appear before the court issued hereunder shall provide a statement of alleged violations which may constitute grounds for the revocation of any city business license or permit. 
(d)  If there is reason to believe that a person notified of violations hereunder may not attend the designated court session or correct the cited violation then the administrator may request that an arrest warrant or summons be issued thereon by the police department. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1-5) 
Sec. 34-33. - Authority to make rules and regulations. 
The administrator shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state, or the Constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1-6) 
Sec. 34-34. - Duties of administrator. 
The administrator, or an authorized representative, shall have, among others, the following duties: 
(1)  To prepare and provide the necessary forms for the registration and application for a business license and for the submission of any required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(2)  To issue to each person a business license within a reasonable time after the payment of the license fee assessed and any business taxes, property or other city taxes levied in this Code; provided, however, where under other portions of this Code, permits, certifications and compliance with enumerated conditions are required for the operation of the business, the administrator shall not issue a business license until the applicant exhibits to the administrator the obtained permits, certification and compliance. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1-7) 
Sec. 34-35. - Duration of license; renewal; delinquent fees. 
(a)  Any license referred to in this article shall automatically expire on December 31 of the year of its issuance. 
(b)  Each licensee shall make a written application for renewal on forms supplied by the city no later than January 1 of each calendar year, which application may require substantially the same information as an initial application. The renewed license shall be issued or denied on the same basis as the original with the requirement that any additional lawful provisions of this Code in effect at the time of renewal must also be met. 
(c)  Every person holding a business license as specified in this article shall secure that license within 90 days after January 1 of each year, and pay for same as herein provided. Failure to secure the license within the time allocated will result in a delinquent fee which shall be assessed at ten percent of the value of the license. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1-8) 
Sec. 34-36. - Exceptions to business licenses and tax. 
Nothing herein contained shall be interpreted to require any person to obtain a business license and pay an occupation tax when all the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The business transactions are the result of casual or isolated activities, defined as being without regularity, unusual, occurring at irregular intervals, occasional, being detached or set apart, or uncombined; more specifically being defined as business activities which occur two or fewer times in any one month, and also do not exceed 12 times in any one year; however, making products, services or properties available by advertising or the posting of signs or otherwise on a regular basis, whether or not such products, services or properties are purchased, rented, or obtained, shall not be considered casual or isolated activity; 
(2)  The business transactions involve only personal assets being either sold or rented; and 
(3)  The business transactions are not the principal occupation of the individual. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1-9) 
Sec. 34-37. - Application review procedure. 
(a)  Review and recommendation by city officer. If any provision of this Code provides for the review of an application for a license by a city officer designated therein, the administrator shall forward a copy of the application to that officer. The officer charged with the duty of reviewing the application shall make a recommendation thereon, favorable or otherwise, and shall return the recommendation to the administrator after receiving a copy of the application. 
(b)  Compliance with building codes. No license shall be issued to any applicant whose place of business is not in full compliance with all minimum standard building codes adopted by the city. 
(c)  Approval of application; issuance of license. Upon the express approval of the mayor and council when so required or otherwise upon a determination by the administrator that the application is in order and all requirements have been met, the administrator shall issue a business license to the applicant therefor, which license shall state the nature of the business authorized and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the administrator. 
(d)  Denial of license. If the administrator finds that the application is not in order or that other preconditions to the issuance of the license have not been met then the administrator shall deny a license to the applicant. 
(e)  Interpretation. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as granting any person whose business is subject to municipal regulation any legal right to engage in that business. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1-10) 
Sec. 34-38. - Display of license and registration. 
All persons shall exhibit and display all licenses and registrations issued to them under this Code in some conspicuous place in their business establishment at which address the license or registration was issued. Any transient or nonresident person doing business within the city shall carry the license or registration either upon his person or in any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in the business and the person shall exhibit the same to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1-11) 
Sec. 34-39. - Revocation or suspension for violation. 
The municipal court, after affording the licensee notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceedings, may if it finds this Code to have been violated by the licensee, his agent, or employee in the operation of the business, revoke the license in its entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation, or place other conditions thereon as the court may deem necessary in addition to any other lawful punishment for violation of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1-12) 
Sec. 34-40. - Change of location. 
Any person licensed hereunder moving from one location to another shall notify the administrator of the move and the new address in writing on a form provided by the administrator no later than the day of moving. The same business license will be valid at the new location if the new location conforms to the zoning regulations of the city and any other location transfer requirements of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1-13) 
Sec. 34-41. - Licenses not transferable. 
Business licenses shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1-14) 
Sec. 34-42. - Amendment, repeal of article. 
This article shall be subject to alteration or repeal in whole or in part at any time during the fiscal year should it be deemed advisable, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to impair the right of the mayor and council to assess or levy a tax for the whole of any year whenever made. 
(Code 1970, § 11-2; Code 1983, § 9-1-15) 
Sec. 34-43. - Right to refuse license issuance. 
The mayor and council reserve the right to refuse to issue to anyone any licenses for any purpose for reasons sufficient to the mayor and council. 
(Code 1970, § 11-3; Code 1983, § 9-1-16) 
Sec. 34-44. - License fee for unspecified businesses. 
In the event any business or calling not specifically mentioned in the city's schedule of license taxes shall be established in the city, the mayor and council reserve the right to establish a license fee for same by majority vote, which fee is to be of equal dignity as the license fees specifically mentioned in the city's schedule of license taxes; provided, however, that any license shall not be more than the sum of $1,500.00. 
(Code 1970, § 11-4; Code 1983, § 9-1-17) 
Sec. 34-45. - Carnival operations; special insurance provisions. 
The following insurance provisions of coverage shall be the minimum requirements applicable to carnival operations, consisting of riding devices of every kind and description, shows, concessions and appurtenant grounds and that the period to be covered by these insurance limits shall be the applicable fiscal year of the municipality, i.e., May 1 to April 30. 

 
(Code 1970, § 11-5; Code 1983, § 9-1-18; Ord. No. 47-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 47-B-2014, § 1, adopted August 28, 2014, amended the title of § 34-45 to read as set out herein. Previously § 34-45 was titled riding devices, passenger vehicles for hire; special insurance and bonding provisions. 
Sec. 34-46. - Reports for purchasing junk or salvage. 
Any person engaged in doing business under any license shall also be required to report to the clerk of council the name and address of each and every person from whom salvage or junk is purchased, and this report shall further identify the article purchased as junk or salvage. The said report to the clerk of council shall be made within 24 hours after the completion of the trade, purchase or acquisition of the junk or salvage. 
(Code 1970, § 11-6; Code 1983, § 9-1-19) 
Sec. 34-47. - Designation and purpose of public areas; sales in public prohibited/limited. 
(a)  The city council has made the following findings: 
(1)  That the beach, streets, strand and parks are public areas which are open and accessible to all persons; 
(2)  That the public beach, streets, strand and parks of this city are maintained and subjected to reasonable regulation by this council in order to promote the health, safety, welfare and morals of all persons; 
(3)  That said areas provide a unique area for all persons to pursue peaceful relaxation and quiet enjoyment in a reasonable manner; 
(4)  That it is desirable and necessary to preserve the unique nature of the areas referred to above and to protect all persons who utilize those areas from undue annoyance, disturbance and inconvenience, and for those reasons, the city council states: 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, or food on any of the public streets, or on the strand, or in any park, or to solicit from any person for the purchase of any goods, wares, merchandise, or food in such areas. This prohibition shall not be construed to prohibit the display, offering for sale or sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, or food immediately in front of the place of business of the seller, or designee of the seller, provided the seller has a building from which his business is being operated. 
(b)  This prohibition shall not be construed to prohibit the city manager from the issuance of a temporary permit for special events to allow any such sales at designated times and places where, in the discretion of such city manager, those sales will not annoy, bother or harass the citizens and visitors of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1-20; Ord. No. 31-2011, § 9-8-2011) 
Sec. 34-48. - License fees levied for certain insurance companies. 
(a)  Life insurer's license fees . There is levied for the year 1998 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each life insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $40.00 for each separate business location in excess of one, not covered by subsection (b) of this section, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1). 
(b)  License fee for life insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations . For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing, and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of a life insurer for life insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $14.00 per location for the year 1998 and for each year thereafter. 
(c)  Independent life insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed . There is levied for the year 1998 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by subsection (a) of this section, in the amount of $40.00 for each such location within the city. 
(d)  Due date for license fees . License fees imposed in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section shall be due and payable on January 1, 1998 and on January 1 of each subsequent year. 
(e)  Other insurance companies. There is levied for the year 1998 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurance company which is not designated as a life insurance company doing business within the city in the amount of $40.00. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurance company" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2—6). 
(Code 1970, § 11-10; Code 1983, § 9-1-21) 
Sec. 34-49. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 which may be enforceable by the contempt power of the municipal court and subject to all other penalties authorized by law. 
(Code 1970, § 11-9; Code 1983, § 9-1-22; Ord. No. 33-2010, 12-9-2010) 
Secs. 34-50—34-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BEACH EQUIPMENT RENTAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 30-2011, adopted Sept. 8, 2011, amended former Art. III, §§ 34-82—34-89, in its entirety. Former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1983. 

Sec. 34-82. - License—Issued subject to regulations. 
All licenses issued authorizing the holder to engage in the business of umbrellas and chairs shall be considered issued subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1970, § 11-19; Code 1983, § 9-3-31; Ord. No. 30-2011, § 9-8-2011) 
Sec. 34-83. - Same—Filing and approval of application; renewals; request for proposals; and lines of business. 
All persons applying for a license provided for in section 34-82 shall first file an application with the city requesting a license and the application shall be investigated by the city manager. A license may only be issued as to locations specified in section 34-85 and such license shall only be authority for operation of the specific business activity to be conducted and listed on the license or an attachment thereto. Existing prior license holders at locations specified herein shall be entitled to annual renewal licenses at the same locations as long as the application is renewed and paid for timely. In the event an existing or prior license holder shall fail to renew at a location, the license shall not be renewed or issued except upon a new application. 
(Code 1970, § 11-20; Code 1983, § 9-3-32; Ord. No. 30-2011, § 9-8-2011) 
Sec. 34-84. - Same—Payment fee. 
The license/regulatory fee for the renting of umbrellas and chairs for use by the public, for each fiscal year shall be payable on or before commencing of any business; however, in order to properly renew a license for an existing location, the fee must be paid prior to April 1 of the renewal year. 
(Code 1970, § 11-21; Code 1983, § 9-3-33; Ord. No. 30-2011, § 9-8-2011) 
Sec. 34-85. - Business site locations; parking area. 
(a)  Each approved business site which shall be located on the sand shall consist of no more than 30 linear feet (900 square feet) in which merchandise for use on the beach for rent will be displayed. (No such business operation will be allowed to be located at the end of any alleys, lanes, or unopened streets or rights-of-way.) The following locations for any such business are approved by the mayor and council and will be located at the end of the following streets or lots only and no other locations shall be permissible without the approval of the mayor and council: 
(1)  North Beach parking lot, at the middle dune crossover. 
(2)  Third Street. 
(3)  Center Street. 
(4)  Fourteenth Street. 
(5)  Fifteenth Street. 
(6)  Tybrisa Street. 
(7)  Seventeenth Street. 
(8)  Eighteenth Street. 
(9)  Nineteenth Street. 
(b)  Any license so issued shall allow the holder thereof the right to operate its business from the end of the above streets or crossovers extending in generally north and south directions half the distance along the beach toward the next street, it being the intent hereof that a license issued will allow the holder thereof to display merchandise within the 900 square feet area, but to allow such license holder to rent from said location northwardly and southwardly from said location in the direction of the street adjacent to the licensed location and running halfway toward the next northern and southern streets. 
(c)  In addition to the beach site location, each business shall include one parking place for a mobile storage unit displaying a current state license tag and a city parking decal and legally parked in a designated parking space. 
(d)  Licenses hereunder shall not be transferable nor may a location or license be sublet. 
(e)  All authorized operations must comply with all regulations required by the Department of Natural Resources and secure any and all necessary permits or letters of permission, if any, required by the Department of Natural Resources. 
(Code 1983, § 9-3-34; Ord. of 8-9-2007(2); Ord. No. 08-2011, 4-14-11; Ord. No. 30-2011, § 9-8-2011) 
Sec. 34-86. - Lifeguard—Required; qualifications; duties. 
(a)  Any person engaged in the business of renting floats, rubber boats, rafts, watercraft or similar beach equipment for use by the public, shall, before engaging in that business' employ and maintain at all times within the vicinity of the business site, the services of a swimmer as a lifeguard who is American Red Cross, Starfish Aquatic, or United States Coast Guard (Aviation Survival Technician) certified as follows: 
(1)  Emergency water safety; 
(2)  CPR; 
(3)  Basic first aid. 
(b)  The lifeguard must be approved by the director of the lifeguards. The particular duty of the business' lifeguard shall be to observe all persons renting any equipment, and to see that those persons use that equipment in a safe manner, and to go to the aid of any person in distress in the water. 
(Code 1983, § 9-3-35) 
Sec. 34-87. - Same—Salary payment; duties subject to city official. 
The lifeguard shall be employed by persons engaged in this business collectively, and the employer shall be solely responsible to the lifeguard for the payment of his salary and other expenses; provided, however, the lifeguard shall be subject to the orders of the chief of police or any other properly designated official of the city with regard to any of his duties. The lifeguard shall be on duty during all of the time at which the equipment shall be in use by the public. 
(Code 1970, § 11-24; Code 1983, § 9-3-36) 
Sec. 34-88. - Same—Nonliability of city. 
The lifeguard shall not be deemed to be an agent or employee of the city. The city shall not be liable for any negligence or act of misfeasance or malfeasance on the part of the lifeguard. 
(Code 1970, § 11-25; Code 1983, § 9-3-37) 
Sec. 34-89. - Same—Contributions to salary. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent or offer for rent any of the equipment described in section 34-86 without contributing his proportionate share of the expense of employing the lifeguard. 
(Code 1970, § 11-26; Code 1983, § 9-3-38) 
Secs. 34-90—34-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BONDSMEN 

Sec. 34-122. - Defined. 
Any person who shall for compensation sign any bond for the appearance of any accused person in any court or who shall procure bond for any person, or who shall deposit collateral for any person in lieu of bond, or who shall for compensation do the same to secure the peaceful conduct or good behavior of any person requiring any security in any court shall be deemed a professional bondsman and shall be deemed as engaging in business as such. 
(Code 1970, § 11-51; Code 1983, § 9-3-51) 
Sec. 34-123. - Permit required; prerequisite to issuance of business license. 
No person shall carry on or be engaged in any business as defined in section 34-122 until authorized to do so by a permit granted by the mayor and council. No business license shall be issued to a professional bondsman until a permit shall have been granted. 
(Code 1970, § 11-52; Code 1983, § 9-3-52) 
Sec. 34-124. - Permit application. 
(a)  All persons engaged or seeking to engage in business as a professional bondsman shall, on or before January 1 in each year, file with the clerk of council a petition for a permit to engage in that business, which application shall contain: 
(1)  A description of all real property in the county, owned in fee simple by any applicant, showing the fair market value of each parcel. Whenever these statements of fair market value indicate that the county tax assessments on that property are disproportionately low, it shall be the duty of the city tax assessor to increase any assessment proportionately. 
(2)  A description of mortgages, liens or other encumbrances affecting that real property, showing the maturity date and amount thereof. No property may be used as security for a professional bondsman that is encumbered. 
(3)  A statement of the total amount of all bonds upon which the petitioner may, at that time, appear as surety. The police commissioner shall have the right to require the applicant to list any bonds so as to show the date and penal sum of each. 
(4)  A list of all bonds upon which the petitioner may, at that time, appear as surety which have been forfeited and not paid. 
(b)  The information given in any application shall be given under oath by the applicant; or, if the applicant is a firm, under oath by each member of the firm; or, if the applicant is a corporation, under oath by two principal officers of the corporation who are authorized by the bylaws of that corporation to make an application under oath and to give any information under oath and to affix the corporate seal thereto. 
(Code 1970, § 11-53; Code 1983, § 9-3-53) 
Sec. 34-125. - Investigation of permit applications prerequisite to issuance. 
It shall be the duty of the police chief to investigate thoroughly all petitions and to verify all statements and information required by section 34-124. The police chief shall not recommend the issuance of a permit to a professional bondsman unless the petition and accompanying information shall show clearly that the petitioner is the owner of real property in the county of a fair market value in excess of encumbrances, equal to the total of twice the value of all bonds upon which the petitioner may at any time appear as surety, plus the amount allowed as exemption under the homestead laws of this state; provided that a surety company complying with the laws of this state and having made deposit as required by law to secure its obligations in this state may act as bondsman under this article through an agent, acting under a power of attorney, if such power is properly executed by the surety and all other provisions of this article have been complied with. 
(Code 1970, § 11-54; Code 1983, § 9-3-54) 
Sec. 34-126. - Submission of list of property and bonds as surety; revocation of license. 
The police chief shall have the right and authority at all times to require professional bondsmen to submit a complete list of their property and of bonds upon which they appear as surety. In the event these lists disclose encumbrances, insolvency or the inability of a bondsman to sign bonds because of an excess of liability over the required assets of twice the value of outstanding bonds, or in the event any bondsman shall fail to furnish any lists or shall contain false information, then the police chief shall have the power to recommend the revocation of, and the mayor and council shall have the power to revoke, the professional bondsman's license of any licensee. 
(Code 1970, § 11-55; Code 1983, § 9-3-55) 
Sec. 34-127. - Permit required prior to visiting prisoners. 
No professional bondsman or agent of any bondsman shall be permitted to visit any prisoner in this city on business under any license or to sign bonds for any person imprisoned in this city unless that bondsman or agent shall have previously procured a permit from the chief of police. As a condition to granting such a permit, the chief of police shall cause the applicant therefor to be fingerprinted and shall require the applicant to show a complete record of any conviction in any court for any offense or crime of which that person may have been convicted and show any other information as will enable him to ascertain the character of that applicant. 
(Code 1970, § 11-56; Code 1983, § 9-3-56) 
Sec. 34-128. - Loitering on police premises prohibited. 
No such licensee or agent thereof shall loiter in the police department or on the grounds thereof or enter the same except when attending court or on business in connection with that license. 
(Code 1970, § 11-57; Code 1983, § 9-3-57) 
Sec. 34-129. - Procedure for failure to pay full amount of bond upon forfeiture. 
If any such licensee shall fail to pay the full amount of any bond within one month after forfeiture thereof, the police commissioner shall have the authority to recommend the revocation of, and the mayor and council shall have the power to revoke, the professional bondsman's license of that licensee, and no such license shall be issued of that bondsman thereafter so long as any part of that bond remains unpaid. 
(Code 1970, § 11-58; Code 1983, § 9-3-58) 
Sec. 34-130. - Effect on rights of individuals and companies. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as affecting the right of a citizen to sign a bond not for compensation, or right of surety companies who have complied with the laws of the state regulating those companies to carry on their regular business. 
(Code 1970, § 11-59; Code 1983, § 9-3-59) 
Secs. 34-131—34-163. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS 

Sec. 34-164. - Registration required. 
Any person peddling, soliciting or canvassing within the city shall be required to register and obtain an identification card as provided by this article. 
(Code 1983, § 9-3-11) 
Sec. 34-165. - Registration fee; application for identification card. 
Any person desiring to peddle, solicit or canvass within the city shall pay to the city a registration fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council and shall make application with the chief of police for an identification card which shall show payment of the registration fee and the days that the registrant has registered to peddle, solicit or canvass within the city. 
(Code 1983, § 9-3-12) 
Sec. 34-166. - Exhibition of identification card. 
Each registrant shall at all times while in the city have upon his person the identification card and shall exhibit the same when requested to do so by any law enforcement officer or by any municipal authority and by any person being solicited. Possession of this identification card shall not in any way represent an endorsement or approval of any products or project by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 9-3-13) 
Sec. 34-167. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, canvass or solicit after sundown. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, canvass or solicit within the fire zone of the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, canvass or solicit without having registered with the city in accordance with this article, or to peddle, solicit or canvass without having on his person and in his possession an identification card issued in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1983, § 9-3-14) 
Secs. 34-168—34-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TAXIS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, adopted August 28, 2014, repealed art. VI, §§ 34-191—34-194 in its entirety and enacted a new art. VI, §§ 34-191—34-212 to read as set out herein. Former art. VI pertained to shuttle/transportation services and was derived from Ord. of 6-14-2007, §§ 34-168—34-170. 

Sec. 34-191. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Taxicab/Vehicle for Hire License and Regulatory Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-192. - Applicability of chapter. 
On January 1, 2015 and thereafter, the operating of taxicabs or vehicles for the transportation of passengers for hire within the city shall be subject to the conditions, regulations and restrictions contained in this chapter. 
When the term "vehicle", "operator", or other terms and definitions with common meaning are used in this section, it is to be limited to the conditions, regulations and restrictions in this article and shall not have any application outside this article. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-193. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter only, the following definitions apply: 
License and license for operation means an occupation tax certificate. In this article, license does not mean "operator's license." 
Operate, to operate, operating in the city, or any similar term shall be defined as picking up or dropping off a passenger or any person within the city for a fee or fare, regardless of the originating point or eventual destination of the person. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this shall not include any taxicab licensed in another jurisdiction, located outside of a 50-mile radius from the city, as a taxicab or vehicle for hire, or similarly licensed, who solely delivers or drops off passengers within the city. 
Owner means the one who holds the license to operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire. 
Taxicab or vehicle for hire shall be defined as any vehicle for transportation for hire for passengers and which is operated in the corporate limits of the city. The term includes, but is not limited to, any taxi, cab, taxicab, shuttle, tour service vehicle, vehicle offering shuttle and/or transportation services, motorized cart, personal transportation vehicle, pedicab or low speed vehicle that offer shuttle and/or transportation services. The terms "taxicab" and "vehicle for hire" shall be used interchangeably in this article. 
Taxi stand means a reserved area where taxis and vehicles for hire may be parked upon the streets and parking areas of the city while awaiting hire. 
Tour service vehicle means a vehicle engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire or offering to carry passengers for hire, through any part of the city where the primary purpose is touring and sight-seeing; including motor coaches which are operated as a part of special tours and are not operated as a part of a tour service licensed by the city; excluding limousines (as they are defined by the laws of the state) which are operated primarily as a transportation service vehicle and which conduct tours on a reservation basis only; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall exempt the conduct of the tours by limousine from the provisions of this article as it pertains to the conduct of tours by tour guides. 
Transportation for hire means to transport at least one person in a vehicle in exchange for money. 
Vehicle means both motorized and non-motorized vehicles. 
Vehicle for hire/taxicab regulatory decal means the decal granted by the city for the privilege of operating a vehicle for hire or taxicab within the corporate limits of the city, issued upon the receipt of a regulatory fee, if any, and compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-194. - License. 
(a)  No taxicab, tour service vehicle or other vehicle for hire shall be operated on the streets of the city unless a license for operation (also known as an occupation tax certificate or business license) has first been obtained from the designated city official. 
(b)  In order to obtain a license, application must be made to the designated city official, containing the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and place of business of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name, address and place of business of each partner or limited partner. If the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of each of the officers of such corporation and those shareholders holding 50 percent or more of the stock in the corporation, and the principal place of business of the corporation. 
(2)  The trade name under which the applicant proposes to operate. 
(3)  The maximum number and type of vehicles to be operated. 
(4)  The name of any insurance or surety providing coverage to the applicant for operation of taxicabs or vehicles for hire. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-195. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  The designated city official shall determine whether issuance of a license is appropriate and shall be approved or denied. 
(b)  Each taxicab or vehicle for hire company, as a condition precedent to receiving a license to operate a vehicle, must have a physical fixed place of business located within the county and comply with the provisions of this article. If approved, and upon payment of the license fee or occupation tax, the license shall be issued. Any license issued is not transferable by the applicant. 
(1)  If the license holder relocates or plans to move from the physical fixed address enumerated in this subsection, then the license holder shall notify the designated city official in writing within 14 days prior to relocation. 
(c)  The applicant shall pay all annual regulatory fee(s) at a rate set by the mayor and city council, if the mayor and council shall so prescribe. 
(d)  If the application for a license is denied by the designated city official, within 30 days following the receipt of written notice of the denial from the designated city official, the applicant may appeal the decision to the mayor and council. Mayor and council shall consider whether the designated city official abused his or her discretion in denying the applicant a permit. 
(e)  Any license shall be valid for one year, and thereafter any license holder will be subject to renewals, and upon renewal, the applicant shall comply with the terms of this article as it exists upon the date of the renewal. 
(f)  For every vehicle the applicant intends to operate as a vehicle for hire or tour service vehicle, the applicant shall submit the taxicab or vehicle for hire to the designated city official for inspection and for compliance with section 34-211. No vehicle shall be issued a decal until the vehicle has been registered and passed inspection. 
(g)  If a license holder has any information concerning any traffic citations, including but not limited to the operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs, or any information concerning a change in the qualifying status by any operator hired or otherwise employed or contracted by the licensee under this article, then the licensee shall immediately notify the designated city official. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-196. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
Following notice to the applicant and hearing before the designated city official, a license may be suspended or revoked if it is determined that the application or other documents provided to the city are inaccurate or falsified or if a taxicab is found to be operating in violation of any provision of this chapter, the laws of the state or the United States or other law or ordinance of this city. The designated city official may further suspend or revoke a license or operator license issued hereinunder if it is determined that an unsafe vehicle is being operated as a taxicab or vehicle for hire or a vehicle has been operated in an unsafe manner. Within 30 days of receipt by the licensee of a written determination by the designated city official revoking the license, the licensee whose license has been revoked may appeal to mayor and council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-197. - Vehicle operators. 
No person shall operate a taxicab, tour service vehicle or other vehicle for hire within the city without having first registered with the designated city official, and securing an operator's license. 
(1)  A vehicle operator must: 
a.  Be at least 21 years of age; 
b.  Hold a valid driver's license; 
c.  Submit to a criminal background check; 
d.  Submit a seven-year motor vehicle record issued by the state; 
e.  Submit a form signed by a physician certifying physical fitness; and, 
f.  Any other requirement placed upon the operator of a motor vehicle by state law. 
g.  Submit any forms required by the city by state and federal laws pertaining to immigration status. 
(2)  An applicant for an operator's license under this article must: 
a.  Not have physical infirmities which make said applicant unsafe or unsatisfactory as an operator of a vehicle for hire; 
b.  Not have been convicted of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs within two years prior to the date of the application for such permit, or have been convicted of reckless driving within one year prior to the date of the application for such permit, or have been convicted of any of these offenses three or more times within three years prior to the date of the application for such permit. Nor shall a permit be issued to any person who has within three years prior to the date of the application for such permit been convicted of any crime relating to transporting persons for immoral purposes (prostitution, solicitation for prostitution, or any sex-related offense), or who has within three years prior to the date of the application for such permit been convicted of, been on probation, parole, or served time on a sentence for a felony. A plea of nolo contendre to any of the offenses set out in this section shall be deemed a conviction; and 
c.  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent [residence] who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Services. 
(3)  Fees. Before any license is granted under this article, the following fee(s) shall be paid by the applicant: 
a.  Background investigation fee. A background investigation fee in the amount of $10.00 shall be paid by the applicant upon application being made and prior to issuance of license; 
b.  A current seven-year M.V.R. is required at the time of the application and renewal. This is the responsibility of the license holder; and 
c.  A regulatory fee as defined in section 58-179, regulatory fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-198. - Issuance of operator's license. 
(a)  The designated city official, shall determine whether issuance of an operator's license is warranted. 
(b)  The operator must maintain a valid driver's license to continue operating a vehicle for hire. In the event the operator's license is suspended or expires, any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall immediately expire and be revoked. 
(c)  Operator licenses are non-transferable. Any operator license issued under this article is not transferable from one driver to another, and is to be used solely by the person to whom it is issued. Any licensed driver shall notify the designated city official prior to beginning employment with another company. An operator may not utilize his or her operator's license with more than one person or entity licensed to operate pursuant to section 34-194, unless the operator has separate operator licenses for each person or entity licensed to operate pursuant to section 34-194. 
(d)  Duration of license. The driver's license shall be in effect for 12 months from the date of issue. Licenses may be renewed upon application and payment of the required fee, for each 12-month period thereafter, unless the license for the preceding period has been revoked or is suspended. 
(e)  Photograph and display of license. Before any operator's license is issued, the operator shall submit two passport style photographs to the designated city official. One photograph shall be attached permanently to the operator's permit for display in the vehicle at all times in which the applicant is the operator. The second photograph shall be filed for record by the designated city official. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to alter, deface, obliterate, or destroy an operator's license or any notice displayed to passengers, or cause the same to be. 
(f)  If the licensed operator receives any legal citation for a moving violation or other traffic violation, including operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs, the licensed operator shall immediately notify the designated city official of such citation. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-199. - Penalty for operating without licensure. 
No vehicle shall be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city unless such vehicle has been licensed under the provisions of this article for use as a vehicle for hire. The operator of any vehicle operating as a vehicle for hire without having a current valid operator's license for that vehicle shall be subject to a fine pursuant to section 34-49. This section shall not apply to a taxicab or vehicle for hire licensed in another jurisdiction, located outside of a 50-mile radius from the city, as a taxicab or vehicle for hire, or similarly licensed, who solely delivers or drops off passengers within the city, and does not pick up and drop off passengers within the jurisdictional limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-200. - Operator identification. 
Each operator of a vehicle for hire in the city shall be issued an identification badge, with a photo I.D. which shall either be worn around the neck of the operator while working as a vehicle for hire operator, or placed in a conspicuous place on the front dash of the vehicle that the operator is operating. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-201. - Vehicle registration. 
(a)  If required by state law, prior to the use and operation of any vehicle as a taxicab under the provisions of this article, the owner of said vehicle shall secure and display on the vehicle a current state license registration tag. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire for transporting passengers unless the vehicle has been registered with the designated city official as available for use as a taxicab or vehicle for hire, and has affixed to it a taxicab regulatory decal, on the lower left portion of the front windshield, a sticker or other signifying marker, as so determined by the designated city official. If placement of the regulatory decal in this location is not feasible, the designated city official shall exercise discretion in determining placement of the decal. Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the applicant's license. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-202. - Vehicle parking location and taxi stands. 
Notwithstanding whether a vehicle for hire has a city parking decal, a vehicle for hire may not be parked on city property, including the roadways, parking lots and curbs for more than one hour continuously, unless the driver is in the vehicle. At the discretion of the designated city official, vehicles for hire may be parked on city property for more than one hour continuously during special events or when otherwise authorized by the designated city official. 
The designated city official shall have the authority to designate areas within the city as taxi stands, subject to the limitation that one stand always be located within 100 feet of the Tybrisa/Strand traffic circle. Otherwise, taxi stand locations are subject to change, following ten days written notice to all vehicle for hire companies that are then currently licensed under this article. In addition, during the hours of 7:00 p.m. until 5:00 a.m., vehicles for hire may use areas within the city designated as "loading zones" as a place to load and unload passengers, subject to the same rules and time constraints that are in effect for each loading zone. 
Vehicles for hire may not be parked in areas designated by signage as "Vehicle for Hire: No Parking Zone" or similar language. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-203. - Indemnification. 
Any taxicab, tour service vehicle or vehicle for hire operating under this article shall hold the city harmless against any and all liability, loss, costs, damages, or expense which may accrue to the city by reason of the negligence, default, or misconduct of the company or operator in connection with the rights granted to such company hereunder. Nothing in this article shall be considered to make the city liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any taxicab, tour service vehicle or vehicle for hire operating under this article, its servants, agents, drivers, or other employees, during the operation by the company of a taxicab, tour service vehicle or vehicle for hire business or service, either in respect to injuries to persons or with respect to damage to property which may be sustained. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-204. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab, tour service vehicle or vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city unless the license holder shall, before the vehicle is placed in operation, file with the designated city official for each such vehicle a liability insurance policy for the injury of persons or property, a policy of indemnity insurance with an indemnity insurance company authorized to do business in the state for each vehicle in use as a taxicab, or a self insurance certificate issued under state guidelines and regulated by the insurance commissioner of the state. Proof of insurance shall be kept in the vehicle and on file at city hall. The minimum insurance coverage for any vehicle for hire covered under this article shall be in accordance with state law applicable to all automobiles and/or motor vehicles. Such indemnity insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who is injured or who sustains damage to property caused by the negligence of a taxicab, tour service vehicle or vehicle for hire company or the operator, whether servant, agent, or independent contractor. 
(b)  Blanket policy. Any company or person operating a vehicle for hire in the city shall give a separate policy of indemnity insurance or certificate of self insurance for each separate vehicle, except where such company or person actually owns or holds legal title to more than one vehicle, in which event, such company or person may give one policy of indemnity insurance or certificate or self insurance covering all the vehicles actually owned. This latter provision, however, shall not apply to any group of persons separately owning vehicles who may be jointly operating or doing business under a licensed taxicab, tour service vehicle or vehicle for hire company name. The vehicle for hire company is responsible for ensuring that individual persons operating vehicles under said license shall comply with all state laws and local ordinances governing insurance coverage. 
(c)  Proof of the original indemnity policy required shall be on file with the designated city official. 
(d)  Each certificate of insurance submitted to the designated city official prior to the issuance of a license shall include, by endorsement to the policy, a statement that written notice shall be given to the city by certified mail 30 days prior to cancellation or upon any material change in coverage. 
(e)  Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the applicant's license. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-205. - Signs and identifying markings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate in the city a taxicab or vehicle for hire unless the vehicle contains at least two signs measuring at least 12 inches in height by 18 inches in width clearly indicating that the vehicle is a taxicab or vehicle for hire, the name of the operator or company and a telephone number where the vehicle's services may be procured. The signs may be painted on the vehicle or attachable, but must be in place at all times the vehicle is operated as or available for hire. The operation of a taxicab or vehicle for hire for transporting passengers which does not bear the signage required by this chapter shall result in revocation of the operator's license. 
(b)  The requirements in subsection (a) shall not apply to motorized carts, personal transportation vehicles or low speed vehicles. For these vehicles, it shall be unlawful to operate in the city as a taxicab or other vehicle for hire for transporting passengers unless the vehicle contains the words taxi [word "taxi"] located on two opposing sides of the vehicle. The sign shall be in accordance with the sign regulations specifically enumerated in section (a), except where dimensions of the vehicle require a smaller sign. In addition, all of these vehicles must be in compliance with the requirements placed on motorized carts under this Code (section 66-8). 
(c)  A license to operate pursuant to section 34-194 is non-transferable, and every sign on a taxicab or vehicle for hire must reflect the name of the entity or person licensed pursuant to section 34-194. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-206. - Citations for violations of taxicab and vehicle for hire article. 
In addition to law enforcement, the designated city official, or other agents authorized by the city council and mayor, shall have the authority to cite or suspend vehicle operators and/or taxicab, tour service vehicles or vehicles for hire companies for violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-207. - Authority for removal from streets. 
The designated city official shall have the authority to remove from operation on the streets of the city any vehicle or operator which is in violation of this article and to prohibit operation of such vehicle until all deficiencies have been corrected. An order of the designated city official to remove a vehicle from the city streets may be appealed to the city council. Until the appeal has been heard and ruled upon, the vehicle or operator ordered to be removed from service shall not be used for operations. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-208. - Speakers and recorded messages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate speakers outside any vehicle for hire within the city; speakers may be operated within the confines of vehicles for the sole benefit of the passengers within the confines. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to utilize amplified sound to the extent it is audible outside of the vehicle for hire, which is not constitutionally protected in form and scope of audibility and which, under the circumstances, of time, place and manner in which it is produced and audible or perceptible, annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities within the area of the audibility or perceptibility of the noise or vibration without the consent of such person. 
(c)  All activity associated with a tour, including but not limited to interaction with people, actors, other tours and props must be contained within the vehicle or method of conveyance (motor coach, bus, trolley, automobile, van, segways, bicycle, carriage, walking tours, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-209. - Soliciting passengers prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit passengers verbally or by gesture, directly or indirectly, upon the streets of the city, or within and adjacent to, any publicly owned facility. 
(1)  Unlawful solicitation occurs when a driver solicits passengers: 
a.  From a location other than the driver's compartment or the immediate vicinity of the driver's vehicle for hire; or 
b.  In a way that obstructs the movement of a person, or follows any person for the purpose of unlawful soliciting. 
(2)  Anyone guilty of the offense of soliciting passengers is subject to a fine or fines as specified in chapter 42 — fees for violations of vehicle for hire ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-210. - Requirements on motor common or contract carriers. 
Any requirements specifically enumerated in this section shall be cumulative, or in addition to any requirements placed on motor common or contract carriers by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-211. - Safe and mechanical operation. 
All taxicabs or vehicles for hire shall be maintained in a safe and mechanical condition, with all safety and pollution equipment required by law remaining intact through service and operation. This inspection shall be performed annually by the designated city official, and shall be an additional condition precedent to the issuance of a decal establishing registration under this article pursuant to section 34-202. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-212. - Motorized cart use. 
In order to utilize a motorized cart, or personal transportation vehicle as a vehicle for hire, the motorized cart of personal transportation vehicle must be equipped to seat at least four people, the driver included. 
(Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Secs. 34-213—34-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ENTERTAINMENT LICENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 48-B-2014, § 1, adopted August 28, 2014, repealed art. VI, §§ 34-191—34-194 and enacted a new art. VI, §§ 34-191—34-212. At the editor's discretion, to prevent duplication of section numbering, §§ 34-201, 34-202, were renumbered as §§ 34-231, 34-232. 

Sec. 34-231. - License required. 
Any business establishment desiring to provide live or recorded amplified music or radio for the entertainment of its customers shall obtain an entertainment license from the city and pay all applicable regulatory fees and occupation taxes. 
(Ord. No. 16A-2012, § 1, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 34-232. - Application. 
(a)  The application for an entertainment license shall be made to the city manager or manager's designee in the name of the business establishment but licenses shall be subject to approval of the mayor and council. 
(b)  The application shall contain: 
(1)  The name of the business; 
(2)  The name of the owner or owners of the business or owners of any corporate or other entity which conducts the business; 
(3)  The name, address and 24-hour phone or contact information for a designated manager or designated contact person for any operational issues (any license holder must notify the city of any change in the contact representative and provide the same information on the replacement); and 
(4)  The address where the entertainment is to be conducted and the nature of any and all commercial activities conducted at the location to be the proposed hours of operation. 
(Ord. No. 16A-2012, § 2, 7-12-2012) 
Secs. 34-233—34-259. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SHORT-TERM RENTAL PROPERTIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-07B , adopted May 26, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as Art. VII, §§ 34-195—34-201. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, these provisions have been included as Art. VIII, §§ 34-260—34-266. 
Effective date of Ord. No. 2016-07B is May 26, 2016. 

Sec. 34-260. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to establish regulations for the use of residential dwelling units as short-term vacation rentals and to ensure the collection and payment of hotel/motel fees and occupation tax certificate fees. 
(b)  "Short-term vacation rental" means an accommodation for transient guests where, in exchange for compensation, a residential dwelling unit is provided for lodging for a period of time less than 30 consecutive days. Such use may or may not include an on-site manager. For the purposes of this definition, a residential dwelling shall include all housing types and shall exclude bed and breakfast accommodations as they are defined by the City of Tybee's Land Development Code. This is also identified as "STVR". 
(c)  An owner shall be required to designate an agent for any short-term vacation rental unit, whose responsibility it will be to comply with the requirements of this section on behalf of the owner. The owner may be the agent. 
(d)  "Short-term vacation rental agent" is a local contact person designated by the owner who shall be available at all times to respond to complaints regarding the condition, operation, or conduct of occupants of the STVR. Such person is customarily present at a location within the city for purposes of transacting business, and is responsible for taking remedial action to promptly resolve issues. 
(e)  The owner or agent shall not be relieved of any personal responsibility or personal liability for noncompliance with any applicable law, rule or regulation pertaining to the use and occupancy of the residential dwellings unit as a short-term vacation rental unit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07B , 5-26-2016) 
Sec. 34-261. - Application. 
(a)  Within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, no person shall rent, lease or otherwise exchange for compensation all or any portion of a dwelling unit as a short-term vacation rental, as defined in section 34-260, without the owner or rental agent first obtaining an occupation tax certificate and registering each STVR with the city. 
(b)  The city must be notified in writing within seven days when there is a change in property ownership, management, agent, or emergency contact. Failure to do so will void any registration. 
(c)  Registrant for a short-term vacation rental shall submit, on an annual basis a registration for a short-term vacation rental to the City of Tybee Island. The registration shall be furnished on a form specified by the city manager, accompanied by a non-refundable registration fee as established by city council and on file with the clerk. Such application should include: 
(1)  The complete street address of the STVR; 
(2)  Ownership, including the name, address, e-mail and telephone number of each person or entity with an ownership interest in the property; 
(3)  The number of bedrooms, the maximum occupancy and the number and location of off-street parking spaces on the premises and any off-premises parking applicable; 
(4)  The name, address and telephone number of a short-term vacation rental agent or local emergency contact if applicable; and, 
(5)  Any other information that this chapter requires the owner to provide to the city as part of the registration for a short-term vacation rental. The city manager or his or her designee shall have the authority to obtain additional information from the applicant as necessary to achieve the objectives of this chapter. 
(6)  The emergency contact number required by section 34-265. 
(d)  The registration form pursuant to this section shall be processed, and added to a database to be kept by staff listing STVR unit information and any citations that occur. The city shall notify the owner and agent of any instances that result in a citation for a code violation or other legal infraction. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07B , 5-26-2016) 
Sec. 34-262. - Regulatory fee/renewal. 
(a)  The short-term vacation rental application shall be accompanied by an initial regulatory fee and be subject to an annual fee every January 1 thereafter, as established by the mayor and city council. 
(1)  The regulatory fee shall be $100.00 per rental unit. An application is valid when completed and filed along with payment of the application regulatory fee. The fee shall be due January 1 of each year for short term rental purposes and, if not paid within 90 days thereof, shall be subject to the delinquency and penalty provisions of section 58-163 as applicable to occupation tax/business license provisions as well as the revocation of any right to use the unit for short term rental purposes until payment of the penalties and fee. In addition to the regulatory fee license as specified herein, the applicant shall also pay the required occupation tax each year. 
(b)  Each property shall be issued a registration number. 
(c)  Failure to register as prescribed by this law will result in a fine of $100.00 for each month that the unit continues to operate without registration. 
(d)  The annual registration of a unit and the regulatory fee are not transferrable. In the event ownership of a unit changes and even if there is no change in the management company managing the unit, the fee upon ownership change shall be $100.00 if the change occurs prior to July 1 of the year and $50.00 if after July 1 of the year. 
(e)  In the event a management company changes, the unit is to be re-registered by notice to the city and the regulatory fee will be $50.00 if the management company change is after July 1; otherwise, the fee is $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 16-2017-B , § 1, 12-19-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-2017-B , § 1, adopted Dec. 19, 2017, amended § 34-262 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 34-262 pertained to registration fee/renewal, and derived from Ord. No. 2016-07B , adopted May 26, 2016; and Ord. No. 06-2017-A , § 1, adopted Mar. 9, 2017. 
Sec. 34-263. - Good neighbor policy. 
The city shall make available on its website a list of STVR good neighbor policies which STVR agents are encouraged to share with their clients. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07B , 5-26-2016) 
Sec. 34-264. - Signs. 
All one- and two-family STVR units shall post a sign visible from the street listing emergency contact name and phone number. Such sign shall not exceed 24 inches x 24 inches. The emergency contact name and number shall be the STVR agent as required by section 34-260(d) unless otherwise specified to and approved by the city staff and any rental agency involved. The purpose of the required sign is to enable officers and third parties to identify appropriate contacts for issues with the property and/or the occupants and, therefore, the sign shall be located at such locations as approved by staff consistent with that purpose. 
Multi-family units shall post a sign visible from outside the unit listing the required emergency contact name and phone number. Multi-family units shall not exceed 8½ inches x 11 inches. All such signs shall be located at locations approved by staff consistent with the purpose of the sign requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07B , 5-26-2016; Ord. No. 16-2017-B , § 1, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 34-265. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-2017-B , § 1, adopted Dec. 19, 2017, repealed § 34-265, which pertained to emergency contact and derived from Ord. No. 2016-07B , adopted May 26, 2016; and Ord. No. 06-2017-A , § 1, adopted Mar. 9, 2017. 
Sec. 34-266. - Compliance. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner or agent to pay all required taxes required by chapter 58, article IV, room excise tax. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07B , 5-26-2016) 
Secs. 34-267—34-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - COMMERCIAL FILM PRODUCTION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14B-2016 , § 1, adopted June 23, 2016, pertaining to commercial film production, set out provisions intended for use as art. VIII, §§ 34-233—34-236. Inasmuch as art. VIII has already been designated, these provisions have been included as art. IX, §§ 34-300—34-303 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 34-300. - Permits required. 
(a)  No commercial film production activities of any type may take place within the city without a commercial film production permit as required by this article. Failure to present a permit upon request by an authorized city official may result in the immediate termination of any filming activity and potential fines and penalties as established in this article. Commercial film production activities means the use of motion picture, videotaping, sound recording, or other moving image or audio recording equipment that involves the advertisement of a product or service, the creation of a product for sale, or the use of actors, models, sets, or props. For purposes of this definition, creation of a product for sale includes a film, videotape, television broadcast, or documentary of participants in commercial sporting or recreation event created for the purpose of generating income. 
(b)  Exceptions. The following persons or entities are not required to obtain a permit: 
(1)  News media; 
(2)  Personal use/non-commercial video; 
(3)  Not-for-profit agencies; and 
(4)  Students engaged in completing school projects. 
(Ord. No. 14B-2016 , § 1, 6-23-2016) 
Sec. 34-301. - Application. 
Any person/agency intending to conduct commercial film production activities in the city upon public or private property, where authorization is sought to conduct activities that are ordinarily prohibited by local law, where state and/or federal permission or authorization is required, where city services are required, or public parking is required shall complete the current commercial film production application, approved by city council, provided by the city for consideration of approval. The film production application form will not be processed until it is submitted with all required information and payment of application fee(s). 
The application and rules related thereto shall be approved by the city council and shall be on file with the city. The current commercial film production application, as approved by council, including all production guidelines and restrictions contained therein, shall be adhered to in all respects. 
(Ord. No. 14B-2016 , § 1, 6-23-2016) 
Sec. 34-302. - Consideration of commercial film production application. 
(a)  City manager approval of productions. The city manager may approve applications without consulting mayor and city council where: 
(1)  All production will account for not more than five days in any 30-day time period; 
(2)  The production will impact not more than two city blocks; and, 
(3)  Not more than 25 parking spaces will be impacted by the production. 
(b)  Upon application made, within five business days, the city manager shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions. Where productions meet all of the criteria of subsection 34-235(a), and the production has activity on the beach and/or the state's shore protection jurisdiction area at any given time during production, the city manager may have up to 20 business days to consider the application. 
(c)  Productions taking place for six or more days shall complete and submit the application and the city council shall approve, deny or approve with conditions within 28 days of the city's receipt of a completed application. 
(d)  Where an application has been approved by city council, the applicant may seek an amendment to the permit, without having to secure city council's approval, by seeking written permission from the city manager, under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Extend the permit time frame by not more than three days, so long as none of the days fall on a recognized city holiday, and none of the days conflict with an annual island event or activity already approved by the city; 
(2)  Expand the footprint of any production, except where the expansion or original footprint is on the beach, and the expanded production area remains within the same city block(s) as approved by city council; 
(3)  The activity sought is not in direct conflict with any specific restriction placed on the applicant, as approved by city council; and 
(4)  Not more than ten city parking spaces are required. 
(e)  Where an application seeks approvals or amendments outside of any authority granted the city manager as herein expressed, the applicant must seek approval from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 14B-2016 , § 1, 6-23-2016) 
Sec. 34-303. - Non-compliance. 
In the event there is a violation of this article, in addition to ceasing any commercial film production activity, or other necessary actions as deemed necessary by the city manager or the police chief, violators will be subject to fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. Continuing film activities in violation of this article, or without a permit is a separate violation for each day of film production activity. 
(Ord. No. 14B-2016 , § 1, 6-23-2016) 
Chapter 38 - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 38-1. - Absence of judge; replacement; powers. 
(a)  In the absence or disqualification of the elected judge of the municipality, the mayor, or any member of the city council designated by the mayor, shall be the judge of the court of the municipality. 
(b)  The mayor, or any member of the city council designated by the mayor, as judge of the court shall have the power to preserve order, compel the attendance of witnesses, punish for contempt, have full power and authority to sentence upon conviction of a violation of a city ordinance, upon conviction of a state law where jurisdiction is inherent, applicable or waived, shall have the right to issue criminal warrants, to hold preliminary hearings and trials, to affix bonds, to commit those offenders to jail, to prescribe acceptable cash bonds, and to do and perform any other act necessary to assure the continuing operation of the court in the absence or disqualification of the elected judge. 
(Code 1970, § 2-16.1; Code 1983, § 2-5-1) 
Sec. 38-2. - Cost of court—Amount. 
There shall be assessed and imposed an administrative cost of court charge of $100.00 against every person convicted of an offense as charged in a citation or warrant issued by a duly authorized law enforcement officer of the city except offenses under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-8-76 and 40-8-76.1. 
(Code 1970, § 2-17; Code 1983, § 2-5-2; Ord. No. 03-2011, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 38-3. - Same—Allocation of proceeds. 
The administrative cost of court charge so collected shall be allocated and appropriated solely to defray the expenses of administering and operating the court of the city, the police department and the city jail, and all those costs so collected shall be used exclusively for those purposes. 
(Code 1970, § 2-18; Code 1983, § 2-5-3) 
Sec. 38-4. - Technology cost surcharge. 
There shall be imposed by the municipal court of the city a technology cost surcharge in the amount of $20.00 per offense for all offenses except violations of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-8-76 and 40-8-76.1. Said technology cost surcharge shall be in addition to all other fines and fees imposed by the municipal court. All revenue derived from the technology cost surcharge shall be utilized by the city to provide technological support for the police department and municipal court functions. 
(Ord. No. 02-2011, 2-24-2011) 
Sec. 38-5. - Indigent defense cost. 
(a)  When an offender in the municipal court enters a plea of nolo contendre, first offender, guilty, or is otherwise convicted, the court may impose as a condition of probation repayment of all or a portion of the cost for providing legal representation and other expenses of the defense if the payment does not impose a financial hardship upon the defendant or the defendant's dependent or dependents. Such payment shall be made by the defendant through the probation department to the city. 
(b)  In determining whether or not a payment imposed under this section imposes a financial hardship upon a defendant or defendant's dependent or dependents in determining the amount of the payment to impose, the court shall consider the factors set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-14-10. The public defender may provide the court with an estimated cost for providing to the defendant the legal representation or other expense of the defense. If requested by the defendant, the court shall hold a hearing to determine the amount to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 15-2014, § 1, 3-13-2014) 
Chapter 42 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Damaging public property—Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, damage or destroy or cause to be defaced, damaged or destroyed public property of any kind or character within the corporate or jurisdictional limits of the city; or to damage or cause to be damaged any street, roadway, lane, thoroughfare or public place within those corporate or jurisdictional limits. 
(Code 1970, § 12-4; Code 1983, § 11-1-4) 
Sec. 42-2. - Same—Special applicability for street surface cutting/opening. 
Section 42-1 shall be held to be especially applicable to any person who shall, without proper authority, cut or open any street, lane, alley or other public place for the purpose of laying or installing water pipes, electric or telephone wires, sewerage or mains, or for any other reason or who shall when given proper authority for the cutting or opening of any such street, roadway, lane, alley or other public place, fail or neglect, after the completion of the work for which that street, roadway, lane, alley or other public place was cut or opened, to restore immediately the same to its former condition. 
(Code 1970, § 12-5; Code 1983, § 11-1-5) 
Sec. 42-3. - Prohibited beverage containers in public areas. 
No glass or breakable containers, bottles or glass cups shall be used in public areas for the consumption of beverages in any of the public parking lots, sidewalks, walkways, or beaches of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-2013-A, § 1, 4-11-2013) 
Secs. 42-4—42-27. - Reserved. 
ARTTICLE II. - OFFENSE INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 42-28. - Firearms discharge. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge firearms, guns, pistols or rifles within the city or upon the strand or beaches of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 12-10; Code 1983, § 11-1-7) 
State Law reference— Discharging of firearms on or near highways, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103. 
Secs. 42-29—42-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 

Sec. 42-60. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful to commit any act of disorderly conduct. Disorderly conduct shall consist of any act which tends to or creates a disturbance of the peace and quiet of the public or community or of any person, class of persons, or of conduct which tends to cause or provoke a breach of the peace or corrupt private or public morals, or which is vile, obscene, degrading or immoral. Any of these acts of misconduct shall be punishable even though not committed in public, if the effect thereof might cause or provoke disorder or disturbance to the public or persons offended or affected thereby. Disorderly conduct shall consist of the following additional specific acts: 
(1)  Appearing in the streets, sidewalks, beaches, lanes, or in such portions of houses, stores or homes as to be visible to the public, and to expose to the public any nudity of the body as to affect the sensibilities of members of the public. 
(2)  Any person appearing to be under the influence of any intoxicating liquor or any drug to a degree which renders him a hazard shall not walk or be upon any public roadway, street or public right-of-way, including the public beaches, or upon the property of another person without consent of that person. 
(3)  Sleeping on the streets, beaches or lanes in parked automobiles or other parked vehicles while under the influence or resulting condition of use of intoxicants or opiates. 
(4)  Any act of immorality or indecency committed in public. 
(5)  Throwing or otherwise permitting, bottles, cans, paper or rubbish, including cigarette butts, to be deposited on parks, sidewalks, streets, beaches, lanes, highways or other public properties, or on private property of another. Included would be the removal by wind or otherwise of such items from pick-up trucks or other vehicles due to having such items unsecured on such vehicles. Parking lot and park users must keep trash in a container at all times. "Rubbish" as used herein shall include any matter that does not occur naturally in the area and specifically includes garbage, food items, peels, shells, etc., whether or not biodegradable. 
(6)  Spitting on streets or sidewalks. 
(7)  Cursing, fighting or any loud and boisterous noises or sounds in public and which cause public commotion and disturbance. 
(8)  Any act of which produces unnecessary stench or odors on any premises or which creates an unsanitary condition or affects the health of the community. 
(9)  Any person operating a place that entices or tends to debauch the morals of the patrons or guests. 
(10)  Any person operating a place in which gambling is permitted, or games of chance are used or played. 
(11)  Any of the aforementioned acts committed in any park, square, beach, church, place of amusement or place of business shall likewise be punishable. 
(Code 1970, § 12-6; Code 1983, § 11-1-6; Ord. of 6-11-2009(2)) 
State Law reference— Highway, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103. 
Sec. 42-61. - Noise from vehicle disturbing the peace prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating any vehicle on the street or parked on any street to make or cause to be made any boisterous or unnecessary noise or to disturb the public peace by sounding a horn, gong or similar device or instrument except as a warning of danger. 
(Code 1970, § 19-2; Code 1983, § 11-1-8) 
Sec. 42-62. - Obstruction of public passageways. 
A person who, without authority of law, purposely or recklessly obstructs any street, sidewalk, or other public passage in such a way as to render it impassable without unreasonable inconvenience or hazard and fails or refuses to remove the obstruction after receiving a reasonable official request or the order of a peace officer that he do so, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 11-1-9) 
Sec. 42-63. - Sleeping in public areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to camp or sleep on the streets, beaches, parks, parking lots or other public areas, whether in automobiles, trucks, campers, recreational vehicles or other vehicle, or in equipment designed and intended for the purpose of camping. Such activity may be permitted in public areas specifically set aside and designated for that purpose. Any person suspected of such activity may be charged with a misdemeanor and fined in accordance with section 1-8. 
(Code 1983, § 11-1-10) 
Sec. 42-64. - Penalty for littering. 
Anyone convicted of violating subsection 42-60(5) shall be fined not less than $100.00 for the first offense plus applicable court fees, and not less than $200.00 for subsequent offenses plus applicable court fees for any subsequent offense occurring within a 12-month period of a preceding offense. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2009(2)) 
Sec. 42-65. - Failure to attend court. 
It is a violation of the city ordinances for an individual cited with the violation of any ordinance or law to fail to appear as directed in the summons, warrant, or citation and such failure to appear shall be subject to a fine of up to $150.00. In addition, a redocketing fee may be assessed in the discretion of the judge or the judge's designee. 
(Ord. No. 18-2016 , § 1, 8-25-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-2016 , § 1, adopted Aug. 25, 2016, pertaining to failure to attend court, set out provisions intended for use as § 42-64. Inasmuch as § 42-64 has already been designated, these provisions have been included as § 42-65 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 42-66. - Consumer fireworks. 
Except as expressly permitted by state law or as otherwise provided herein, the discharge of consumer fireworks within the city at other than permitted events shall be unlawful. 
(a)  All words or phrases specifically defined in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 and used herein shall have the definition attributed to such word or phrase as provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1, et seq. Consumer fireworks may only be used and sold as provided in the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 and except as otherwise provided herein. 
(b)  Any producer of an event desiring to conduct a public display of fireworks shall first obtain a permit from the judge of the probate court of Chatham County in accordance with the provisions set forth under state law. A special use permit shall be required for anyone seeking to use, ignite, or cause to be ignited consumer fireworks beyond the time within which fireworks may be used under state law or outside of those time limits established under state law. In the absence of a special use permit granted by the city, fireworks may not be used from 9:00 p.m. until 11:59 p.m. on any day other than specific holidays authorized by state law and shall not be used in violation of the city noise ordinance. Except as specifically authorized by state law or herein, consumer fireworks may not be used, ignited, or caused to be ignited after 12:00 midnight. 
(c)  Consumer fireworks may not be used indoors or within the right of way of any public road, street, or highway, or in any other location specifically prohibited by state law and, further, may not be used, ignited, or caused to be ignited on any property wherein its use has not been authorized by the property owner or individual or entity in control thereof, including the property of the city. 
(d)  Consumer fireworks may not be used within 100 yards of a facility engaged in retail gasoline sales or storage or any facility engaged in producing, refining, processing or blending any flammable liquid or gas(es) for sale or within 100 yards of any electric substation. 
(e)  Consumer fireworks may not be used, ignited, or caused to be ignited in Jaycee Park, Memorial Park, the beach of the city, or any other property, including but not limited to any park, historic site, recreational area or other property owned, operated by, and/or under the control of the city unless a special use permit therefor has been granted. Special use permits shall require a fee of $100.00. 
(f)  Consumer fireworks may not be used, ignited, or caused to be ignited by any person under the influence of alcohol or any drug or any combination thereof to the extent that it is less safe or unlawful for such person to ignite consumer fireworks or as provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2.1. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to use, ignite, or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks within 100 yards of a nursing home. This prohibition shall not apply to the owner or operator of a nursing home facility. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful to use, ignite, or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks in such a manner as to endanger the safety of life, limb, health or property of any person. 
(i)  Consumer fireworks may only be stored for sale and/or sold by distributors licensed as provided by state law from locations within C-1 zoning subject to the additional restrictions set forth under state law. From the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived until January 31, 2018, temporary consumer fireworks retail locations must additionally secure a license as provided under O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(c). 
(Ord. No. 14-2017 , § 1, 12-14-2017) 
Secs. 42-67—42-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 42-90—42-106. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC NUDITY AND OBSCENITY 

Sec. 42-107. - Indecent shows prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit any vulgar, indecent, lewd, or obscene show, theatrical, opera, or concert. It shall be unlawful for the owner or manager of any ballroom, lounge, inn, opera house, or other houses where exhibits may be had to permit any vulgar, indecent, lewd, or obscene show, theatrical, opera, or concert to exhibit therein. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-11) 
Sec. 42-108. - Nude exhibitions or serving prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to permit, and no license shall be issued, for any nude, topless, or bottomless dancing, exhibition, or serving in a place in the city to which the public has access. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person displaying the nude body, regardless of whether male or female, to dance or otherwise perform as an entertainer in any public place or business establishment. As a means of clarification, no female shall publicly display the nipples of the breast, and no male or female shall allow to be exposed any private sex parts of the body, including the pubic hairs. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-12) 
Sec. 42-109. - Sex stores, shows, and paraphernalia prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore or shop; a triple-x-rated movie house; to conduct live sex shows; or to sell any type of sex manipulation paraphernalia. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-13) 
Sec. 42-110. - Obscene materials prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, within the city, to import, print, publish, exhibit, display, sell, or distribute any book, pamphlet, ballad, printed paper, stereopticon, moving picture, slide or film, or other thing, containing obscene language, or any obscene prints, figures, pictures, or descriptions manifestly tending to the corruption of the morals of youth, or introduce into any family, school, of place of education, or buy, procure, receive, or have in his possession any book, pamphlet, ballad, printed paper, stereopticon, slide or moving picture film, or other thing, either for the purpose of sale, exhibition, loan, or circulation, or with intent to introduce the same into any family, school, or place of education, or any other place of public amusement. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-14) 
Sec. 42-111. - Display of obscene materials prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful, within the city, for any person to put on display for sale, any pictures, magazines, papers and/or other reading material that: 
(1)  Has nude or partially nude bodies; 
(2)  Has suggestive sexual enticements or sexual perversity; and/or 
(3)  Suggests or describes any unwholesome sexual relations. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-15) 
Sec. 42-112. - Prosecution of violators. 
For the purpose of prosecution of violators of sections 42-107—42-111, each and every violation of every separate section hereof, shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-16) 
Sec. 42-113. - Penalty. 
Any person found in violation of sections 42-107—42-111 shall, upon conviction be fined not less than $100.00, or imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days, either or both, in the discretion of the judge. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-17) 
Chapter 46 - PERSONNEL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance pertaining to retirement plans for city officers or employees, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances shall be maintained separately. 
Sec. 46-2. - System of old age and survivor's insurance. 
(a)  Purpose . It is declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, under the agreement entered into by the state and federal security administration, to the employees and officials thereof, and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this Code, the benefits of the system of old age and survivors' insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act, the state enabling act and amendments thereto. In the pursuance of this policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take any action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(b)  Execution of agreements with regard to retirement system . The mayor, or other chief executive officer, of the city is authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the employees' retirement system of the state for coverage of those employees and officials as provided for in section 46-55 hereof, to include any employee (namely firefighters) that are in positions covered by a public retirement system, in the manner by that law provided. 
(c)  Withholdings from wages . Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided for in section 46-55 hereof are authorized to be made in the amounts and at those times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations and shall be paid over to the state agency. 
(d)  City contributions, etc . There shall be appropriated from general funds those amounts at those times as may be required by applicable state or federal law or regulations for employer's contributions and administrative expenses. These funds shall be paid over to the state employees' retirement system in accordance with regulations established by that agency. 
(e)  Records and reports . The city shall keep any records and make any report as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(f)  Excluded employees . There is excluded from subsections (a)—(e) of this section any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1970, §§ 14-5—14-9; Code 1983, §§ 2-4-31—2-4-36) 
Secs. 46-3—46-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERSONNEL RULES 

Sec. 46-23. - Generally. 
(a)  Purpose . These policies are adopted to provide for the recruitment and development of the best available employee for each position in the personnel system of the city and to establish orderly procedures for administering that personnel system to be consistent with the following merit principles: 
(1)  Recruiting, selecting and advancing employees on the basis of their relative ability, knowledge and skill, including open competition of qualified applicants for initial appointment; 
(2)  Establishing pay rates consistent with the principle of providing comparable pay for comparable work; 
(3)  Training employees, as needed, to assure high-quality performance; 
(4)  Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance, correcting inadequate performance and separating employees when deemed appropriate and necessary; 
(5)  Assuring fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects of personnel administration without regard to political affiliation, race, color, national origin, sexual orientation, age, religion or handicapped status; 
(6)  Establishing a procedure for the presentation and adjustment of employee grievances based on alleged injustice or inequality of treatment because of some conditions of their employment; or based on alleged discrimination because of race, color, national origin, sex, age, religion or handicapped status; 
(7)  Assuring employees protection against partisan political coercion and prohibiting their use of official authority for interfering with or affecting the results of an election or the nomination for an office. 
(b)  Administration . The responsibility for the administration and interpretation of the personnel rules and regulations are vested in the city manager in accordance with policy guidelines established by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Applicability of policy . The provision of the city personnel policy shall not be applicable to part-time, seasonal, temporary, or volunteer employees except where specified. 
(d)  Nepotism. No member of the immediate family of a department head may be hired or transferred into a department where a potential supervisor-subordinate relationship would exist. No relative of the city manager may be employed with the city. If two employees marry or become related, only one of the employees will be permitted to remain employed in the department. In addition, immediate family members should not be employed in the same city departments. Nothing in this section shall affect persons hired or transferred prior to the adoption of this policy. The city may consider requests for variance from this section on a case-by-case basis, and upon city manager approval. 
As used herein "related" and "immediate family" are synonymous and are to include spouse, child, step-child, grandchild, parent, grandparent, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew, or the spouse of any of them. These relationships shall include those arising from adoptions, persons who are married by common law marriage or who are living together without the benefit of matrimony are also considered related under the intention of this rule. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-1; Ord. of 1-11-2007(1); Ord. No. 25-2010, 2-24-2011) 
State Law reference— "Discrimination" defined, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-22. 
Sec. 46-24. - Classified or exempt service; at-will employees; emergency management. 
(a)  General allocation. All offices and positions of the city shall be allocated to the classified or exempt service. 
(b)  Exempt service. The exempt service shall include the following: 
(1)  All elected officials, city attorney and city judge; 
(2)  Positions involving seasonal or part-time employment; 
(3)  Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to serve without compensation; 
(4)  Consultants and council rendering temporary professional service. 
(c)  Classified service. The classified service shall include all other positions in the city service which are not placed in the exempt service. 
(d)  At-will employees. The city manager and the city clerk shall be "at-will" employees, serving at the pleasure of the city council, within the classified service of the city and all other employees within the classified service of the city shall be deemed to be "at-will" consistent with the provisions of the Charter. By providing for notices, hearings and appeals the city is in no manner altering the "at-will" status of employees in any respect. 
(e)  Emergency management. Whenever salaried employees work in excess of 40 hours per week in response to hurricane preparation and recovery needs, they shall be temporarily classified as hourly employees and be eligible for overtime compensation as a result of their extraordinary duties and assignments during such periods. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-2; Ord. No. 25-2010, 2-24-2011) 
Sec. 46-25. - Classification plan. 
(a)  Definition. The classification plan is the systematic grouping of positions into appropriate classes. 
(1)  A position is a group of currently assigned duties and responsibilities requiring the full-time or part-time employment of one or more persons. 
(2)  A class is a group of positions that: 
a.  Has similar duties and responsibilities; 
b.  Requires like qualifications; and 
c.  Can be equitably compensated by the same salary range. 
(3)  The class title is the official designation or name of the class to which a position has been assigned. It shall be used on all personnel actions. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this section hereinafter set forth shall apply only to the classified service unless otherwise provided herein. 
(c)  Establishment. A classification plan has been established and is maintained and filed at city hall. The plan is available for review by city employees. 
(d)  Basis for position classification. Each position shall be assigned or allocated to an appropriate job classification on the basis of the kind and level of its duties and responsibilities to the end that all positions in the same classification shall be sufficiently alike to permit the use of a single descriptive title, the same tests of competence and the same salary range thus carrying out the basic principle of classification, which is equal pay for equal work. A job classification may contain one position or a number of positions. From time to time a review of the job classifications shall be undertaken by the city manager and a report thereof shall be made to the mayor and council. 
(e)  Changes in classification plan. 
(1)  The classification plan may be amended from time to time by the city manager, with the approval of the mayor and council. Such changes may result from the need of creating new positions, changes in organization, or changes in assigned duties and responsibilities. 
(2)  The city manager shall review all requests for creation of new positions, the abolition or consolidation of present positions, reclassification of positions to different job classes, or the reallocation of positions to new salary ranges. In such review the current duties and responsibilities of the position concerned will be studied and the appropriate action necessary to ensure the correct classification and allocation of the position will be taken, and, when necessary in connection with an amendment to the plan, with the approval of the mayor and council. 
(3)  Each department head shall report to the city manager any changes in the organization or assignment of duties and responsibilities of a given employee which might result in changes in the position-classification plan or in the classification of any of the positions within the department. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-3; Ord. of 4-10-2008(3)) 
Sec. 46-26. - Pay for employees. 
(a)  Pay plan. The pay of all employees is governed by the pay plan for the class of position in which they are employed. In arriving at salary ranges, consideration shall be given to prevailing rates for comparable work in other public employment and private business, the current cost of living, responsibilities of the position, and the city's financial condition and policy. 
(b)  Pay steps. For each class of positions, a pay range is assigned, and for each class of positions within that range 12 pay steps are provided. Initial employment is normally at the first pay step for that position but in exceptional circumstances based upon experience or unusual qualifications of an applicant, an employee may be hired in a higher pay step. 
(c)  Notice to employee of pay step and salary range. After each class or position has been assigned to a salary grade and the pay plan and rules for its administration have been adopted by the mayor and council, each employee shall be advised of the applicable pay step and the salary grade to which the position title has been assigned. When an employee attains the maximum step in the salary grade for his position, said employee shall not receive further salary increases unless: 
(1)  The position is reclassified; 
(2)  The employee is promoted to another position having a higher salary grade; 
(3)  A general increase is granted to all employees; 
(4)  Longevity pay is approved; or 
(5)  Administrative salary adjustment - merit raise is approved. 
(d)  New employee pay. Generally, a new employee will be paid at the minimum of the approved salary range for the position to which the new employee is appointed. In exceptional cases a new employee may be appointed at the second or higher pay step based upon experience or other qualifications. 
(e)  Pay for promotions to higher class. When an employee is promoted to a position in a higher class, the employee's salary shall be increased to the minimum rate for the higher class. In the case of overlapping ranges the promoted employee shall be increased to the step immediately above the employee's present salary. 
(f)  Reinstated employees. A reinstated employee shall be paid at a salary rate within the approved salary range for the position in which the employee is reinstated. 
(g)  Rehired employees. Employees who voluntarily leave the city service and are subsequently rehired at a later date shall be considered a new employee. This means all benefits accrued during the previous period of employment are forfeited and length of service will be calculated from the most recent employment date. 
(h)  Transfer. The pay of an employee transferred to another position of the same pay range shall remain unchanged. 
(i)  Demotions. The pay of an employee demoted to a position of lower range shall be reduced to a stop within the range to which the employee was demoted. 
(j)  Administrative salary adjustments. The performance of each employee shall be reviewed annually during November through January, by the department head for the purpose of determining which employees shall receive merit increases or other changes. Personnel records, performance and length of service will be considered in making recommendations, with major emphasis on evaluation of services rendered by the employee. Based upon the employee's evaluation, the department head will make appropriate recommendations to the city manager for merit increases, promotions, demotions, transfers to other positions, training and education programs, and/or other appropriate personnel changes. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-4) 
Sec. 46-27. - Recruitment and selection. 
(a)  Recruitment for vacant positions. 
(1)  All full-time vacancies shall be publicized by posting announcements and by other such means as necessary to assure obtaining well-qualified candidates for the positions. The announcement shall specify the title and salary range of the vacant position, minimum qualification requirements, manner of making application, final date on which applications shall be received, and other pertinent information. Every reasonable effort shall be made to publicize vacancies so that all interested persons are informed and qualified persons who are attracted to compete. 
(2)  When a vacancy occurs, a recruitment plan will be developed by the city manager and the hiring authority based on current organizational needs. 
(b)  Application process. Applications shall be made on forms provided by the city manager. Such forms shall require information covering training, experience, and other job related information. Applications shall be signed by the persons applying. All persons must be informed that the application will be placed in an active file for a period of six months. 
(c)  Disqualification of applicants. The city manager may disqualify an applicant who does not meet the requirements for the position. An applicant may be disqualified for the practice or attempted practice of fraud or deception in the completion of his application. 
(d)  Documentation to be submitted by applicant. The applicant may be required to submit proof of his education, military service or any other such documentation as deemed necessary. 
(e)  Emergency hiring. In order to provide for necessary labor and services, at such times as a locally declared emergency exists and it is necessary to properly meet or cope with the emergency or disaster when the public health, welfare and safety are threatened, the city manager, without advertisement or posting, is hereby authorized at such time to hire, or authorize others to hire, as he or she deems necessary and to create any necessary positions to meet such state of emergency. Persons so hired shall be paid at a rate of pay as prescribed by council for skilled labor for city employees. Such appointment shall be temporary and any positions created temporary for the duration of the emergency declaration. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-5; Ord. of 7-13-2006) 
Sec. 46-28. - Appointments; medical exams; probationary periods. 
(a)  Recommendations and appointments . Department heads shall examine applications and applicants for employment and recommend to the city manager applicants for appointment to vacancies existing within their departments. Appointments shall be made on the basis of ability, training, and experience without regard to age, race, creed, national origin, sex, or handicap. 
(b)  Types of appointments . 
(1)  Permanent appointment . Appointment to permanent positions shall only be made when a vacancy in a permanent classification exists and such appointments shall be subject to a probationary period. 
(2)  Temporary appointment . In the absence of an appropriate list for filling vacancies, temporary appointments may be made for a period not to exceed 12 months. No temporary appointments shall be construed to confer tenure of office by the employee and any temporary appointment may be terminated at any time. 
(3)  Emergency appointment . When an emergency exists and in order to prevent stoppage of public service or loss or convenience to the public, appointments may be made for periods not to exceed 30 days. Emergency appointments shall be reported immediately to the city manager. 
(c)  Pre-employment medical examination . Prospective employees may be required to supply medical and health data, and complete a pre-employment medical examination as a condition for employment. The physician to conduct the examination shall be selected by the city and expenses for the examination assumed by the same. 
(d)  Probationary period . Each employee receiving an appointment with the city shall complete a probationary period of 90 days. For law enforcement personnel, in appropriate positions, the probationary period shall not be considered complete until the employee has successfully completed the required basic training course, even if the time to complete the said training exceeds one year. However, under no circumstances will the probationary period be less than one year. Notwithstanding any other provisions a probationary employee may be terminated with or without cause at any time and the provisions of section 46-33 are not applicable. At the conclusion of the probationary period, the department head shall recommend whether to: 
(1)  Retain the employee in the present position and classification; 
(2)  Assign the employee to an alternative position usually at a lower classification; or 
(3)  Separate the employee from city service. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-6) 
Sec. 46-29. - Drug free testing policy. 
(a)  Statement of purpose. It is the policy of the city that the abuse of alcohol and drugs by public employees is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the public. The purpose of this section is to establish reasonable standards and procedures for drug and alcohol testing of city employees and applicants for employment for certain public health, safety and security positions within the city. The city also recognizes that individuals employed as municipal employees have certain rights to privacy. However, under applicable state and federal laws, the city's interest in protecting the health and safety of the public outweigh the individual employee's legitimate expectations of privacy. Accordingly, certain procedural safeguards, limitations, and due process guarantees are set forth in connection with the testing required by this section. 
(b)  Scope of policy. Drug and alcohol abuse by city employees is prohibited. This shall include the illegal manufacture, distribution, possession or use of a controlled substance, the abuse of prescription medications, and the use of alcohol during or immediately preceding work hours or on city premises. This prohibition also includes the unauthorized use of prescription drugs or the abuse of prescribed drugs. The use or possession of prescription drugs while on work premises, or while working, which could affect or impair the ability to function in one's job shall be prohibited, unless the prescribing physician has been notified of the duties involved with the employee's position and has approved, in writing, the use of the drug while that employee is performing those duties. Use of "over the counter medication" which has a narcotic labeled as "can cause drowsiness," shall not be used by employees prior to operating a city vehicle or heavy equipment or performing other safety sensitive functions. If an employee is directly observed using alcohol, or a controlled or illegal substance while on duty, the city expressly reserves the right to immediately terminate the employee without testing as provided in this policy. The employee may appeal such actions as per section 46-35. 
(c)  Testing for certain drugs. When drug and/or alcohol testing is required under the provisions of this section, a urinalysis test, or other appropriate test, will be given to detect the presence of the following drugs: 
(1)  Alcohol (ethyl); 
(2)  Amphetamines (e.g., speed); 
(3)  Barbiturates (e.g., Amobarbital, Butabarbital, Phenobarbital, Secobarbital); 
(4)  Cocaine; 
(5)  Methaqualene (e.g., Quaalude); 
(6)  Opiates (e.g., Codeine, Heroin, Morphine, Hydromorphone and Hydrocodone); 
(7)  Phencyclidine (PCP); 
(8)  THC (marijuana); 
(9)  A metabolite of any such substances; 
(10)  All drugs specified by the state as controlled substances; 
(11)  All drugs required to be tested under applicable federal laws. 
(d)  Reasons for testing. 
(1)  Pre-employment. As a condition of employment so as to guard against hiring people with current drug use problems. 
(2)  Testing of current employees. 
a.  Reasonable suspicion. The city may require a current employee to undergo drug and/or alcohol testing if there is reasonable suspicion to believe that the employee is under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol during working hours. The term "reasonable suspicion" means a belief that can be articulated based upon specific facts and reasonable inferences drawn from those facts. Circumstances, which constitute a basis for determining reasonable suspicion, include, but are not limited to: 
1.  A pattern of abnormal or erratic behavior; 
2.  Observed use, possession or sale of illegal or prescription drugs or alcohol, or a report of same from a reliable source; 
3.  Employee involvement in or contribution to a work-related accident; 
4.  Presence of physical symptoms of drug or alcohol abuse (i.e., glassy or bloodshot eyes, alcohol odor on breath, slurred speech, poor coordination and/or motor reflexes); 
b.  On-the-job accident. When any employee has an accident in a city vehicle for which they are cited or listed on the police report as being "at fault" or when any employee has an accident or injury on the job that results in the employee seeking medical help under workers' compensation. 
c.  Violations of criminal drug law statutes involving the use of illegal drugs, alcohol, or prescription drugs and/or violations of other drug/alcohol statutes. 
d.  Follow-up program for treatment of drug or alcohol abuse. 
e.  Fitness for duty medical examination. When a substance abuse test is conducted as part of a regularly scheduled employee fitness for duty medical examination that is scheduled routinely for members of an employment classification or group. 
f.  Random screening. Employees may be randomly tested without reasonable suspicion when they are in a position involving public health, safety or security. Federal law under the department of transportation and the state department of transportation regulations require random and post-accident testing of all employees who possess a commercial driver's license which they utilize in the course of their job-related duties. The city manager will determine and provide a list of those employees who are subject to random drug/alcohol testing. 
(e)  Pre-employment drug testing. 
(1)  All applicants for employment who have been tentatively selected for a position must submit to a urine drug test before final selection. 
(2)  A positive drug screen invalidates the offer made by the city to the individual seeking the position. Applicants will be notified in writing if they are rejected on the basis of a confirmed positive result. The individual will not be able to re-apply for employment with the city for one year. 
(3)  Refusal by an applicant to be tested will result in the job offer being rescinded. 
(f)  Employee drug testing. As described above, there are several types of situations that call for testing of employees or prospective employees, including pre-employment, reasonable suspicion testing, random testing with employees in safety sensitive positions, and follow-up under discipline or employee assistance protocols. 
The city manager, or his/her designee, shall identify all positions considered safety sensitive. Positions so designated shall be positions that, if an employee in such position were in any manner impaired by controlled substances, the employee's ability to safely and/or substantially perform the duties of the position could be compromised with potential great risk of harm to the employee, other employees, or the general public. 
Any employee who refuses to consent to drug and/or alcohol testing when reasonable suspicion has been identified, or any employee in a safety sensitive position who refuses such testing' upon request, will be subject to immediate discipline up to and including termination. 
(1)  Reasonable suspicion drug testing. 
a.  A supervisor is required to detail, in writing, on the designated personnel form, the specific facts, symptoms, or observations, which formed the basis for their determination that reasonable suspicion existed to warrant the testing of an employee. This documentation shall be forwarded to the appropriate department head or designee as the city manager finds appropriate. These forms shall be considered confidential. 
(2)  On-the-job accident drug testing. 
a.  Any traffic accident involving a city driver in a city vehicle where the driver is "at fault" in the accident, will be required to be tested for alcohol and drugs. The determination of "at fault" should be made by the police. If an accident involves an injury or another vehicle, a police report must be obtained. Supervisors may decide to get a police report on any accident when there is a question of "at fault" status. 
b.  If the employee tests positive on his/her screen, he/she will be terminated from employment and not offered a "second chance" for treatment under EAP. 
(3)  Random drug testing. 
a.  Employees in positions defined by the city manager to be safety sensitive. 
b.  Employees with commercial drivers licenses under DOT regulations. 
c.  Employees referred to EAP for positive drug test or job related problems. 
(g)  Employee arrest/conviction notification. If an employee is arrested or convicted (including pleas of nolo contendere) of violating any criminal drug statute of any jurisdiction, regardless if the alleged violation occurred at the workplace or elsewhere, the employee must notify the city manager, in writing, within five calendar days of each arrest or conviction. 
(h)  Prior notice of testing policy. The city shall provide written notice of its drug-free testing policy to all employees. This shall be accomplished by providing each existing employee with a copy of the drug-free testing policy and obtaining each employee's signature attesting that they have received a copy of the drug-free testing policy. Job applicants may be informed verbally or in writing of the existence of the city's drug-free testing policy. Furthermore, any job posting which requires a drug/alcohol screening shall state such in the job posting. 
(i)  Procedures to be followed for reasonable suspicion testing. If, in the opinion of the department head or his/her designee, a reasonable suspicion (a reasonable suspicion must be based on objective indications of alcohol and/or controlled substance abuse; more obvious indications of alcohol and/or controlled substance abuse include repeated unauthorized absences, repeated illnesses, bloodshot eyes, slurred speech, lethargic behavior, rapid weight loss, behavior inappropriate or inconsistent with the workplace, or odor of alcohol arises, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  The supervisor shall determine if there is a reasonable suspicion an employee may be under the influence of alcohol or drugs, including controlled substances and prescriptions, or both. 
(2)  When possible, a supervisor should have a second supervisor or member of the management team verify suspicion through observance of the employee's behavior in the workplace. This second verification is required for CDL drivers. 
(3)  The employee shall be escorted by the supervisor to this/her office or to an area where confidentiality can be maintained. The other "observing" supervisor or management team member, if any, who can maintain confidentiality, should be witness to the conversation. 
(4)  The supervisor must be clear with the employee about the viewed behavior. The employee should be questioned as to whether he/she may be ill or taking medications. The supervisor should advise the employee of any odor of alcohol. The supervisor should use caution in questioning the employee about alcohol or drug use. The supervisor must keep statements and questions geared to job performance and/or work-related behavior. The reasonable suspicion observation form for supervisors included in this policy must be used when testing an employee "for cause." This form must be signed by the two supervisors, if two participated, and the supervisor if only one, and returned to the city's HR administrator or designee within 24 hours of the drug test. 
(5)  The department head should be contacted of the decision to test the employee. The HR administrator or designee should also be notified so the lab can be informed of the employee to be tested. 
(6)  The supervisor should escort the employee to the city's designated lab. The employee will be asked to sign a consent form prior to testing. 
(7)  After the drug test is completed, the supervisor should make the necessary arrangements to have the employee taken home. If the employee refuses assistance, or at any time during the process of this test decides to leave the worksite on their own, the police should be called to warn them of the employee's condition. 
(8)  The employee shall be placed on leave with pay until results from the drug/alcohol test are verified. If the test is negative, the employee is to immediately return to work. If positive, the employee is referred to the HR administrator or designee to be evaluated. The employee is immediately suspended without pay for five working days and will not [be] allowed to return to work until he/she has a negative drug/alcohol screen. 
(9)  Every effort will be made to uphold the principle of allowing the employee to get treatment for an alcohol or drug problem. If the employee has had previous treatment, has extensive problems related to job performance, or shows a lack of interest or motivation in getting help for his/her problem, a decision may be made by his/her department head for termination. After testing positive, an employee must have a negative screen to return to work after the five-day suspension. If the recommendation is to retain the employee, they will be required to follow through with a program of treatment, and a continuing care contract. Once the employee returns to work, he/she is subject to immediate termination not only for further substance abuse, but also for failure to follow through with the terms of his/her contract. 
(10)  Employees who are required to drive as a part of their work may be subject to suspension or loss of driving privilege as a result of a drug test or incident. This disqualification from driving may result in demotion to a non-driving position or termination form employment. 
(j)  Random testing for employees in positions defined by the city manager to be "safety sensitive. " The city manager, or his/her designee, shall identify all positions considered safety sensitive. Positions so designated shall be positions that, if an employee in such position were in any manner impaired by controlled substances, the employee's ability to safely and/or substantially perform the duties of the position could be compromised with potential great risk of harm to the employee, other employee, or the general public. 
(1)  Each year the city manager or his/her designee will designate a percentage of "safety sensitive" employees to be randomly tested. This percentage may be as low as ten percent or as high as 50 percent. 
(k)  Confirmation of test results. 
(1)  An employee or applicant whose test yields a positive result shall be given a second confirming test using a gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (G.C./M.S.) tests. The second test will be performed on the same sample as the first test; the employee/applicant will not be permitted to submit a second sample. 
(2)  If the second test confirms the positive test result, the employee or applicant shall be notified of the results, in writing, by the appropriate department head or designee. The letter of notification shall identify the particular substance found and its concentration level. A copy of the test results shall be included with the notification letter. 
(3)  An employee or applicant whose second test confirms the original positive test result may, at the employee's or applicant's own expense, have a third test conducted on the same sample at a laboratory selected by the city. The employee/applicant must respond to the notifying department head or designee, in writing, within five calendar days from receipt of notification of a positive test result, explaining and/or contesting the result, and/or requesting a third test conducted on the original sample. 
(l)  Consequences of a confirmed positive result for applicants and employees. 
(1)  Job applicants will be denied employment with the city if their initial positive results have been confirmed. Applicants will be notified in writing if they are rejected on the basis of a confirmed positive result. 
(2)  If an employee's positive test result has been confirmed, the employee is subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination in accordance with section 46-33. 
(m)  Mandatory termination. Termination will be mandatory in the following cases: 
(1)  Selling drugs on or off the job; 
(2)  A positive drug or alcohol test while either on probation or while participating in a drug or alcohol treatment program; 
(3)  A nolo plea, guilty plea or conviction of a second DUI offense; 
(4)  A DUI offense (nolo plea, guilty plea or conviction) while operating a city vehicle; 
(5)  A felony violation (nolo plea, guilty plea or conviction) of any controlled substance law. 
(n)  Right to a hearing. If an employee is tested, and the employee's positive test result has been confirmed, the employee is entitled to an informal disciplinary hearing as per subsection 46-33(c), before any disciplinary action may be taken by the city. Should any of the listed disciplinary actions be taken, the employee may appeal such actions as per section 46-35. 
(o)  Confidentiality of test results. All information from an employee's or applicant's drug and/or alcohol test is confidential under all applicable state and federal laws, and only those with a need to know are informed of the test results. Disclosures of test results to any person, agency, or organization, unless otherwise required by law, are prohibited unless written authorization is obtained from the employee or applicant. The records of the results of a positive drug test shall not be released until the results are confirmed. The records of a confirmed positive test result and the testing laboratory shall unless otherwise required by applicable law, destroy negative test results. 
(p)  Employee assistance program. 
(1)  The city offers an employee assistance program (EAP) benefit for employees and their dependents who have personal problems. These may include, but are not limited to, alcoholism and drug abuse. Voluntary participation prior to an employee being requested to submit to a test is strongly encouraged. In these situations, no disciplinary action shall be implemented because an employee volunteers to participate in such a program. Confidentiality is assured. No information regarding the nature of the problem will be made available without the participant's written permission, nor will it be included in the employee's personnel file. 
(2)  However, participation in the EAP program will not protect an employee from disciplinary action or even termination after he has been requested or required to submit to a drug/alcohol test. In these cases, the EAP process may be used in conjunction with discipline, but not as a substitute for discipline. All employees who are referred to the EAP as a mandatory participant and who refuse to cooperate in counseling and rehabilitation for drug or alcohol use, or who are found to have used drugs or alcohol during the course of their treatment and rehabilitation, shall be subject to immediate termination. All participants in the EAP drug or alcohol programs are subject to random testing during the course of their treatment and rehabilitation. 
(q)  Convicted employees' participation in rehabilitation. The city will notify any granting agency as defined in the Drug Free Workplace Act, within ten days after receiving notice of a conviction from an employee or otherwise receiving actual notice of such conviction and will impose a sanction on or require the satisfactory participation in a drug abuse assistance rehabilitation program by any such convicted employee as required by 41 USC 703 within 30 days of notice of such conviction. 
(r)  Maintaining a drug free workplace. The city will make good faith efforts to maintain a drug free workplace through implementation of the provisions hereof and the Drug Free Workplace Act, 41 USC 701 et seq. 
(Code 1983, §§ 2-4-6.1, 2-4-10.1; Ord. No. 27-2012, 10-8-2010) 
Sec. 46-30. - Types of employment. 
(a)  Full-time employees. Full-time employees shall be defined as personnel who regularly work 35 hours or more per week. Vacation, sick leave and holidays shall count as time worked for this purpose. 
(b)  Part-time employees. Part-time employees are those employed to work less than 35 hours per week. Part-time employees who regularly work 35 hours per week are eligible to participate in the city's retirement program. 
(c)  Seasonal and temporary. Seasonal and temporary employees are those employees who work either full-time or part-time, but are employed for a specified time period at the end of which they are separated from the city service. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-7) 
Sec. 46-31. - Records. 
(a)  Personnel transactions. All appointments, separations and other personnel transactions shall be made on forms designated by the city. A separate file folder shall be prepared and maintained for each employee and shall contain the original copy of all pertinent documents. 
(b)  Confidential records; information for public inspection. All personnel records of employees covered under these policies and all other records and materials relating to the administration of the personnel system shall be considered confidential and the property of the city as provided by law. Information which is obtained in the course of official duties shall not be released by any employee other than by the city manager. The following information relative to employees and former employees is available for public inspection at reasonable times and in accordance with such procedures as the city manager may prescribe: 
(1)  Name, class title and salary, selection records and performance rating report are accessible only to the department head concerned, the city manager, and the employee involved. 
(2)  Other personnel information may be made available for official purposes at the discretion of the city manager. 
(c)  Central personnel file. A central file of records on all personnel will be maintained. The file will contain for all employees: 
(1)  Job application; 
(2)  Copies of all position or pay rate changes; 
(3)  Attendance records, including vacations, sick leave, and other leave; and 
(4)  Other personnel action notices and personnel data required for the proper administration of the personnel program. 
(d)  Personnel record changes. If, at any time, an employee's address, name, phone number, or other pertinent information changes, the change shall be immediately reported to the employee's department head and the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-8) 
Sec. 46-32. - Separation of employees. 
(a)  Types of separation. 
(1)  Dismissal . An involuntary separation, except by expiration of term specified by law, suspension, layoff or retirement. 
(2)  Suspension . Involuntary separation during a limited period for disciplinary purposes. 
(3)  Resignation . Voluntary separation. 
(4)  Layoff . Involuntary separation through no fault of the employee as by reason of lack of funds, changes in organization, completion of temporary or restricted employment or similar causes and without adverse effect on the employee's eligibility for further employment. 
(5)  Retirement . Voluntary separation after age and length of service eligibility requirements have been met in a retirement program. 
(b)  Resignation procedures. Unless otherwise specified by contract, department heads are required to submit notices in writing to the city manager at least 30 days in advance of their intent to resign in order to leave city service in good standing. All other employees are required to notify their department heads in writing two weeks in advance of their intent to resign in order to leave city service in good standing. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-9) 
Sec. 46-33. - Disciplinary action. 
(a)  Types of discipline. 
(1)  Reprimand . An oral or written advisement to the employee that some phase of the employee's work performance is not satisfactory and must be corrected to prevent the employee from exposure to more severe disciplinary action. Reprimands may be given by the department heads. 
(2)  Suspension . Temporary separation without pay from the service for disciplinary purposes where the case is not sufficiently grave to merit dismissal. An employee may be suspended by the appropriate department head with approval from the city manager. 
(3)  Demotions . Demotions are necessary in order that employees whose work has not been satisfactory, but who do not deserve dismissal, may be retained and assigned less difficult work. An employee may be demoted by the appropriate department head with approval from the city manager. 
(4)  Dismissals . Dismissals are necessary as a result of inadequate or inefficient performance or when such action is deemed necessary and appropriate by the supervisor and/or the city manager. Consistent with the provisions of the city's charter, employees serve "at-will" and can be dismissed with or without cause. 
(b)  Causes for discipline. Notwithstanding any other provision hereof or the progressive discipline system provided for herein or which may hereafter be established, the at-will status of employees contemplated by the city's charter is at all times applicable. In addition, an employee may be reprimanded, suspended, demoted or dismissed for the following reasons: 
(1)  Incompetence or inefficiency in the performance of the duties of the position; 
(2)  Violation of any lawful official regulation or order, or failure to obey any proper direction made and given by a superior; 
(3)  Misappropriation, destruction, theft or conversion of city property; 
(4)  Falsification of any information required by the city; 
(5)  Negligence or carelessness resulting in damage to city property or equipment; 
(6)  Offensive conduct or language in public or toward the public, city officials, or fellow employees, either on or off duty; 
(7)  Habitual tardiness and/or absenteeism; 
(8)  Takes for personal use from any person, any fee, bribe, gift, token, monies or other valuable things given in the hope or expectation of receiving a favor or better treatment than that accorded other persons; nor shall the employee accept any fee, bribe, gift, token, monies or other things of value intended as an inducement to perform or refrain from performing any official act; 
(9)  Introduction, possession or unlawful use on city property or in city equipment of controlled substances as defined by O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-25—16-13-29; 
(10)  Employee subsequently becomes physically or mentally unfit for the performance of duties; 
(11)  Absences without leave or failure to give proper notice of absences; 
(12)  Conviction of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude; 
(13)  Willful violation of any provision of this policy; 
(14)  Sexual harassment. 
Disciplinary action against an employee based on age, creed, national origin, race or sex, or for partisan reasons shall be considered a violation of these rules. 
(c)  Informal disciplinary hearing. 
(1)  Informal disciplinary hearing. Before an employee other than a department head is suspended without pay, demoted, or dismissed from employment, he shall be entitled to an informal hearing before the department head. At least 12 hours prior to such a hearing, the employee will be furnished with a written notice stating the disciplinary action contemplated, and the reasons for such actions. This notice should advise the employee that he will have an opportunity to respond in writing and/or orally before the department head at the time of the hearing so as to effectively rebut the reasons for disciplinary action contemplated. Following the hearing the department head shall confer with the city manager and personnel director, obtain the city manager's approval of appropriate action to be taken, and orally and in writing advise the employee of his decision; and in the event that disciplinary action is taken against the employee the department head shall orally and in writing advise the employee of the reasons for such action and that the employee may appeal the department head's decision. If disciplinary action is taken, it shall become effective immediately. A notice of the action taken, with a statement of the reasons therefor, will be filed in the office of the personnel director prior to closing of the succeeding business day. 
(2)  Disciplinary action against department heads shall be administered by the city manager in accordance with a hearing procedure requiring at least 12 hours notice to the department head and the opportunity for the department head to respond and present evidence. No appeal is permissible from the city manager's decision by a department head. 
(d)  Suspension with pay prior to hearing. In any extraordinary situation where an employee is unfit to perform his work under circumstances where retention of the employee pending a hearing might result in damage to the property or injury to the employee or other persons or the employee is physically unable to perform his duties, or retention might be detrimental to the interest of the city government or pending an investigation of disciplinary issues, an employee may be suspended temporarily with pay prior to a hearing. A hearing will then be scheduled as soon as practicable to determine whether the temporary suspension was without pay, if the employee desires such a hearing. The provisions of subsection (c) of this section and this subsection shall not apply to probationary employees. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-10; Ord. No. 25-2010, 2-24-2011) 
Sec. 46-34. - Sexual harassment. 
(a)  Goal. The city has a goal of establishing a workplace free from sexual harassment. Every employee of the city has a duty to protect and safeguard the rights and opportunities of every other employee to seek, obtain, and hold employment without subjugation to sexual harassment of any kind in the workplace. Ensuring a workplace environment free of sexual harassment is a goal that all employees are to share and to work together toward achieving. All employees are responsible for the implementation of and compliance with this goal. 
(b)  Definition. 
(1)  Sexual harassment is defined as: 
a.  Making unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when submission to, or rejection of such conduct is made, explicitly or implicitly, and basis for any decision affecting employee status (e.g., pay, promotion, assignment, termination, etc.); or 
b.  Creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment through: 
1.  Verbal conduct such as sexual innuendoes, suggestive comments, jokes of a sexual nature or sexual propositions; 
2.  Nonverbal conduct such as sexual suggestive objects or pictures, graphic commentaries, leering, whistling, or obscene gestures; or 
3.  Physical conduct such as unwanted physical contact of any nature including touching, pinching or brushing the body. 
(2)  Such conduct is prohibited in the workplace. 
(3)  The term "harassment" generally suggests a pattern of conduct; however, an isolated instance of conduct as described above could constitute harassment depending on the circumstances of the particular incident. 
(c)  Implementation. 
(1)  The city requests and encourages any employee who believes that he has been subjected to any such prohibited conduct described above by any other employee to report the incident to his immediate supervisor. 
(2)  If the alleged conduct is that of the immediate supervisor, the employee is encouraged to report such incident directly to the department head. 
(3)  If the alleged conduct is that of the department head the employee is encouraged to report such incident to the city manager. 
(4)  The immediate supervisor, department head, or city manager, as applicable, shall conduct a prompt, confidential investigation of all alleged incidents of prohibited conduct. Any employee who is found to have either engaged in, or condoned prohibited conduct will be subject to disciplinary action, as appropriate, up to and including termination. 
(d)  Nonretaliation. This goal also prohibits retaliation against employees who bring harassment charges or assist in investigating charges. Any employee bringing a sexual harassment complaint or assisting in the investigation of such a complaint will not be adversely affected in terms and conditions of employment, nor discriminated against or discharged because of the complaint. 
(e)  Appeals. Decisions made under this section may be appealed in the same manner as any other personnel decision, pursuant to section 46-35. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-10.2) 
Sec. 46-35. - Appeal of disciplinary action. 
After any suspension without pay, demotion, or dismissal from city employment, the affected employee shall have the right to appeal within five days after the effective date of the disciplinary action. The employee should notify the city manager in writing of his desire to have a hearing. The city manager shall promptly notify the employee of the time of the hearing in writing, the reasons for the disciplinary action taken, the names and the nature of the testimony of the witnesses against him, and that the employee will have an opportunity to present evidence on the issues. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-11) 
Sec. 46-36. - Grievances. 
(a)  In general. The effective accomplishment of the work of the city requires prompt consideration and equitable adjustment of employee grievances. It is the desire of the city to adjust the causes of grievances informally, and the city manager, department heads and employees are expected to make every effort to resolve problems as they arise. 
(b)  Procedure follows lines of authority. In the city, procedures follow the established lines of authority. An employee first discusses the problem with the appropriate department head within 30 calendar days from the date the grievant first becomes aware of his grievance. 
(c)  Grievance presented to city manager. If satisfaction is not achieved by the above procedure within ten working days, the grievance must then be presented by the grievant to the city manager. Grievance problems carried to the city manager must be submitted in writing. 
(d)  Meeting to discuss grievance. The city manager shall convene a meeting within ten days to consider the grievance. The employee and the department head shall have the right to appear and be heard. The city manager shall take appropriate action which may include a recommendation to change the personnel rules and regulations, a finding that the grievance is unjustified or a finding that the situation is not subject to the grievance procedure or not a grievable matter or any other appropriate recommendation or determination. 
(e)  Effect of using grievance procedure. No employee shall be disciplined or discriminated against in any way for proper use of the grievance procedure. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-12; Ord. No. 25-2010, 2-24-2011) 
Sec. 46-37. - Annual leave. 
Annual leave is based on years of service to the city and is computed as follows: 
(1)  Permanent appointments—Full-time employees. Employees who have a permanent appointment and work full-time, in their first year of service earn one-half of a day per month of annual leave, or six work days in the first year. Accumulation begins as soon as employment begins, but annual leave may not be taken until after three months of continuous employment with the city. Employees with one or more years of continuous service earn leave at the rate of one day per month, or 12 work days per year. Employees with ten or more years of continuous service earn leave at the rate of 1½ days per month, or 18 work days per year. 
(2)  Service requirement. Vacation leave is earned during any month in which the employee is at work at least one-half the work days within that month. 
(3)  Vacation leave schedule. 
a.  Vacation leave shall be scheduled by the department heads, and approved by the city manager, with particular attention to seniority of employees, departmental operating requirements, and insofar as possible, the requests of the employees. 
b.  Employees shall submit in writing a request for vacation leave to their department head prior to the desired vacation date. 
c.  Vacation leave may not be taken in increments of less than one-half day. 
d.  Vacation leave may be accrued to a maximum of 30 days. 
(4)  Pay in lieu of vacation leave. Any employee eligible for vacation time may elect to be paid for not more than 40 hours of accrued vacation leave once each year by notifying the appropriate department head on the form provided for this purpose, provided the employee has taken off a minimum 40 hours' vacation prior to this request, during the same calendar year, and provided that permission is approved by both the department head and the city manager. 
(5)  Employee donation of vacation leave. An employee may elect to donate some portion of his/her accrued vacation leave to another employee in need under the following conditions: 
a.  Such vacation leave must be transferred, on an hourly basis as opposed to a cost basis. The donee may only use the donated time for actual sick leave. 
b.  The recipient must be in need of additional leave time for personal illness or illness of a family member and must be at the point of taking leave without pay. 
c.  Vacation leave, once donated, shall not be given back to the donor except where the conditions of subsection b. above are met. 
d.  In no case shall the donor transfer vacation leave to another employee for the single purpose of avoiding losing vacation leave. 
e.  The sale or trade of vacation leave for purposes which would circumvent the spirit of this procedure is prohibited. 
f.  Requests to donate vacation leave should be made in writing to the department head and the city manager. 
(6)  Possible requirement of vacation leave. The city recognizes the benefit of employees having time off for leisure and recreation. Department heads and/or the city manager may therefore require employees to utilize a maximum of 40 hours' vacation leave each calendar year as time off from work. 
(7)  Other employees. 
a.  Employees who have a permanent appointment and work part-time, earn annual leave on a prorated basis, as determined by the city manager, computed on the basis of the ratio of hours worked during the prior three-month period relative to the work defined for full-time employment. 
b.  Employees who have a temporary appointment and work full-time, other than seasonal employees, earn annual leave on the same basis as employees who have permanent appointments. 
c.  Employees who have a temporary appointment and work part-time; and seasonal employees working either full-time or part-time; and employees who have an emergency appointment, do not earn annual leave. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-13(a); Ord. of 7-14-2005, § (a)) 
Sec. 46-38. - Sick leave. 
Sick leave is given to employees only for sound and valid reasons. It is so designed to meet necessary, emergency conditions of illness. Each department head has the authority to approve or disapprove sick leave applications. Sick leave shall not be abused; it is to be used as insurance for salary continuation in the event an employee becomes ill and is unable to work. 
(1)  Eligibility. An employee may be eligible for sick leave for the following reasons: 
a.  Personal illness; 
b.  Quarantine of an employee by physician; 
c.  Illness in the immediate family requiring the employee to remain at home; 
d.  Death of a member of employee's immediate family. Immediate family shall mean and include spouse, child, step-child, grandchild, parent, grandparent, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew, or the spouse of any of them. These relationships shall include those arising from adoptions, persons who are married by common law marriage or who are living together without the benefit of matrimony are also considered related under the intention of this rule; 
e.  Appointments with physicians for self or dependents. 
All full-time employees, and career employees serving temporarily in substitute or acting capacities, are eligible to accrue sick leave as described in subsection (2) below. Temporary, seasonal, and part-time employees are not eligible for sick leave except as described below. 
(2)  Sick leave for on-the-job injury. An employee who sustains an injury on the job must, at the time of the injury or as soon as possible thereafter, notify the supervisor on the forms provided. The appropriate department head shall review the case and make recommendations to the city manager or designate for appropriate compensation. If the injury necessitates the employee's absence from work, the employee shall receive only that compensation provided under workman's compensation. 
(3)  Accrual of sick leave. 
a.  Employees who have a permanent appointment and work full-time, shall accrue sick leave at the rate of one day per month, or 12 days per year. 
b.  Accumulation begins as soon as employment begins, but sick leave may not be taken until after three months of continuous employment with the city. 
c.  Sick leave is accrued during any month in which the employee is at work at least one-half the work days within that month. 
(4)  Reporting of sick leave. An employee who is absent from work because of illness is responsible for reporting to the appropriate supervisor or department head at the designated reporting time on the day of absence, and will be expected to keep his supervisor or department head informed of his progress on a regular basis; such leave will be charged against sick leave. Where a relief employee is required in a department which must provide 24 hours' sustained service, the employee, if possible, should report his absence two hours before the designated reporting time. In the event of failure of compliance with this provision, the employee will be charged on the payroll with leave without pay. A physician's certificate may be required for sick leave absences of three or more days. 
(5)  Use of sick leave. Sick leave is not to be considered a right which an employee may use at his discretion, but a privilege not to be abused. Abuse or misuse of sick leave is a cause for disciplinary action since falsification of any information required by the city and/or "absences without leave" are both causes for reprimand, suspension, and dismissal. Department heads who feel an employee is abusing the sick leave privilege may also require the employee to furnish a doctor's certificate for each period of absence regardless of the provision of subsection (4) above. 
(6)  Accumulated sick leave. An employee, upon separation from the city service, shall not receive payment for accumulated sick leave. 
(7)  Extended sick leave. In addition to sick leave accrued, additional sick leave may be advanced up to a maximum of 12 days with the approval of the city manager. Extended sick leave will be granted only due to extraordinary circumstances, such as for a serious injury or disease, (heart attack, cancer treatment, not for a cold, headache, or flu). Sick leave may not be advanced during a leave without pay status. Leave records will show a negative balance until normal accruals reduce the balance to zero. 
(8)  Sick leave wellness incentive. Employees who successfully undertake wellness programs are eligible for monetary incentives. Qualified wellness programs include weight reduction programs, stop smoking programs, preventive physical examinations, and similar wellness-promotion activities. Eligible employees may apply for monetary incentives by providing the city manager receipts of expenditures made and proof of results achieved. Incentives payments shall be at the rate of 300 percent of the value of sick leave hours surrendered by the employee to the city, at the discretion of the city manager. 
(9)  Other employees. 
a.  Employees who have a permanent appointment and work part-time accrue sick leave on a prorated basis, as determined by the city manager, computed on the basis of the ratio of hours worked during the prior three-month period relative to the work defined for full-time employment. 
b.  Employees who have a temporary appointment and work full-time, other than seasonal employees, accrue sick leave on the same basis as employees who have permanent appointments. 
c.  Employees who have a temporary appointment and work part-time; and seasonal employees working either full-time or part-time; and employees who have an emergency appointment, do not accrue sick leave. 
(10)  Any employee may accumulate at most a maximum of 65 days (520 hours) of sick leave. No additional sick leave will be credited until sick leave time is used and an employee's accrued sick leave falls below 520 hours. Employees who have accrued more than 520 hours prior to the effective date hereof (January 12, 2012) shall retain those hours, but no additional sick leave will be credited until accumulated sick leave is used and the accrued hours fall below 520 hours at which time credit will recommence subject to a 520 hour maximum. 
(11)  An employee may be compensated for up to 65 days of sick leave at the rate of $25.00 per day upon retirement or death. In the event the payment is owed as a result of the death of the employee, the payment will be made to the beneficiary designated by the employee for this purpose and/or to the representative(s) of the employee's estate if no beneficiary is designated. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-13(b); Ord. of 7-14-2005, § (b); Ord. No. 2010-03, 3-11-2010; Ord. No. 07-2012, 12-8-2011) 
Sec. 46-39. - Civil leave. 
An employee will be granted civil leave when it is necessary for the employee to answer a subpoena, perform emergency civilian duty for national defense, or serve on a jury. The employee will be paid his or her regular salary while on civil leave and such leave shall not count against vacation or sick leave. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-13(c); Ord. of 7-14-2005, § (c)) 
Sec. 46-40. - Military leave. 
Employees may receive a leave of absence not to exceed 15 days for participation in the National Guard, Reserved Armed Forces or other military duty. The employee will be paid his or her regular salary during this period in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-2-279. Request for leave shall be accompanied by a copy of the official orders requiring training or duty. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-13(d); Ord. of 7-14-2005, § (d)) 
Sec. 46-41. - Maternity leave. 
Maternity leave may be charged to accumulated sick leave, vacation leave to the extent available, or may, at the option of the employee, be taken without pay. The same procedures for sick leave, vacation leave and leave without pay shall apply where appropriate. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-13(e); Ord. of 7-14-2005, § (e)) 
Sec. 46-42. - Leave without pay. 
(a)  Generally. When it is deemed in the best interest of the employee and the city, a permanent status career employee may be granted leave without pay for personal or other reasons, provided such leave is recommended by the department head and approved by the city manager. Non-career employees are not eligible for grants of leave without pay. Leave without pay shall not exceed one year. 
(b)  Valid reasons. Valid reasons shall include, but not be confined to, the following: Prolonged illness or disability of the employee or a member of the employee's household, educational or training enrichment, pregnancy and childbirth, and military service. 
(c)  Procedure for requesting leave without pay. Application for leave without pay shall be submitted in writing in advance, showing the employee's reason for requesting such leave and shall contain a statement that he intends to return to the city service upon expiration of such leave and that he agrees to the terms and conditions as outlined in these policies. In emergency situations, when an employee does not have accrued leave and is unable to return to work as scheduled as a result of illness or emergency reasons, his department may recommend approval of the granting of leave without pay without prior application by the employee, or the personnel officer may investigate and make such recommendations in the absence of the department head. 
(d)  Temporary filling of position of employee on leave without pay. During the employee's approved leave of absence, his position may be filled by the temporary appointment of a substitute. At the expiration of leave without pay, the employee (subject to subsection (e) below) shall be reinstated in his former position, and the substitute employee returned to his former position without loss of status or benefits. 
(e)  Rights of employee on leave without pay; reinstatement in former position. Employees granted leave without pay not exceeding two calendar months shall be entitled to reinstatement in their former position. For employees granted leave without pay exceeding two calendar months, every effort will be made to return the employee to his former position or a comparable one. He shall be listed on reemployment lists in the same manner as employees who are laid off in good standing. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-13(f); Ord. of 7-14-2005, § (f)) 
Sec. 46-43. - Holiday leave. 
The city observes paid holidays each year in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Observed holidays. The following are observed as paid holidays: New Year's Day; Martin Luther King Day; President's Day; St. Patrick's Day; Memorial Day; Independence Day; Labor Day; Veteran's Day; Thanksgiving Day and Friday after Thanksgiving Day; Christmas Eve and Christmas Day. 
(2)  Optional paid holiday. Each employee has the option of observing their own birthday in lieu of observing President's Day. If an employee elects to take his own birthday in lieu of President's Day, the day off must be taken within three days of the actual birthday date. 
(3)  Observation of weekend holidays. When a holiday falls on a Saturday, it is observed on the Friday before. If it falls on Sunday, it is observed on the following Monday. 
(4)  Alternative paid holidays for certain holidays. Uninterrupted continuation of service is required of some city departments. Consequently, the work schedule of employees in those departments sometimes necessitates work on authorized holidays. Holiday leave for these employees shall be administered as follows: Employees who work on an authorized holiday shall be granted a workday of leave with pay at a later date to be determined by the appropriate department head. 
(5)  Permanent appointment with full-time service. Employees who have a permanent appointment, and who work full-time, are paid one full day's pay for each observed holiday. 
(6)  Permanent appointment with part-time service. Employees who have a permanent appointment and work part-time are paid one day's pay for each observed holiday on a prorated basis, as determined by the city manager, computed on the basis of the ratio of hours worked during the prior three-month period relative to the work defined for full-time employment. 
(7)  Other employees. Employees who have a temporary appointment and work full-time, other than seasonal employees, receive holiday leave on the same basis as employees who have permanent appointments employees who have a temporary appointment and work part-time; and seasonal employees working either full-time or part-time; and employees who have an emergency appointment, do not receive holiday leave. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-13(g); Ord. of 7-14-2005, § (g); Ord. of 1-11-2007; Ord. No. 18-2007, 12-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-44. - Family and medical leave without pay. 
(a)  Generally. The provisions of this section are regulated by the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (P.L. 103-3) and pertinent department of labor regulations as they may be promulgated. The city specifically reserves the right to add to, change or abolish the provisions of this section, in whole or in part, based upon pertinent action by any appropriate legislative, judicial or regulatory authority. 
(b)  Eligibility and reasons granted. 
(1)  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply only to those employees who have been employed for at least 12 months (such 12 months of employment does not have to be consecutive) and who have provided at least 1,250 hours of service during the 12 months before any leave is requested. In determining the hours worked, paid leave, such as vacation, sick or compensatory leave is not included. 
(2)  Conditions. The city manager will grant up to a total of 12 work weeks of Family and Medical Leave Act (hereinafter FMLA) leave to any eligible employee during any 12-month period for one or more of the reasons listed below. The 12-month period for purposes of this section shall be measured forward from the date any employee's first FMLA leave begins. However, employees are required to first use any accrued vacation, sick, holiday or compensatory leave for all or any part of this 12-week period. When paid accrued leave is used by an employee in lieu of unpaid FMLA leave, the city will only provide sufficient unpaid leave to total 12 weeks in the designated 12-month period of time. 
a.  Reasons. 
1.  Birth of child and to care for that child is requested within one year after birth of the child. Employees are required to give at 30 days' notice for a request for this reason and specify the amount of time requested. If, due to unforeseeable circumstances, some adjustment must be made to the requested leave, employees are required to provide the city with reasonable notice of such adjustment. Failure to comply with this notice requirements may be grounds for postponement of the requested leave. 
2.  Placement for adoption or foster care of a child if requested within one year after placement of the child. Employees are required to give at least 30 days' notice for a request for this reason and specify the amount of time requested. If due to unforeseeable circumstances, notice is not able to be given within the 30-day time period, employees are required to provide reasonable notice within two business days of learning of the need for leave. Failure to comply with this notice requirement may be grounds for postponement of the requested leave. 
3.  Serious personal health condition making the employee unable to perform the essential functions of his job. Employees are required to give notice as soon as practicable after the need for FMLA leave becomes known to the employee, and specify the amount of time requested. 
4.  Care for a parent, spouse, or child with a serious health condition. A qualifying child must be under 18 years of age or if older, incapable of self-care because of a mental or physical disability. Employees are required to give notice as soon as practicable after the need for FMLA leave becomes known to the employee, and specify the amount of time requested. For purposes of this policy, a parent includes only a biological parent or an individual who stands or stood in loco parentis to the employee when the employee was a child. Parent-in-law is not included. For purposes of this policy, child includes biological children, adopted children, foster children, step children, legal wards or a child of an employee standing in loco parentis and the child is either under age 18 or older and incapable of self-care because of a mental or physical disability. For purposes of this policy, spouse means husband or wife as defined or recognized under state law for purposes of marriage in the state where the employee resides including common law marriages in states where it is recognized. Domestic partners are not eligible for the provisions of this section. Leave for care of any other relatives or for any other individuals who may be a part of an employee's household is not authorized by this section. 
b.  Serious health conditions. For the purposes of this section, a serious health condition is an illness, injury, impairment or physical or mental condition that involves one of the following: 
1.  Hospital care. Inpatient care (i.e., an overnight stay) in a hospital, hospice, or residential medical care facility, including any period of incapacity or subsequent treatment in connection with, or as a consequence of, such inpatient care. Incapacity for the purpose of FMLA is defined to mean inability to work, attend schools, or perform other regular daily activities due to the serious health condition, treatment for it, or recovery from it. 
2.  Absence plus treatment. A period of incapacity of more than three consecutive calendar days (including any subsequent treatment or period of incapacity relating to the same condition) that also involves: 
i.  Treatment two or more times by a health care provider, a nurse, or physician's assistant under direct supervision of a health care provider or by a provider of health care services (e.g., physical therapist) under orders of, or on referral by, a health care provider; or 
ii.  Treatment by a health care provider on at least one occasion that results in a regimen of continuing treatment under the supervision of the health care provider. 
3.  Due to pregnancy, or for prenatal care. Any period of incapacity due to pregnancy or for prenatal care. 
4.  Chronic conditions requiring treatments. A chronic condition that: 
i.  Requires periodic visits for treatment by a health care provider or a nurse or physician's assistant under the direct supervision of a health care provider; 
ii.  Continues over an extended period of time (including recurring episodes of a single underlying condition); and 
iii.  May cause episodic incapacity rather that a continuing period of incapacity (e.g., asthma, diabetes, epilepsy, etc.) 
5.  Permanent/long-term condition requiring supervision. A period of incapacity that is permanent or long-term due to a condition for which treatment may not be effective. The employee or family member must be under the continuing supervision of but need not be receiving active treatment from a health care provider. Examples include Alzheimer's, a severe stroke, or the terminal stages of a disease. 
6.  Multiple treatments (non-choric conditions). Any period of absence to receive multiple treatments (including any period of recovery from them) by a health care provider or a provider of health care services under orders of, or on referral by, a health care provider, either for restorative surgery after an accident or other injury or for a condition that would be likely to result in a period of incapacity of more than three consecutive calendar days in the absence of medical intervention or treatment, such as cancer, chemotherapy, radiation, etc., severe arthritis (physical therapy) or kidney disease (dialysis). 
(3)  Notice required; initial certification. Employees must give 30 days' notice for all requests for leaves of absences for any planned medical treatment. If the employee fails to give 30 days' notice, when requested, for foreseeable leave, with no reasonable excuse for the delay, the city manager may deny the taking of FMLA leave until at least 30 days after the date the employee provides notice to the city manager of the need for FMLA leave. All requests for FMLA leave for the serious medical condition of the employee, spouse, parent or child must be substantiated by a health care provider's certification of the existence of such medical condition. The initial certification must be provided within 15 days after the city requests such certification. The city's request for certification shall be written and addressed to the employee. 
(4)  Recertification of health status; reduced work schedule; etc. The employee is required to provide his department head on the beginning day of the sixth and twelfth week of FMLA leave, a recertification by the health care provider of the status of the employee's, spouse's, parent's or child's serious medical condition, and a written statement by the employee as to his intention to return to work. If the employee's FMLA leave is intermittent or a reduced schedule of work, the employee shall provide the required recertification and written statement of intent at such time as the employee's accumulated FMLA leave totals six weeks and 12 weeks. Intermittent leave or a reduced schedule of work may be taken whenever medically necessary to care for a seriously ill family member or because the employee is seriously ill and unable to work. Employees needing intermittent leave or leave on a reduced schedule must attempt to schedule their leave so as to not disrupt the department's operation. Intermittent leave or a reduced work schedule will not be approved for birth of a child, placement for adoption or foster care of a child. The city reserves the right to temporarily transfer an employee on intermittent leave or a reduced work schedule to work an alternative position, with equivalent pay and benefits that better accommodates the recurring periods of leave than the employee's regular position. 
(5)  Both spouses employed by city. If a husband and wife are employed by the city, they are limited to a combined total of 12 work weeks of FMLA leave during any 12-month period for the following reasons only: 
a.  Birth of a child, and to care for the newborn child; 
b.  Placement of a child with the employee for adoption or foster care; or 
c.  The care of a parent with serious health condition. 
(6)  Updated address. The employee is required to keep the department of personnel (payroll section) advised of his current address at all times. 
(c)  Employee benefits during leave. 
(1)  Health insurance. The city will provide and pay for the same group health care coverage during the FMLA leave in the same manner as for active employees. The city will notify the employee on FMLA to pay the employee portion of any health insurance premium owned to the city during his absence. If the employee elects not to return to work after the FMLA leave, the city will initiate proceedings to collect the city's portion of the premium paid during the leave of absence. The city will not collect such premiums if the employee fails to return to work after the FMLA leave due to a continuation, recurrence or onset of the medical condition or other circumstances affecting the employee or other family members which are clearly beyond the employee's control. 
(2)  Life insurance. The employee may elect to continue coverage of the city's life insurance benefit. The employee is responsible for timely payment of all premiums, including city's portion during his absence. The employee is responsible for timely payments of all premiums for any supplemental policies the employee wishes to continue. Failure to pay the monthly premiums within 30 days of the due date will result in termination of the coverage. 
(3)  Vacation and sick leave. No vacation or sick leave will be earned by an employee on leave of absence without pay status. 
(4)  Pension plans. No contributions will be made to the employee's supplemental pension fund while on leave without pay status. However, credit for service time for the employee's regular pension plan will be credited to any employee while on leave without pay status for family and medical leave purposes only. 
(5)  Performance evaluations, performance awards and longevity bonuses. Any leave of absence without pay for four or more weeks will result in a corresponding adjustment of evaluation date and if eligible, the effective date of award of any eligible performance raise or bonus or longevity bonus will also be adjusted. 
(d)  Return to work. 
(1)  Failure to return. An employee is expected to return to work no later than the first workday of the week following the expiration of the FMLA leave for the above reasons. Failure to do so for any reason will constitute abandonment of the city employment by he employee. 
(2)  Job status at time of return. Upon return to work from FMLA leave, an employee will be restored to his original job, or to an equivalent job with equivalent pay, benefits, and other employment terms and conditions. 
(3)  Absence due to personal illness. If the employee's absence is due to personal illness, the employee may return to work at any time providing a fitness for duty certification by his health care provider. Employees who desire to return to work prior to the end of their leave must give the city notice a soon as possible, but no later than two work days prior to their return. If any employee who requests leave under this section is identified as a key employee (a salaried employee who is compensated among the highest ten percent of all city employees at the time of the request) when he requests such leave, then such employee may be denied restoration to his employment with the city under the following conditions: 
a.  The restoration of the employee to employment will cause substantial and grievous economic injury to the operations of the city; 
b.  The city manager gives written notice to the employee of his status as a "key" employee in response to the employee's notice of intent to take FMLA leave, and informs the employee of the potential consequences with respect to reinstatements and maintenance of health benefits if the city determines that substantial and grievous economic injury to the city's operations will result if the employee is reinstated from FMLA leave; 
c.  The city manager gives the employee written notice as soon as possible as a decision is made to deny job restoration and explains the reasons for the decision; 
d.  The city manager offers the employee a reasonable opportunity to return to work from FMLA leave after giving notice; and 
e.  The city manager makes a final determination as to whether reinstatement will be denied at the end of the FMLA leave period if the employee then requests restoration. 
(e)  Procedure. 
(1)  Employee's responsibilities. The employee requesting family/medical leave should complete a request form as provided by the personnel department. Such request form should be submitted to the employee's department head and forwarded to the personnel director and the city manager. The employee should meet with the personnel director to explain the circumstances of the leave and for the personnel director to explain the employee's right and obligations under this act. The employee is also responsible for providing all information required on the form, notice of absence when required and for all certifications by any treating health care provider. An employee must work cooperatively with supervisors and department heads to work out a treatment schedule which best suits the needs of both the city and the employee. 
(2)  Department responsibilities. The department head and the city manager are required to approve leave as outlined in this section for eligible employees. The city manager, department heads or supervisors are prohibited from discriminating against employees who take family and medical leave in employment decisions such as performance evaluations, promotions or disciplinary actions. Department heads are required to maintain the departmental and/or division poster notifying employees of the provisions of the FMLA. If an employee verbally notifies a supervisor or department head of the need for leave which may be eligible under this policy, such supervisor should require further of the employee of the need to have more information about whether FMLA leave is being sought by the employee, and to obtain the necessary details of the leave to be taken. 
(3)  Personnel director. The personnel director will serve as advisor to employees and supervisors on the requirements of eligibility for family/medical leave and the provisions of the FMLA. All records pertaining to family and medical leave will be maintained in the employee's confidential medical file in the custody of the personnel director. The personnel director will be responsible for notification of any premiums due from the employee and the collection of same. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-13(h); Ord. of 7-14-2005, § (h)) 
Sec. 46-45. - Overtime/compensatory time off; approval and designation. 
It is the intent and policy of the city to comply with the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act, as it applies to local governments, in its overtime and compensatory time provisions for city employees. In the event that the city's personnel policy should differ from the FLSA, the FLSA controls. Occasionally eligible employees may be called upon to work overtime, and such employees are to be paid at a rate of 1½ hours for each hour worked, in excess of 40 hours per week or in excess of their established work period, as applicable, or may receive compensatory time off. The following particulars apply: 
(1)  Only employees eligible for overtime pay are eligible for compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay. 
(2)  Employees not eligible for overtime pay are those employees defined by the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) as "Non-Covered Employees." Included within the definition of noncovered employees are executive, administrative and professional employees, and other salaried employees. 
(3)  Overtime work must be approved and authorized by the city manager, prior to performance of the work, except in emergency conditions when overtime may be approved by the appropriate department heads. 
(4)  The eligible employee working the approved overtime may elect to receive compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay, either compensation being earned on the basis of 1½ hours for each hour of overtime worked in excess of the maximum hours applicable to the type of employment in which the employee is engaged. 
(5)  Eligible employees electing to receive compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay may accrue compensatory time up to the maximum amounts specified below, and must be paid overtime for overtime hours worked when the maximum accrued amounts have been earned and are unused. The maximum accrued amounts are as follows: 
a.  Eligible employees engaged in a public safety activity, an emergency response activity, or seasonal activity, as defined by FLSA, may accumulate up to 480 hours of compensatory time for 320 hours of overtime worked. 
b.  All other eligible employees may accumulate up to 240 hours of compensatory time for 160 hours of actual overtime work. 
(6)  Noncovered employees, including executive, administrative and professional employees, and salaried employees are not eligible for overtime compensation nor compensatory time off. It is recognized that the positions of these employees often require them to work beyond the regular scheduled hours of duty, and some flexibility shall be granted them in adjusting their work schedules to meet varying workloads. These employees are granted the privilege of adjusting their work schedules to work lesser hours when their workloads permit. There shall be no accumulation of administrative leave of any nature beyond these employees' privilege of adjusting their work schedules and upon departure from employment with the city, these employees will not be paid for any claimed administrative leave for supposed overtime work. 
(7)  If compensation is paid to an eligible employee for accrued compensatory time off, the compensation will be paid at the regular rate earned by the employee by the time the employee receives such payment. An eligible employee who has accrued compensatory time off upon termination of employment will be paid for the unused compensatory time at a rate of compensation not less than: 
a.  The average regular rate received by the employee during the last three years of the employee's employment; or 
b.  The final regular rate received by the employee, whichever is higher. 
The official time and attendance records maintained by the city's personnel office will be the controlling records for any compensatory time purpose. 
(8)  The city may pay an employee in cash, in whole or in part, for accumulated compensatory time, at any time. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-14) 
Sec. 46-46. - Authorization and conditions required for outside employment. 
Employees are expected to devote primary attention to the requirements of their city jobs. It is permissible to obtain outside employment if the employee first gains written approval from the appropriate department head and if: 
(1)  There is no conflict in working hours; 
(2)  The employee's job efficiency is not reduced; 
(3)  There is no conflict of interest that could cause embarrassment to the city or to the employee. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-15) 
Sec. 46-47. - Political activity. 
(a)  No city employee shall actively seek city elective office or actively advocate or oppose the candidacy of any individual for nomination or election to any city office. An employee may participate in political activities at other levels of government, provided that such participation is not engaged in during working hours, and provided such participation does not adversely affect performance as a city employee. 
(b)  An employee who qualified for elective office at the city level shall resign in writing from city service effective the date of qualification. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent employees from becoming or continuing to be members of any political party, club or organization; attending political meetings; expressing their views in private on political matters outside working hours and off city premises; or voting with complete freedom in any election. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-16) 
Sec. 46-48. - Employee training and educational development. 
(a)  In-service training. The city manager shall be responsible for fostering and promoting in-service training of employees for the purpose of improving the quality of service and to assist employees in preparing themselves for advancement. 
(b)  Educational enrichment. Upon the recommendation of the department head and the prior approval of the city manager, an employee may receive payment for the cost of tuition and books for any job-related course successfully completed with a passing grade and/or completion certificate. Such courses shall be taken during employee off-duty hours unless it is necessary training for the job which is specifically approved by the department. The city manager may also approve compensation based on regular city travel policies. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-17) 
Sec. 46-49. - Employee fringe benefits. 
(a)  Retirement system. Provisions for retirement systems for city employees shall be as outlined in any retirement ordinance passed or amended by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Insurance benefits. Provisions for group insurance and group medical coverage for employees shall be as outlined in existing group contracts and plans, or as they may be amended. 
(1)  Employees who have a permanent appointment and who work full-time, are fully eligible for insurance benefits. 
(2)  Employees who have a permanent appointment and work part-time, are partially eligible for insurance benefits/premium payments on a prorated basis, as determined by the city manager, computed on the basis of the ratio of hours worked during the prior three-month period relative to the work defined for full-time employment, if they otherwise meet the insurance plan criteria. In such cases, the employee shall pay that portion of the insurance premiums not computed to be provided as an employee insurance benefit. 
(3)  Employees who have a temporary appointment and work full-time, other than seasonal employees, receive insurance benefits on the same basis as employees who have permanent appointments, if they otherwise meet the insurance plan criteria. 
(4)  Employees who have a temporary appointment and work part-time; and seasonal employees working either full-time or part-time; and employees who have an emergency appointment, do not receive insurance benefits. 
(5)  Employees of the city who are currently eligible for insurance benefits under the city's group medical coverage and who elect to accept the early retirement program effective May 1, 2003, shall be entitled to: 
a.  Continuing HMO healthcare benefits or PPO healthcare benefits for the retiree employee only at a cost not to exceed $348.00. Retirees can purchase dependent health coverage at their own expense. The coverage will be in lieu of COBRA benefits. 
b.  The city reserves the rights to terminate, discontinue, modify, decrease or otherwise limit the health benefit provisions included as part of the early retirement incentive program at anytime in the future. The benefits stated herein are not available to any employee ineligible for the early retirement program effective May 1, 2003, or to employees eligible for the program but who elect not to participate, nor are the benefits stated herein available to other future retirees. All provisions are contingent upon an acceptable agreement with GMEBS. 
(c)  Uniforms and equipment. Uniforms for police and fire department employees and such other employees as the city manager may authorize and may be furnished by the city. Equipment deemed necessary and essential to job performance may also be furnished if authorized by the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-18) 
Sec. 46-50. - Travel, travel expense and other reimbursements. 
(a)  Travel outside of area. 
(1)  Occasionally employees may be required to travel outside the city to attend meetings, conferences, and job related workshops and seminars, however, no official travel outside the city and immediate area shall be authorized without prior approval of the appropriate department head. In the case of department heads themselves, this approval must be obtained from the city manager. 
(2)  If city employees use personal vehicles for out-of-area, city-related travel or in the performance of employment within the city, such employees will be reimbursed at a rate determined by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Lodging and modes of travel. Lodging and modes of travel other than automobiles that are required for out of area travel are reimbursable with the proper receipts for expenses incurred. Any meal required out-of-town for day or night meetings will be reimbursed if the employee is required to pay for said meals personally. 
(c)  Subsistence. Subsistence expenses for travel will be on an actual meal and lodging charge basis. Only the actual paid lodging and meal expenses are allowed. Receipts for lodging expense are required. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-19) 
Sec. 46-51. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. of Sept. 27, 2007, § 1.01, repealed § 46-51, which pertained to acceptance of gifts and gratuities and derived from Code 1983, § 2-4-20. 
Sec. 46-52. - Use of city vehicles. 
(a)  License requirements; citations, fines, etc., given by police. Employees driving city vehicles are required to have such driver's licenses for the vehicles being driven as is required by law, irrespective of whether the employee drives the vehicle on a regular, occasional, or other basis, and whether or not this requirement is included or omitted in the description of the class to which the employee was appointed. Violation citations, fines or other actions taken by any police jurisdiction against any employee while driving a city vehicle in violation of this rule shall be the responsibility of the employee and may be cause for disciplinary action. 
(b)  Use of vehicles. Anyone misusing or abusing city vehicles, using a city vehicle for other than approved purposes, or taking a vehicle home when not approved, shall be subject to appropriate disciplinary action, including dismissal if deemed appropriate. 
(c)  Permission to take city vehicles home. City employees, who are certified police officers, whose jobs include the use of a city vehicle, are authorized to drive a city vehicle to their home if it is within 20 miles of the city limits. Permission for any other employee to drive a city-owned vehicle home will be at the discretion of the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-21) 
Sec. 46-53. - Reciprocal agreements for use of materials, services, etc. 
The government is authorized and empowered to enter into reciprocal agreements upon such terms as may be agreed upon, for the use of equipment, materials, facilities, and services with any public agency or body for purposes deemed of benefit to the public personnel system. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-22) 
Sec. 46-54. - Penalties. 
Any person who willfully violates any provision of this law or the personnel policies established herein may, upon action of the proper authority as outlined in the personnel policies, have one of the following judgments rendered: 
(1)  Dismissal from city service; 
(2)  Demotion in rank or grade; 
(3)  Suspension for a period of time not exceeding 30 days; 
(4)  Ineligibility for appointment to or employment in a position in the city service for a period of time, or indefinitely. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4-23) 
Chapter 54 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal streets generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; street improvements generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Building numbering required; penalty. 
All buildings, residential or commercial, shall be numbered with uniform, sequential numbers based on information provided by the city. Owners failing to comply with this requirement shall, after 30 days' notice, be subject to penalty under section 1-8. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-1) 
Sec. 54-2. - Building number placement. 
All building numbers shall be placed on the outside of the building in a conspicuous place with open view to the public. 
(Code 1970, § 16-2; Code 1983, § 5-1-2) 
Sec. 54-3. - Removal of sand or soil; permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to move or remove sand or soil from any street right-of-way, easement, beach or other lands of the city by bulldozing, grading, loading or by any other mechanical means, without a written permit from the city. 
(Code 1970, § 16-3; Code 1983, § 5-1-3) 
Sec. 54-4. - Removing lateral support from adjacent property; permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to grade any property owned by him in the city or change the elevation thereof in a manner that would cause the lateral support of the lands adjacent thereto to be in any way affected, without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(Code 1970, § 14-4; Code 1983, § 5-1-4) 
Sec. 54-5. - Damage to and intrusion upon property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this state or any waters in this state, unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; or 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; and 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(b)  Any person who violates subsection (a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less the [than] $100.00 nor more than $300.00; 
(2)  In the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way, for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the judge of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(c)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating subsection (a). 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-5; Ord. No. 44-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 54-6. - Road warranty. 
(a)  In connection with any work performed by contractors for the city, the contractors shall warrant the performance, quality and workmanship and the quality of all materials on any road project for a period of two years after final acceptance by the city. The city may require letters of credit or bonds or cash, in an amount determined by the city, in order to secure the obligation under the warranty. 
(b)  When contractors perform a street cut for private entities or in subdivisions of any road or right-of-way, the contractors shall warrant the performance, qualify and workmanship and the quality of all materials on any street cut for a period of two years after final acceptance by the city. The city may require letters of credit or bonds or cash in order to secure the obligation under the warranty. A minimum road warranty of $750.00 shall be required which may be increased for larger projects. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2007(3); Ord. No. 26-B-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Secs. 54-7—54-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS AND REPAIRS 

Sec. 54-34. - Permit to dig in public places; exception. 
No person shall make any excavations or openings or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipes, wires, or poles for any purpose, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the city. A permit shall not be required where that work is performed under a contract with the city but in the event that work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the city and the police department at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-11) 
Sec. 54-35. - Application for permit. 
All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street or sidewalk, as set forth in section 54-34, shall make written application therefor, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-12) 
Sec. 54-36. - City indemnification. 
Any person obtaining a permit as provided for in sections 54-34 and 54-35 agrees, as a condition of the issuance of the permit to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's operations. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-13) 
Sec. 54-37. - Street repair; violation. 
When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making that excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening, and such refilling shall be done in accordance with the standards and specifications issued by the city. Any person neglecting, refusing or failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof; and where such neglect, refusal or failure is continued, after notice from the city, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-14) 
Sec. 54-38. - Leaving excavations unprotected prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who obtains a permit under the sections of this article to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the city without placing and maintaining proper guard rails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the work, sufficient to warn the public of any excavation or work and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of same. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-15) 
Sec. 54-39. - Supervision; final inspection; violation. 
All excavations and work in the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public places of the city shall be under the supervision and control of the superintendent of public works-sanitation, whose duty it shall be to inspect the same from time to time during the progress thereof. Upon the completion thereof, he shall make a final inspection and see that the street, sidewalk or public place is restored to a condition as good in all respects as before the excavation or work was made or done, and that all debris, materials, tools and equipment are removed therefrom. Any person refusing or failing to comply with any provision of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof; and where any failure or refusal is continued after notice from the city, every day's continuance shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-16) 
Sec. 54-40. - Sidewalk construction; permit required. 
No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any person of any brick, wood or other material without a written permit from the city. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-17) 
Sec. 54-41. - Streets and sidewalks not to be damaged. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drag, or run, or cause to be dragged or run any harrow or other implements, engine, machine tool upon any asphalt, batholithic, warrenite or other type of permanently paved street or sidewalk of the city which shall be liable in any way to injure or cut the surface thereof. It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the same manner. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-18) 
Sec. 54-42. - Sidewalks, parking areas, not to be obstructed or damaged. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or damage in any manner any sidewalk, parking lane or parking area in the city by allowing landscaping, trees, shrubbery, hedges, branches, roots or other debris to interfere therewith. Uncontained yard trash or other debris placed in city rights-of-way, including parking lanes or spaces, is specifically prohibited. Trees shall be pruned to a minimum height of ten feet above the sidewalk. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-19) 
Sec. 54-43. - Violation. 
All persons found guilty of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-20) 
Secs. 54-44—54-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL EVENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-04-A , § 1, adopted Mar. 23, 2017, amended art. III in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said article to read as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 21-2015, § 1, adopted Sept. 10, 2015; and Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 1, adopted Mar. 10, 2016. 

Sec. 54-70. - Definitions. 
Words and terms used in this article are defined as follows: 
Alcoholic beverage shall mean any beverage containing alcohol. 
Control zone shall mean a zone within the festival area in which special regulations may apply as recommended in each case by the city manager and authorized by the mayor and council including, but not limited to, controlled access by fencing and gating, wristband identification of persons admitted to a control zone, wristband identification of persons authorized to purchase and hold in possession alcoholic beverages, loud speaker limits and controls, enhanced security measurements and entertainment controls. 
Festival shall mean a program of cultural and/or entertainment events open to the general public and taking place either fully or in part on public streets, thoroughfares, parking lots, parks or squares, or other public property in connection with a community festival or event such as Pirates Fest. To be regulated by this article, each such festival must be designated as a festival by the mayor and council. 
Festival area shall mean the area specifically designed and defined by the mayor and council as the location of festival events and activities. 
Municipal resources actually required (pop-up event) shall mean the municipal services required for an unpermitted assembly exceed at any point in time the level of municipal services typically available from the city for that time and season after taking into consideration the similar, municipal-type services provided by the person or persons, if any, encouraging the assembly. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing definitions, any planned special event to be held in any part of the beach is presumed to be a special event, except for specifically enumerated exceptions that are a part of this article. This presumption can be rebutted only by the event producer providing clear and convincing evidence that, based upon the nature, location, time and season of the event there is a high degree of probability that the event will not draw a crowd in excess of one person for every seven square feet of beach controlled by the producer, or where people are gathered for purposes of the event. 
Municipal resources anticipated to be (planned event) shall mean a gathering that is reasonably anticipated to require for its safe and successful execution the provision or coordination of municipal services by the city or by the event producer to a material degree above that which the city routinely provides under ordinary, everyday circumstances. Municipal services include, but are not limited to fire and police protection, crowd control, traffic control, parking control, street closure, emergency medical services, garbage or trash facilities or clean-up and sanitation facilities (herein "municipal services"). 
Producer shall mean an individual, individuals or any entity that attempts to promote or does promote an event or gathering of people by way of advertising, social media, directly or indirectly, the event or gathering and/or promotes the attendance at an event or gathering, including but not limited to one who serves as an emcee, disc jockey or entertainer at an event or gathering and/or one who supervises or finances an event. Such term shall be synonymous with "promoter" and includes a person or entity who directly or indirectly encourages, persuades, or advertises, or uses publicity to encourage or persuade attendance at an event or gathering, whether or not for personal pecuniary gain. 
Special event shall mean any assembly of persons upon the public beaches, public streets or rights of way, or within the city parks or parking lots, where it is either reasonably anticipated that municipal services will be required, or where additional municipal services are actually required. All special events require a permit under this article whether a planned event or an unplanned/pop up special event. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-A , § 1, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 54-71. - Permits. 
(a)  In the interests of the public's convenience and safety and availability of city services, persons or organizations wishing to host a special event must first obtain a permit from the city manager or his designee. The permit application shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Description of event including the location, date/time, activities, entertainers, estimated number of participants. 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of sponsoring organization and its responsible representative. This includes the name and address of all natural persons or organizations controlling at least a five percent stake in the event. 
(3)  Method of notification of participants. 
(4)  Publicity plan, if open to the general public. 
(5)  Parking/traffic control requests and concerns. 
(6)  Public safety requests and concerns, if any. 
(7)  Impacts on other city services, if any. 
(8)  Whether alcoholic beverages will be permitted in the event. 
(9)  Whether there is a request for the city to activate the control zone. 
(b)  Each application for a special event permit required by this article shall contain the information described in section 54-73(a) and must be filed, and the permit fee paid, no less than 60 days before the opening of the event to the public. Notwithstanding the forgoing, the city manager shall accept a tardy application if (i) city staff has the capacity to conduct an ordinary review of the application without causing material neglect of other staff duties or, (ii) the event promoter stands willing and able to pay and deposits a sum of money to cover any overtime for city staff to conduct an ordinary review of the application, and staff volunteers such overtime, then the city will use reasonable efforts to process a tardy application in time to allow the event to be held. Applications shall be reviewed in the order received and priority shall be given to timely filed applications. 
(c)  All applications shall contain language indemnifying and holding harmless the city, its elected officials, officers, agents, and employees, in language approved by the city attorney. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to engage, conduct, promote, or provide entertainment to any special event without first receiving a permit from the city pursuant to this article. 
(e)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; and 
(3)  Training exercises conducted by federal, state or local officials, so long as the training exercise has been approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-A , § 1, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 54-72. - Community festival, festival area and control zone. 
(a)  Designation of a community festival. On the recommendation of the city manager, the mayor and council may designate and name certain community festival days and, during such festival days, authorize cultural and entertainment events and initiate regulatory provisions of this article within the festival area. 
(b)  Designation of festival area. Unless the mayor and council specifically define otherwise, the festival area shall be that area bounded on the north by 14th Street, the east by the Atlantic Ocean including the Walter Parker Pier and Pavilion, the south by 17th Street, and the west by the properties abutting the west side of Highway 80 and Butler Avenue between the north and south boundaries. 
(c)  Designation and management of control zone. Upon recommendation of the city manager, the mayor and council may designate one or more control zones within the festival area, and may authorize the city manager to implement regulations and controls which will be specific for each designated control zone. Such regulations and controls may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Fencing and gating. Fencing designated control zone(s) and establishing entrance gates for controlling and limiting access to each control zone. 
(2)  Signage. The festival manager is required to provide signage indicating control zone boundaries and all restrictions required within the zone. 
(3)  Identification entrance criteria. Require pre-numbered wristbands or other means of identifying persons who have met entrance criteria. Entrance criteria may include, but are not limited to, prohibiting persons from entering with unlawful weapons, beverage coolers, pets, excluding pets of residents who live within the control zone, exotic animals, skates, bicycles, fireworks, sparklers, bang snaps (snap and pops), smoke balls (smoke bombs), and fountains and other items which may be dangerous, disruptive, or inconvenient in crowded conditions and prohibiting entry by persons appearing to be intoxicated. 
(4)  Identification, consumption of alcoholic beverages. Require wristbands or other means of identifying persons who have displayed proof of attaining the age of 21 years and who are authorized to purchase or hold in possession alcoholic beverages within the control zone, outside of licensed alcohol beverage establishments. A fee, as set by the mayor and council, may be charged for such wristbands and such wristbands shall contain the city logo. Only persons who are authorized may sell or disburse wristbands. Displaying such a wristband does not relieve alcohol beverage establishments of responsibility for determining if a person has attained the age of 21 years before dispensing alcohol to that person. 
(5)  Designation of festival manager within the control zone. The mayor and council may designate and authorize a non-profit, tax exempt organization or similar entity to organize and manage festival activities within a control zone. Such designation may include authorization to collect and expend funds, in which case paragraph (6) below will apply. 
(6)  Financial requirements, audit regarding wristbands. Any organization designated and authorized to collect fees and generate revenues from the public in connection with such event shall, with regard to sales of wristbands, within seven calendar days of conclusion of the event, provide to the city manager a comprehensive audit that provides full accounting of all revenues and expenditures associated with the event. The designated organization shall be required to maintain documentation supporting event revenues and expenditures. The city will have complete and free access to all such financial records at all reasonable times for purposes of review and audit. Any organization designated and authorized to collect fees and generate revenues from the sales of wristbands to the public in connection with such event shall, within seven calendar days of conclusion of the event, provide the city manager with a certified report of the number of wristbands sold and pay the city the agreed upon fee for each wristband sold (or otherwise unaccounted for). 
(7)  Insurance. Any organization authorized to organize and manage festival activities within a control zone shall take out and keep in force for all activities associated with such event a special events liability policy. Such policy shall provide the following: 
(i)  Minimum coverage limits: $1,000,000.00 single limit; 
(ii)  Named as an additional insured: City of Tybee Island; and 
(iii)  Certificate of insurance: A certificate of insurance shall be issued to the additional insured at least five calendar days prior to the beginning of the event. Such certificate shall be on standard form and will provide for notification of the additional insured within ten calendar days of termination of coverage. 
(8)  Restricting hours of alcohol sales. Within the control zone, outdoor dispensing of alcoholic beverages under any permit or license will be promoted from 11:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight only. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-A , § 1, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 54-73. - Application and plan. 
(a)  Each plan included in the special event application, and any conditions imposed by the city manager pursuant to section 54-76(e), shall be continuously implemented during the special event, and any failure to do so shall result in the automatic suspension of the permit and suspension of the event until full implementation is made. 
(1)  Should the actual attendance at any special event, including persons attempting to enter the event, or the municipal services actually required at a permitted event exceed for a period of one hour the number or level anticipated by the application and permit, it shall become the duty of all persons owning or able to control the event or the event venue to take reasonable, diligent, and constant measures to reduce the excess until the planned number or level is reasonably achieved. The failure of any such person to immediately, after notice from the city, make a reasonable, diligent and constant effort to reduce the excess shall be a violation of this law punishable by civil penalties specified in this article. The chief of police or his designee is authorized to approve actions to partially or slowly reduce the excess as compliance if he or she finds (i) that such person is acting in good faith after notice of the excess, (ii) that full and immediate elimination of the excess will not be feasible and (iii) that it would be safer to taper down the event rather than to abruptly close the venue or stop the event. 
(2)  Conversely, should actual attendance fall below the permit estimates for a sustained period and appear likely to continue at reduced levels, the city manager or his designee shall be authorized, but not required, to allow the applicant to reduce staffing to the minimums reasonably required. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-A , § 1, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 54-74. - Unpermitted assembly (pop-up events). 
The city has found and determined that some special events occur without a permit, especially if attendance is promoted through instantaneous, social media. 
(a)  If an assembly develops into a special event (without a permit) it shall become the duty of all persons or entities owning or able to control the special event or who is providing entertainment encouraging the assembly, to take reasonable, diligent and constant measures to reduce the activity or circumstances which caused the assembly to become a special event—that is for example but not limited to, reducing the number of attendees, or to provide the additional municipal type services needed to regulate event traffic, maintain the peace and protect the public health and safety. The failure of any such person or entity to immediately after notice from the city make a reasonable, diligent and constant effort to reduce the event attendance or otherwise provide adequate services, to the satisfaction of the chief of police or his/her designee shall be a violation of this law punishable by civil penalties specified in this article. The chief of police or his designee is authorized to approve actions to partially or slowly reduce the event attendance to a point where it is not considered a special event if he or she finds (i) that such person is acting expeditiously and reasonably to employ feasibly available resources to address the issues after notice that the assembly has become a special event, (ii) that full reduction to the criteria threshold will not be feasible and (iii) that it would be safer to taper down the event rather than to abruptly close the venue or stop the event. 
(b)  Whether a spontaneous assembly has developed into a special event based upon attendance or a need for municipal services (as those services are defined in this article), shall be determined by an objective and reasonable examination of the totality of the circumstances at hand, including but not limited to the following factors: 
(1)  With respect to attendance and attempted attendance: 
(i)  Whether the attendance is ticketed. 
(ii)  Actual attendance at prior, similar events. 
(iii)  The extent of commercial promotion and advertisement of the event, especially promotion outside of the city, by traditional or digital means, but excluding spontaneous social media not initiated, encouraged or orchestrated by a commercial event producer or any person acting on behalf of the event producer or any person with a financial or other personal interest in the event ("spontaneous social media"). 
(iv)  The extent of spontaneous social media encouraging attendance at the assembly. 
(v)  Whether the location and configuration the assembly, and the nature and presence (sight and sound) of the event, will be likely to draw attendees or observers from the public at large. 
(vi)  The number in attendance and attempting to attend shall be determined by the chief of police or his designee using recognized or previously established law enforcement estimating techniques. 
(2)  With respect to municipal services actually required: 
(i)  Repeated pedestrian trespass. 
(ii)  Repeated vehicular trespass. 
(iii)  Illegal parking. 
(iv)  Traffic congestion. 
(v)  Apparent need for sanitation facilities as evidenced by public urination or other bodily functions. 
(vi)  Repeated and flagrant instances of illegal activity. 
(vii)  Repeated noise ordinance violations after notice, including differing offenders. 
(viii)  Unusual amount of trash being abandoned with no apparent resources available to clean up after event. 
(ix)  Unusual or repeated need for medical assistance. 
(c)  When the city is aware of the planning of an assembly in which the chief of police determines is more likely than not to become a special event, as defined by this article, then the city manager may notify anyone promoting, organizing, or otherwise planning to attend that they may be subject to this article and all resulting criminal and civil penalties. Said communication shall also include a copy of a special event application and a copy of this article. 
(d)  In addition to the procedures described above, the mayor and council of the city may by resolution impose restrictions on activities including, but not limited to, the public consumption of alcoholic beverages in areas designated in such resolution upon a report to the mayor and council that an unpermitted event is being promoted and advertised, published on social media, or by leaflets or by other means where such promotion reasonably indicates to the mayor and council that there is an immediate risk to the public safety, welfare, citizens and property of those participating in the event and residents of the city. Upon the passage of any such resolution pursuant to the provisions of this subsection, the resolution shall be posted on the city's website and publication and dissemination thereof shall be encouraged and notice thereof shall be disseminated to the fullest extent possible so as to alert the public, the event producers or promoters and all persons whatsoever of the lack of permission for the event and/or a prohibition on the public consumption of alcoholic beverages during such dates, times and locations as set forth in the resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-A , § 1, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 54-75. - Fees. 
(a)  As part of the application review process, together with the services requested by the applicant, the city manager shall set fees to defray the costs of city services for special events to be determined on the basis of actual expected costs. The costs shall be the marginal costs directly associated with the special event above what the general public would generally require. Such fees may be adjusted to the extent that the city co-sponsors a special event, as determined by the city manager. In the instance of a spontaneous unpermitted special event, where the city incurs marginal costs directly associated with the unpermitted special event, the fee shall still be calculated and applicable as further provided herein. 
(b)  The level of municipal services required shall be determined by an objective, reasonable examination of the totality of the circumstances, including but not limited to the following factors: 
(1)  The size of the assembly and the anticipated attendance. 
(2)  The location of the event to determine the potential for pedestrian and vehicular congestion. 
(3)  The nature of the event, the activities planned during it and the weather conditions of the season to evaluate the danger of harm to persons and property such as a fireworks explosion, a collision of participants or spectators, spectator or participant heatstroke, drowning, and the like. 
(4)  The historical density of visitors to the city during the annual season of the event and the type of activities, safe and unsafe, in which those visitors have historically engaged. 
(5)  Whether the assembly is specifically designed and staffed to handle the anticipated needs and effects of the anticipated number of attendees. 
(c)  The city shall notify the applicant of the municipal services fee, and if requested grant a meeting with the city manager to confer with the applicant about the fee. If the applicant does not accept the type and extent of municipal services listed and the amount of the municipal services fee, the city shall nonetheless proceed in ordinary course to complete the application process and either deny the permit through the process contained in this article without consideration of the applicant's objection to the fee, or if the applicant is entitled to the permit then grant the permit upon the condition that the municipal services fee be paid before the permit becomes valid or effective. The applicant shall have the right to appeal to the mayor and council the type and extent of services required and the amount of the fee by letter filed with the city clerk within three business days after the city shall provide the applicant the itemization and amount of the fee which notice shall state that the applicant may appeal within three business days. The mayor and council shall uphold or lessen the fee based upon information about the extent of services to be rendered by the city directly related to the event and the cost of those services as presented by the city manager or his/her designee and the applicant in a de novo, quasi-judicial hearing held as soon as may be practicable. The mayor and council's decision, including its reasons therefore, shall be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and entered onto the record thereof which shall constitute the council's final order in any subsequent proceedings. The hearing may be continued from time to time in the sole discretion of the mayor and council. If the mayor and council is unable to timely conduct or conclude the hearing in time for the event to be held pursuant to an otherwise valid permit, the applicant may pay to the city the disputed fee under protest, and the permit shall become effective so that the event may be held, in which case the hearing shall be held and concluded after the event at a mutually convenient time. If the fee is upheld, it shall be accepted by the city; if it is reduced the reduction shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(d)  In the event of an unplanned and unpermitted special event, anyone who promoted, planned, executed, and/or provided entertainment shall be responsible for the applicable municipal services fee. This includes anyone that promotes through social media. The city manager is authorized to direct the city attorney to pursue all legal remedies necessary to collect any fees that are authorized pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-A , § 1, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 54-76. - Action on the application and appeal. 
(a)  The city manager must decide to grant or deny an application at the earliest possible time after receipt. 
(b)  The city manager may deny a permit only on one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The permit application is incomplete; a complete application is one that provides all the information or items required by this article regardless of the sufficiency of the information or item. 
(2)  The application fee has not been paid; 
(3)  The proposed event is unlawful; 
(4)  The application contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation; 
(5)  It reasonably appears that the proposed event will present a clear and present danger to the public safety or health; 
(6)  The proposed event is of such a nature or duration that it cannot be reasonably accommodated in the particular location; or 
(7)  The applicant has refused to attend or participate in good faith in a pre-permit meeting requested by the city manager following reasonable notice and scheduling attempts by the city manager and failed to propose reasonable alternatives. 
(c)  The city manager is expressly prohibited from denying any permit based upon the identity of any speaker or entertainer or the viewpoint, content, or type of speech or expression to be displayed so long as such speech or expression is lawful. 
(d)  Every denial of a permit shall be in writing and shall clearly explain the reason(s) for denial. A denial of a permit application as "incomplete" must identify the specific information required by this article which was not provided. A denial based upon the unlawfulness of an event must identify the law or regulation prohibiting such conduct. A denial based upon a clear and present danger to the public safety or health must identify the specific conditions which reasonably give rise to the danger. A denial based upon the fact that the proposed event cannot be reasonably accommodated in the particular location applied for must state specific reasons why the area is unsuitable for the event. A denial based upon an applicant's refusal to attend or participate in good faith in a pre-permit meeting, or suggest an alternative, shall identify the steps taken to provide reasonable notice and scheduling of such meeting and, if applicable, any conduct at the meeting demonstrating bad faith participation by the applicant. The purpose of the requirement is to allow the applicant to know the grounds upon which the permit was denied and to permit mayor and council the opportunity to verify and confirm the objective validity of any denial and to ensure that any limited discretion given to the city manager under this article is not abused so as to disfavor protected speech or expression. 
(e)  The city manager may condition any permit with reasonable requirements concerning the time, place or manner of holding a special event as is necessary to coordinate municipal services, multiple uses of public property, assure preservation of public property and public places, prevent dangerous, unlawful or impermissible uses, protect the safety of persons and property and to control vehicular and pedestrian traffic in and around the venue, provided that such requirements are narrowly tailored to address these concerns and are not implemented for the purpose of regulating or restricting protected speech or expressive conduct. 
All permit applications shall be deemed granted as applied for if the city manager does not grant, grant with conditions, or deny the permit in writing within 30 calendar days of receiving an application. A permit which is granted automatically under this section is conditioned upon any required city services fee being paid before the permit becomes valid or effective. If an applicant disagrees with the fee required, the provisions of section 54-75(c) shall control. The automatic granting of permits provided in this section shall not apply if: 
(1)  The permit application fee has not been paid; 
(2)  The city manager has indicated his intent to deny a permit and the applicant has agreed, in writing, to supply the city manager with additional information which may allow the permit to be granted. In this case, the permit application will be deemed granted if the city manager does not grant, grant with conditions, or deny the permit in writing within ten calendar days of receipt of the additional information, unless the applicant agrees in writing to provide further additional information, which shall renew the terms and timeframes of this paragraph; or 
(3)  The city manager requests additional time to review the application and the request is agreed to in writing by the applicant. In this case, the permit application will be deemed granted if the city manager does not grant, grant with conditions, or deny the permit in writing by the expiration of the agreed date. 
(f)  Every denial of a permit and every conditional grant of a permit challenged by an applicant is appealable to the mayor and council by letter filed with the city clerk within three business days after receipt of the denial or proposed conditional grant. The mayor and council shall grant or deny the permit, or uphold or rescind the conditions, based upon information presented by the applicant and the city manager or his designee in a de novo, quasi-judicial hearing held as soon as practicable. The mayor and council's decision, including its reasons therefor, shall be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and entered onto the record thereof which shall constitute the mayor and council's final order in any subsequent proceedings and which may, but shall not be required to, express findings of fact and conclusions of law. The hearing may be continued from time to time in the sole discretion of the mayor and council, provided that if the mayor and council does not render a final order within 15 days after filing of the letter of appeal the permit shall be deemed granted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-A , § 1, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 54-77. - Penalty for violation. 
In addition to any civil penalties that the city may pursue, any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-A , § 1, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 54-78. - Liquor prohibited. 
Consistent with the provisions of section 6-12, no liquor or distilled spirits may be sold or otherwise distributed at any special event conducted under the provisions of this article except for special events conducted on private property and approved by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-A , § 1, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 54-79. - Weather and other changes. 
Once a special event has been permitted, location and date changes necessitated by weather events or other calamity shall not require further permitting, and all authorizations and licenses or permissions applicable to the original permit shall continue to the extent applicable. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the permit holder must cooperatively work with staff on different dates, locations and times. 
The city manager shall have the authority to revoke a permit in the event that weather or other environmental conditions presents a substantial likelihood of danger to the public, and event organizers and attendees. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-A , § 1, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 54-80. - Severability. 
Should any section, provision, or clause of any part of this article be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent of the city that this article would have been adopted had any such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-A , § 1, 3-23-2017) 
Secs. 54-81—54-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - USE OF CITY-OWNED FACILITIES 

Sec. 54-110. - Use of facilities. 
(a)  Criteria for use. City facilities may be used by individuals and organizations whenever such use meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  The use does not interfere or conflict with planned use by the city. 
(2)  The use promotes the health and welfare of the general public. 
(3)  The use is consistent with the functions of municipal government reflected in state law. 
(4)  The use is lawful and does not unfavorably reflect on the image and reputation of the city. 
(5)  The use is compatible with the characteristics and capabilities of the facilities and does not create undo risks of damage or deterioration to the facilities. 
(6)  The use is reserved in advance by a responsible party, on forms provided by the city, with payment of the use fees and damage/cleanup deposits as specified below. 
(7)  The reserved use may not be assigned or sublet to others. 
(b)  Fees and deposits. 
(1)  Use of city facilities by others requires the payment of use fees and damage/cleanup deposits. Use fees and damage/cleanup deposits reflect various amounts depending on the category of person reserving the facilities as well as the types of people using the facilities, reflecting whether such individuals pay taxes to the city directly or indirectly. 
(2)  Use fees charged shall be used to offset the cost of utilities, insurance, and periodic maintenance of the facilities, as well as administrative costs associated with reserving the facilities and processing the monies involved. 
(3)  Damage/cleanup deposits shall be used when necessary to offset the costs of any damage and cleanup of facilities. 
(4)  The schedule of use fees and damage/cleanup deposits for city facilities available for use by others is as follows: 
Public Facility Fee Schedules 
Facility Codes Definitions 
1-City hall auditorium 
2-Memorial Park pavilion 
3-Community building 
4-School cafeteria 
5-School classrooms 
6-Jaycee Park building 
7-Other (ball fields, etc.) 
Use Fees 

 
Amounts indicated as use fees are per day charges (or any portion thereof). 
A three-hour use minimum is required for by-the-hour facility rate. 
*Amounts charged for facility number 7 are variable, depending on the type of facility used, as determined by the city manager. 
**$1.00 for each additional person attending over the count of 50. 
Damage/Cleanup Deposits 

 
Amounts indicated as damage/cleanup deposits are per occasion deposits. 
A three-hour use minimum is required for by-the-hour facility rate. 
*Amounts charged for facility number 7 are variable, depending on the type of facility used, as determined by the city manager. 
**$1.00 for each additional person attending over the count of 50. 
(c)  Refunds. Refunds of amounts paid to the city for facility use by others shall be as follows: 
(1)  Upon cancellation no later than on the fourth calendar day preceding the first day of reserved use, the total use fee and damage/cleanup deposit shall be refunded. 
(2)  Upon cancellation after the fourth day preceding the first day of reserved use, the damage/cleanup deposit shall be refunded, and the use fee shall be forfeited. 
(3)  Following examination of the premises after use by others, and following the immediate return of any facility keys provided, the damage/cleanup deposit shall be refunded only if the facilities are returned to a condition equal to or better than the condition existing immediately prior to the use by others, including the removal of all litter, garbage, and trash from the premises. 
(d)  Miscellaneous. 
(1)  There should be no smoking in any city building. 
(2)  Nothing shall be attached in any way to the walls, doors, floors, ceilings, fixtures, or any other part of any city building. 
(3)  All furniture or equipment shall remain in city buildings. 
(4)  Entrance fees may not be charged without a special permit from the city manager or his designee. 
(Code 1983, § 7-2-1) 
Sec. 54-111. - Criteria for establishing public facility use fees. 
The following criteria shall be used in establishing fees for the use of public facilities. 
(1)  Fees are applicable whenever all or a portion of public facilities are reserved for exclusive use, or whenever a special event would result in the city experiencing special expenditures. 
(2)  Fees applicable for commercial events may not be waived in whole or in part, since such waiver would be a transfer of public funds to a private entity without a corresponding direct benefit to the city. 
(3)  Special events having indirect effects on government revenues and expenditures, such as increasing business activity or future tourism, may not be granted a fee waiver on the basis of such indirect effects, since such waiver would be an indirect transfer of public funds to a private entity without a corresponding direct benefit to the city. 
(4)  Noncommercial special events for resident and business taxpayers may have partial fee waivers since a portion of the government's expenditures may have been prepaid through taxes, etc. 
(5)  The city may co-sponsor special events whenever such events are deemed to serve the general public welfare (and not the welfare of organizations or selected individuals). 
(6)  Special event fees must be determined on the basis of estimated governmental expenditures associated with the event, and may include recovery of capital expenditures, operating costs, and maintenance costs. 
(Code 1983, § 7-1-5) 
Secs. 54-112—54-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC PARKS 

Sec. 54-126. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  All persons entering upon the public parks or structures erected thereon shall comply with the following rules and regulations and failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this article: 
(1)  Within the Memorial Park enclosed cemetery area, with the exception of service dogs, all pets, on or off leashes, are prohibited. 
(2)  No alcohol may be consumed or possessed within the enclosed cemetery area. 
(3)  Smoking of tobacco products, including the use of vapor smoking devices, within the enclosed cemetery is prohibited. 
(4)  Within the enclosed playground areas within J.C. Park and Memorial Park, the following is prohibited conduct: 
a.  Pets, including dogs on or off leashes. 
b.  Smoking of tobacco products, including the use of vapor smoking devices. 
(b)  The city may place appropriate signs to advise the public that they are subject to fines for allowing pets into the cemetery or other restricted areas and for the other conduct prohibited in the designated areas as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , § 1, 3-10-2016) 
Chapter 58 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Delinquent taxes. 
All taxes due the city when delinquent shall be collected by every means allowed by law. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-1) 
Sec. 58-2. - Interest on tax executions. 
All tax executions shall earn the maximum rate of interest allowed by law. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-2) 
Sec. 58-3. - Taxation and revenue. 
(a)  Taxes on real and personal property and any and all assessments due to the city may be collected and executions therefor may issue as provided in section 1.13(37) and section 6.10 of the Charter. The city clerk shall be authorized to designate an agent, including the county tax commissioner, to bear tester in the name of the mayor or the mayor pro tem. All executions may be directed to the county tax commissioner, or other levying officer. All sales shall be conducted on the steps of the Chatham County Courthouse, Savannah, Georgia. 
(b)  Forms for execution procedures shall be substantially as follows: 
(1)  Consolidated fi fa. 
(2)  Levy notice. 
(3)  Notice to owner, security deed holder or mortgagee. 
(4)  No particular forms or language shall be required for publication notice, written evidence of sale and/or any other documents which might be necessary or appropriate in dealing with the collection of delinquent taxes, executions and conveyances in connection therewith. 
(c)  Included within the costs collectible as a result of an execution shall be all costs for advertising the sale of the property levied upon, all postage and other costs of notices provided to the defendant in execution or to the indebted party, and all recording costs and fees. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-3) 
Sec. 58-4. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless service at retail point of sale. 
(a)  9-1-1 Charge on prepaid wireless transactions. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of $0.75. 
(b)  Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the Commissioner of the Department of Revenue at the times and in the manner provided by Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(c)  Administrative provisions. The clerk of the City of Tybee Island, Georgia, is hereby directed to file with the State Revenue Commissioner a certified copy of this article and amendments thereto in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(l) by December 31, 2011. 
(d)  Depositing of funds; use of funds. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2G)(5), funds received by the City from charges imposed by this article shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by the City pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(d)(2) and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction. All such funds shall be exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
(Ord. No. 34-2011, 10-13-11) 
Secs. 58-5—58-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAXES 

Sec. 58-30. - Tax levied; homestead exemption. 
(a)  An annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the city is levied. The millage rate therefor shall be established each year by resolution of the mayor and council. The rate shall be a total of the rates authorized by law for general, recreation, education and debt retirement needs of the city. 
(b)  Individuals qualifying for the city homestead exemption shall be granted such exemption as follows: each resident of the city who is a senior citizen is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all ad valorem taxes for city purposes in an amount equal to the amount of assessed value of that homestead which exceeds the assessed value of that homestead for the taxable year immediately preceding the taxable year in which this exemption is first granted to such resident if that person's income, together with the income of the spouse of such person and any other person who resides within such homestead, does not exceed $30,000.00 for the immediately preceding taxable year. This exemption shall not apply to taxes assessed on improvements to the homestead or additional land that is added to the homestead after January 1 of the base year. If any real property is removed from the homestead, the assessment in the base year shall be recalculated accordingly. 
(1)  The term "income" means federal adjusted gross income, as defined in the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, from all sources. 
(2)  The term "senior citizen" means a person who is 62 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under this section is made. 
(3)  The term "base year" means the taxable year immediately preceding the taxable year in which the exemption under this act is granted. 
(c)  All new and renewal applications for homestead exemption shall be due by April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-11) 
Sec. 58-31. - Assessment. 
All property subject to the ad valorem tax shall be assessed at 40 percent of its full fair market value as established by the county for county ad valorem tax purposes. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-12) 
Sec. 58-32. - Tax due and payable. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to require the payment of taxes in the calendar year 1997 and subsequent years in two regular installments. 
(b)  Tax installments due. City ad valorem taxes shall be due and payable in two installments. The first installment shall be due and payable on June 1 of each year, and the second installment shall be due and payable on November 15 of each year. 
(c)  Tax digest and rendition of statements. The first installment of taxes for the year shall be paid on statements prepared and rendered on the basis of one-half of the total tax levied on said property in the prior year by the taxpayer of said property for the calendar year; with the updating of ownership and other necessary corrective changes in order to issue said tax bills and corrections. The second installment shall be due and payable on November 15, and the tax statements for this payment shall be made on the basis of the current Tax Digest approved by the state revenue commissioner with the billing taking into consideration the adjustments as approved on the current Tax Digest giving due and proper credit for the payment made on June 1. 
(d)  Penalties and interest. Any final installment not paid on the due date shall bear penalties and interest as authorized under the general laws of the state, O.C.G.A. § 48-2-44(b)(1). 
(e)  Executions. Executions will be issued as provided by the general laws of the state on all properties for which taxes are not paid at the final installment date. Execution expenses shall also be applicable as provided by the general laws of the state, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-161(b). 
(f)  Exception. Executions may be delayed by the city and added to future year's billings whenever the amount due is not significant in relation to the city's needs. Further, when the amount due the city is less than $1.00, the city manager may excuse the amount due. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-13) 
Sec. 58-33. - Homestead exemption. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes means all ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes, levied by, for, or on behalf of the city except for taxes to pay interest on and to retire bonded indebtedness. 
Homestead means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40. 
(b)  Exemption granted. Each resident of the city is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all city ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes, as follows: for all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2004, in the amount of $80,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount under this subsection shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  Qualifications. In order to qualify for the exemption granted herein, an individual must have filed for homestead exemption on the property in question with the county. The city designates the appropriate county official as its designee for purposes of receiving the applications to qualify for the homestead exemption granted herein, it being the express intention hereof that city residents who qualify for the homestead exemption for county purposes shall also automatically qualify for the exemption for municipal ad valorem taxes, including all of those qualified as the first taxable year of the special homestead exemption. 
(d)  Renewal; ineligibility. The special homestead exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided under state law for other exemptions and shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has properly qualified for the exemption, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year as the exemption shall continue to be allowed for such person. In the event an individual becomes ineligible for the special homestead exemption it is the duty of such person to notify the governing authority of the city or the designee thereof, including the appropriate official of the county. 
(e)  Ad valorem taxes. The exemption granted by this section shall not apply to or affect state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes or county school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. 
(f)  Applicability. The exemption granted by this section shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning January 1, 2003. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-14) 
Secs. 58-34—58-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 58-70. - Imposed and levied. 
In addition to all other tax or license fees heretofore or hereafter imposed upon retail dealers engaged in the city in the business of selling malt beverages, wine or spirituous liquors as defined under state law, there is imposed and levied upon all such retail dealers within the city for each fiscal year beginning January 1 a license tax for the privilege of doing such business in the city, to be computed and collected as hereinafter set forth. The term "retail dealers" shall include clubs and similar organizations. 
(Code 1970, § 3-17; Code 1983, § 3-2-21) 
Sec. 58-71. - Amount of tax per beverage. 
The amount of the license tax imposed by this article on such dealers shall be computed on the following basis: 
(1)  Malt beverages. 
a.  Cases of 24 bottles or cans when each bottle or can contains 12 ounces or less at $1.20 per case. 
b.  Cases of 24 bottles or cans when each bottle or can contains more than 12 ounces up to and including 14 ounces at $1.40 per case. 
c.  Cases of 24 bottles or cans when each bottle or can contains more than 16 ounces up to and including 32 ounces at $1.60 per case. 
d.  Cases of 12 bottles or cans when each bottle or can contains more than 14 ounces up to and including 16 ounces at $1.60 per case. 
e.  Barrels, kegs or drums with a capacity of 7.75 gallons or less at $4.13 each. 
f.  Barrels, kegs or drums with a capacity of more than 7.75 gallons up to and including 9.3 gallons at $4.96 each. 
g.  Barrels, kegs or drums with a capacity of more than 9.3 gallons up to and including 15.5 gallons at $8.27 each. 
h.  Barrels, kegs or drums with a capacity of more than 15.5 gallons up to and including 31 gallons at $16.53 each. 
(2)  Wine. Twenty-two cents per liter on wine. 
The term "case" as applied to wine shall mean a carton or other container containing 24 bottles of pint size or smaller, or 12 bottles of either quart size or fifth size. 
(3)  Liquor. Eighty cents per gallon. Fractional parts of gallons, cases or barrels, kegs or drums, or any other size or type of containers shall be computed proportionately. 
(Code 1970, § 3-18; Code 1983, § 3-2-22) 
Sec. 58-72. - Payment date; wholesale regulations. 
(a)  The license tax imposed herein on malt beverages and wines shall be computable and payable monthly. 
(b)  Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping or delivering malt beverages or wines to any retail dealers in the city, whether delivered to the retail dealer's place of business or elsewhere for resale in the city, shall as a condition to the privilege of carrying on that business in the city: 
(1)  Keep true and correct records of all sales, shipments or deliveries of any malt beverages or wines to each retail dealer in the city; these records to be preserved for a period of one year and to be made available on request for the inspection of any duly authorized representative of the city; 
(2)  Collect from each such retail dealer in the city and add on each invoice at the time of delivery of the malt beverages and wines the amount of license tax due under the terms of this article, and hold the same in trust for the city until that amount is remitted to the municipality as next provided; and 
(3)  On or before the tenth day of each calendar month, make a verified return to the city for the monies collected from retail dealers for the month immediately preceding said report, accompanying that return with a remittance to the city for all license taxes collected. 
(Code 1970, § 3-19; Code 1983, § 3-2-23) 
Sec. 58-73. - Failure to pay tax; revocation of license. 
If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the returns herein provided for, the city shall notify that party in writing, and, if the returns are not made and the license taxes are remitted within five days from date of that notice, the municipality may withdraw from the wholesale dealer or distributor the privilege of doing business in the city by revoking his license. On any failure to make returns and pay the license taxes accrued, the city shall proceed to assess the amount of taxes due under this article from retail dealers who have purchased from such wholesale dealer or distributor, from the best information available, and proceed to collect those license taxes as provided by ordinance for the collection of delinquent license taxes. 
(Code 1970, § 3-20; Code 1983, § 3-2-24) 
Sec. 58-74. - Records to be kept; availability to city officials. 
Each wholesale dealer in spirituous liquors (which shall include all alcoholic beverages excepting beer and wine) shall keep 51-A and 51-B records available for inspection at all times by duly authorized agents and/or representatives of the city. These records shall show the amount and quantity of each item sold by each wholesaler to each retailer and that wholesaler shall collect at the time of the delivery to the retailer the license tax due under this article. 
(Code 1970, § 3-21; Code 1983, § 3-2-25) 
Sec. 58-75. - Retail sale without tax payment prohibited. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to sell at retail within the city any malt beverages, wines or spirituous liquors on which the license taxes herein provided for have not been paid to the wholesale dealer or distributor for the municipality. 
(Code 1970, § 3-22; Code 1983, § 3-2-26) 
Sec. 58-76. - Collection on delivery required. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any wholesale dealer or distributor or person to deliver any malt beverages, wines or spirituous liquors to any retail dealer in the city without first collecting the license taxes. 
(Code 1970, § 3-23; Code 1983, § 3-2-27) 
Sec. 58-77. - Possession without tax payment prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the sale as a retail dealer of alcoholic, vinous or malt beverages to have in his possession any of those beverages unless the tax required by the city shall first have been paid to the wholesaler, distributor or other source delivering or causing the beverages to be delivered to the retail dealer, and, whenever any such beverages are found in possession of a retail dealer where records of the payment of the city tax shall not appear upon the records of the wholesale liquor dealer to the city, it will be presumed that the tax has not been paid and the burden shall be upon the retailer to provide that fact. 
(Code 1970, § 3-24; Code 1983, § 3-2-28) 
Sec. 58-78. - Violation; revocation of wholesaler's license, confiscation of liquor. 
Any person engaged in the distribution by wholesale of any of the beverages mentioned in this article willfully violating the same shall be subject to revocation of their license to do business within the corporate limits of the city, and all liquor found in the possession of any retail establishment in the city which has not paid the tax or reported same under this article shall be subject to confiscation by the municipal authorities of the city, in addition to the other penalties set forth in this article, and sold by the city. 
(Code 1970, § 3-25; Code 1983, § 3-2-29) 
Sec. 58-79. - Revocation of retailer's license. 
Any retailers violating the provisions of this article shall, in addition to the penalties hereinabove set forth, be subject to revocation of their license to do business in the city as provided in other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 3-26; Code 1983, § 3-2-30) 
Sec. 58-80. - Distilled spirits by the drink—Tax levied. 
There is levied an excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in the amount of three percent of the charge to the public for the beverage. This tax does not apply to the sale of fermented beverages. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 58-81. - Same—Payment; collection; receipts. 
(a)  The tax imposed on resale consumption dealers by section 58-80 shall be payable as provided in this section. 
(b)  Every licensee shall, at the time of collecting for food and drinks served, give to the purchaser a receipt on which the price of alcoholic beverages served shall be itemized separately. Where the charges for food and drink are satisfied by credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the licensee may be deferred in a like manner; however, the licensee shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred. 
(c)  Every licensee or its agent is authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed in this article from purchasers of alcoholic beverages by the drink sold within its licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the city manager to facilitate the collection of this tax. 
(d)  All taxes collected by any licensee or agent under this article shall be due and payable to the city on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective calendar month, as set forth in this division. 
(e)  On or before the 20th day of the month, a return for the preceding calendar month shall be filed with the city clerk in such form as the city clerk may prescribe by every licensee liable for the payment of tax under this division. 
(f)  All returns shall show the gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink, amount of tax collected or authorized due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2005, § 2) 
Secs. 58-82—58-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ROOM EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 58-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Tybee Island and, variously, the incorporated territory of the city, wherein the city is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
Innkeeper means any person who is subject to taxation under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq., for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-41A) 
Sec. 58-107. - Imposition of tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. authorizing each municipality in the state to impose, levy, and collect an excise tax upon the furnishing for value to the public of any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by or required to pay business or occupation taxes to the municipality for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value, there is levied an excise tax on the charges to the public for such furnishing of any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations within the city. The tax shall not apply to charges for rooms, lodgings, or accommodations which are provided: 
(1)  For continuance occupancy of more than 30 consecutive days, the tax shall apply to the charges for accommodations during the first 30 days of continuous occupancy. 
(2)  To any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty; 
(3)  For meeting rooms and other such nonlodging facilities; 
(4)  Without charge in money or other form of direct or indirect compensation; 
(5)  To officials or employees of the state government or any of its instrumentalities, and to officials or employees of local governments of the state (municipalities, counties and school districts), when such official or employee is traveling on official, public business and provides documentation thereof issued by the governmental unit. Occupancy may be for any period and charges may be paid by any means. Member institutions of the state university systems are instrumentalities of the state. Notwithstanding the availability of any other means of identifying the person as a state or local government official or employee, whenever a person pays for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations with a state or local credit or debit card, such rooms, lodgings or accommodations shall be deemed to have been furnished for use by a state or local government official or employee traveling on official business for purposes of the exemption provided by this subsection; 
(6)  To foreign nationals who are members of their legation (diplomatic mission) in this country and who provide documentation thereof issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy may be for any period; 
(7)  To employees of the United States government and its instrumentalities for accommodations furnished for any period when charges are paid exclusively by check or other negotiable instrument issued by the United States of America or any of its instrumentalities. Unless the charges are paid directly by the U.S. government or any of its instrumentalities, such employees (including military personnel) are not exempt from this tax. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-42A; Ord. of 3-12-2009) 
Sec. 58-108. - Rate. 
The rate of taxation shall be six percent of taxable charges to the public for lodging accommodations. The tax shall be levied at this rate and the resulting revenue shall be used pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3.2). 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-43A) 
Sec. 58-109. - Collection of tax by innkeeper. 
Every innkeeper providing accommodations in this city shall collect the hotel-motel tax on the taxable charge to the occupant and shall provide a receipt to each occupant which receipt shall reflect both the amount of charge for the accommodations and the amount of this and other taxes applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant and shall be collected by the innkeeper at the time payment for the accommodations is made. The innkeeper shall be liable for any amount of tax that he fails to collect appropriately and must remit to the city any amount of tax collected in excess of that which should have been collected. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-44A) 
Sec. 58-110. - Registration of innkeeper. 
(a)  Required. Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an innkeeper in this city shall immediately register with the city on a form provided by the city. Persons engaged in such business must so register, if not already registered. 
(b)  Name of business; other information. Each registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city. 
(c)  Signature requirement. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. 
(d)  Certificate of authority. The city shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each innkeeper to collect the tax from the occupant. 
(e)  Separate business locations. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an innkeeper. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-45A) 
Sec. 58-111. - Returns; payment of tax. 
(a)  Payment due date. Each innkeeper on or before the 20th day of each month, shall transmit returns and remit taxes due showing the total charges taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month. The return shall be made upon forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the city. 
(b)  Estimated tax liability. 
(1)  Definition. As used in this subsection, the term "estimated tax liability" means an innkeeper's tax liability under this article, adjusted to account for any subsequent change in the rate of tax imposed under this article or any substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the premises, based on his average monthly payments for the last fiscal year. 
(2)  Amount owed to city. If the estimated tax liability of an innkeeper for any taxable period exceeds $2,500.00, the innkeeper shall file a return and remit to the city not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the taxable period on or before the 20th day of the period. The amount of the payment of the estimated tax liability shall be credited against the amount to be due on the return required under subsection (a) of this section. This subsection shall not apply to any innkeeper unless during the previous fiscal year the innkeeper's monthly payments exceeded $2,500.00 per month for three consecutive months or more. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-46A) 
Sec. 58-112. - Collection fee. 
Each innkeeper collecting the tax required by this article shall be allowed a collection fee of three percent of the tax due as a deduction from the amount due, provided that the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment, and provided further that no other city taxes, fees or assessments are delinquent. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-47A) 
Sec. 58-113. - Innkeeper—Selling or quitting of business. 
If any innkeeper liable for any tax, interest or penalty imposed by this article sells his business or quits the business, he shall make a final return and payment within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. The innkeeper's successor or assigns, if any, shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase money to cover the amount of the taxes, interest, and penalties due under this article and unpaid until the former owner produces either a receipt from the city showing that the taxes, interest, and penalties due under this article have been paid or a certificate from the city stating that no tax, interest, or penalty is due under this article. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the purchase money as required by this section, he shall be personally liable for the payment of any taxes, interest and penalties accruing under this article and unpaid by any former owner or assignor. The personal liability of the purchaser in such a case shall not exceed the amount of the total purchase money, but the property being transferred shall in all cases be subject to the full amount of the tax lien arising from the delinquencies of the former owner. Paid executions may be transferred and enforced as otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-48A) 
Sec. 58-114. - Extensions and returns, failure of innkeeper to make return and pay required taxes. 
(a)  Extensions for returns. 
(1)  The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making any returns required under this article for not more than 30 days. 
(2)  No extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application, and then the extension shall only be valid for a period, as appropriate, of not more than 12 consecutive months or four consecutive calendar quarters. 
(3)  Upon the granting of any extension authorized by this subsection, the innkeeper shall remit to the city on or before the date the tax would otherwise become due without the grant of an extension an amount which equals not less than 100 percent of the innkeeper's payment for the corresponding period of the preceding tax year. 
(4)  No interest or penalty shall be charged by reason of granting an extension pursuant to this subsection during the first ten days of each extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected upon the unpaid balance of the innkeeper's liability of the rate specified by law. 
(b)  Failure to make return; payment of required taxes. In the event any innkeeper fails to make a return and pay the tax as provided in this article or makes a grossly incorrect return or a return that is false or fraudulent, the city, through the finance director, shall make an estimate for the taxable period of taxable charges of the innkeeper. Based upon its estimate, the city shall assess and collect the taxes, interest and penalties as accrued on the basis of the assessments. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-49A) 
Sec. 58-115. - Records and books. 
(a)  Each innkeeper required to make a return and pay any tax under this article shall keep and preserve: 
(1)  Suitable records of the charges taxable under this article; and 
(2)  Other books of account which are necessary to determine the amount of tax due. 
(b)  All books, invoices and other records required by this section to be kept shall be open to examination at all reasonable hours by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-49B) 
Sec. 58-116. - Assessments. 
Any assessment of an innkeeper by the city under this article shall be deemed prima facie correct. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-49C) 
Sec. 58-117. - Taxes delinquent. 
The tax imposed by this article shall become delinquent for each month after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-49D) 
Sec. 58-118. - Provisions applying to taxes. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41 relating to authority to waive interest on unpaid taxes; O.C.G.A. § 48-2-43, relating to authority to waive penalties; O.C.G.A. § 48-2-49 relating to periods of limitation for assessment of taxes shall apply to taxes imposed by the city pursuant to this article provided that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the commissioner and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-49E) 
Sec. 58-119. - Penalties added to tax for failure to pay. 
(a)  When any innkeeper fails to make any return or to pay the full amount of tax required by this article, there shall be imposed, in addition to other penalties provided by law, a penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for not more than 30 days, and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional 30 days or fraction of 30 days during which the failure continues. The penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00 in the aggregate, whichever is greater. If the failure is due to providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the finance director in an affidavit form attached to the return and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, the return may be accepted exclusive of penalties and interest. In the case of a false or fraudulent or failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due under this article, a penalty of 50 percent of the tax due shall be assessed. 
(b)  All civil penalties and interest added to any tax imposed under this article and collected by the city shall be included as revenue derived from such tax for purposes of the expenditure requirements imposed on the city by state law. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-49F) 
Sec. 58-120. - Failure to collect taxes; punishment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any innkeeper to fail, neglect, or refuse to collect the tax provided in this article, either by himself or through his agents or employees. 
(b)  In addition to the penalty of being liable for and paying the tax himself, any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 or imprisonment for not more than three months or both. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-49G) 
Sec. 58-121. - Fraudulent returns; punishment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any innkeeper required by this article to make, render, sign, or verify any return to make a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax levied by this article. 
(b)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon a conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00, or confinement for not less than 30 days nor more than three months, or both fine and confinement. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-49H) 
Sec. 58-122. - Failure to furnish return. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any innkeeper subject to this article to fail or refuse to furnish any return required to be made by this article or to fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city imposing a tax under this article. 
(b)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-49I) 
Sec. 58-123. - Failure to keep and open records. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any innkeeper subject to this article to fail to keep records or fail to open the records to inspection as required by law. 
(b)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-49J) 
Sec. 58-124. - Other violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any innkeeper to violate any other provisions of this article for which punishment is not otherwise provided. 
(b)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-49K) 
Secs. 58-125—58-151. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OCCUPATION TAX 

Sec. 58-152. - Occupation tax required for business dealings in the city. 
For the year 1997 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state, exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city marshal or his officer's deputies or to any police officer of the city upon request. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-51) 
Sec. 58-153. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
City means the City of Tybee Island, Georgia. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Location and office mean and include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person means and includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-52) 
Sec. 58-154. - Administrative and regulatory fees. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $10.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up and thereafter for each renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee; however, investigative fees not to exceed the actual costs involved in the background investigation may be charged. 
(c)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions regulated by this Code is set forth in section 58-179. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-53) 
Sec. 58-155. - Occupation tax levied; flat fee; exceptions. 
(a)  Occupation tax on certain businesses. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the flat rate as established by mayor and council. 
(b)  Flat fee. The amount of such fee which shall be applied uniformly to each business, trade, profession, or occupation shall be $125.00. 
(c)  Exceptions. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(3)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this article. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-54) 
Sec. 58-156. - Tax imposed on businesses with no location in state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in-state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-55) 
Sec. 58-157. - Dominant line of business to be identified on registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-56) 
Sec. 58-158. - Separate business locations. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-56.2) 
Sec. 58-159. - Certain practitioners to elect tax rate. 
(a)  Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on flat rate as set forth in section 58-155. 
(2)  A fee of $200.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(b)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 31 of each year. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-57) 
Sec. 58-160. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-57.2) 
Sec. 58-161. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 75 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-57.4) 
Sec. 58-162. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-58) 
Sec. 58-163. - Business license expiration/registration dates; tax payment/due dates; delinquency; penalty. 
A business license shall be required, and an occupation tax must be paid during any year in which any person engages in any business, trade, profession, or occupation for revenue-raising purposes, unless specifically exempted herein, in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Any business license shall be for a calendar year, and expire on December 31 of each year. 
(2)  Registration for a business license shall be made with the city prior to January 1 of each year, except for new registrations when there was no business, trade, profession, or occupation in the prior year, in which case registration for a business license shall be made prior to commencing business activities in the city. 
(3)  Payment of the occupation tax, and acquisition of a business license, shall be accomplished prior to January 1 of each calendar year, and if such occupation tax is not paid, and such business license is not obtained, within 90 days from January 1 of each calendar year, a penalty of ten percent of the occupational tax is applicable; except for new registrations when there was no business, trade, profession, or occupation in the prior year, in which case the acquisition of the business license and payment of the occupation tax shall be due at the time of registration and prior to commencement of business activity. If payment of the occupation tax for a new business, trade, profession, or occupation is not accomplished prior to the commencement of business activity, the occupational tax shall be delinquent, and a ten percent penalty is applicable. 
(4)  Any new business, trade, profession, or occupation which did not operate within the city during the prior year nor during the first half of a current calendar year, and begins a new business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city after July 1 of a current calendar year, shall be charged a one half year rate for the occupational tax for that portion of the first calendar year only. 
(5)  Each person who shall transact or offer to transact, any business, trade, profession, or occupation, who has not registered same with the city, or who has not acquired a business license from the city, or who has not paid an occupational tax to the city, as required herein, and is delinquent, shall, upon conviction by the judge, be punished by a fine or imprisonment not to exceed that of the general penalty section 1-8, either or both in the discretion of the judge. In addition to the above remedies, the city marshal may proceed to have the business cease operations and to collect the unpaid occupational tax as provided by law. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-59) 
Sec. 58-164. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state license to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-60) 
Sec. 58-165. - Evidence of requirements, if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-61) 
Sec. 58-166. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-62) 
Sec. 58-167. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 which may be enforceable by the contempt power of the municipal court and subject to all other penalties authorized by law. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-62.2; Ord. No. 32-2010, 12-9-2010; Ord. No. 32-2010, 12-9-2010) 
Sec. 58-168. - Deputy marshal-business inspectors; subpoena powers. 
The city police department, its chief and its duly designated officers and inspectors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspectors with full subpoena powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-63) 
Sec. 58-169. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-64) 
Sec. 58-170. - Tax inapplicable where prohibited or exempted by law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by law. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-64.2) 
Sec. 58-171. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business will pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-65) 
Sec. 58-172. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, etc. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books upon request, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to a person who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city in accordance with provisions found in this article. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-66) 
Sec. 58-173. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-67) 
Sec. 58-174. - Application of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-67.2) 
Sec. 58-175. - Enforcement of provisions; inspection of registrations. 
It is the duty of the city manager and his designees to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is made the further duty of the city manager and his designees to inspect all registrations issued by the city as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-68) 
Sec. 58-176. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
After January 1, 1997, the city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-69) 
Sec. 58-177. - Option for exemption or reduction in tax for certain occupations. 
The mayor and council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the meeting of the mayor and council, or in a plan duly adopted at an open meeting. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-70) 
Sec. 58-178. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-71) 
Sec. 58-179. - Regulatory fees; schedule. 
Any business of the type listed below operating within the city shall pay a regulatory fee, even if such business has paid a business tax in Savannah, Tybee Island or another jurisdiction, and regulatory fees as defined in section 58-154(b) are established for those businesses operating within the corporate limits of the city, according to the following schedules: 
Alcoholic Beverages 

 
Miscellaneous 

 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a business that is already licensed and paying an occupation tax to Tybee shall not have to pay a regulatory fee in connection with vending activities as long as such activities are limited to the same line of product or service covered by the occupational tax paid. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-72; Ord. No. 12-2010, 7-22-2010; Ord. No. 51-2011, 12-8-2011; Ord. No. 08-2012, 8-23-2012; Ord. No. 20-2014, § 1, 3-13-2014; Ord. No. 17-2017 , § 1, 12-19-2017) 
Secs. 58-180—58-201. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - INSURANCE PREMIUM TAX 

Sec. 58-202. - Levy of tax. 
(a)  Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. There is levied for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used on O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 34-48. 
(b)  Gross premiums tax on all other insurers. There is levied for the year 1991 and for each year thereafter an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), and specifically those classes designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2)—(6), doing business within the city in an amount equal to 2 1/2 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Code 1970, § 18-7; Code 1983, § 3-2-75) 
ARTICLE VII. - ENERGY EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 58-203. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Tybee Island Energy Excise Tax Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 29-2012, 11-8-2012) 
Sec. 58-204. - Findings and intent. 
This article is adopted to address the interest of public finance. Georgia law authorizes counties and municipalities to impose an excise tax on the sale or use of energy but the imposition of the excise tax on the sale or use of energy in the law is contingent upon the enactment of an ordinance of the municipality in question. In order for the municipality to properly impose such excise tax the municipality must follow all of the provisions of O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 13, Article 6, one provision of which is the enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 29-2012, 11-8-2012) 
Sec. 58-205. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Dealer shall have the same meaning as provided for in the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
Energy shall have the same meaning as provided for in the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
Local sales and use tax shall have the same meaning as provided for in the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
Purchaser shall have the same meaning as provided for in the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
(Ord. No. 29-2012, 11-8-2012) 
Sec. 58-206. - Energy excise tax imposed. 
(1)  In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 13, Article 6, there is imposed within the territorial limits of the municipality, an excise tax on the sale or use of energy when such sale or use would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 8, Article 1 but for the exemption found in the O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(2)  The sales or use of energy when such sale or use would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 8, Article 1 but for the exemption found in the O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2 includes, but is not limited to, the items listed in subsection (e) of the same Code section. 
(Ord. No. 29-2012, 11-8-2012) 
Sec. 58-207. - Energy excise tax rate and phase-in. 
(1)  The rate of the excise tax levied and collected pursuant to this article shall be phased in over a four-year period as directed by the O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-112(a)(3) and 48-13-112(b) and as set forth below: 
a.  For the period commencing January 1, 2013, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2013, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 25 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in the O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
b.  For the period commencing January 1, 2014, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2014, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 50 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in the O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
c.  For the period commencing January 1, 2015, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2015, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 75 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in the O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; and 
d.  On or after January 1, 2016, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 100 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in the O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(2)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2 (c)(4), if a project of regional significance under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3(92) is started in the special district, it shall not be subject to the phase-in period contained in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of subsection (1) of this section, and the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy in connection therewith shall be subject to the rate specified in paragraph (d) of subsection (1) of this section notwithstanding the January 1, 2016 limitation in that paragraph (d). 
(3)  Following such initial imposition during the phase-in time period, on or after January 1, 2016, the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the governing authority of the city shall be directed by the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(d). Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the special district, but in no event more than two percent. 
(4)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district decreases from two percent to one percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
(5)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district increases from one percent to two percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 29-2012, 11-8-2012) 
Sec. 58-208. - Energy excise tax imposition, remittance and recovery. 
(1)  The excise tax levied and collected pursuant to this article shall be imposed at the time and be recoverable as governed by the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c). 
(2)  The excise tax shall be a debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts as governed by the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c). 
(3)  The dealer collecting the excise tax shall remit the excise tax to the county as governed by the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c). 
(4)  Every dealer subject to an excise tax under this article shall be liable for the excise tax at an applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of the excise taxes collected from the purchasers, whichever is greater as governed by the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c). 
(Ord. No. 29-2012, 11-8-2012) 
Sec. 58-209. - Exemption certificates. 
(1)  The governing authority of the city, or the collecting officer appointed under this article, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the city and to ascertain whether such purchasers have completed a uniform exemption certificate provided by the Georgia Department of Revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser under the exemption found in the O.C.G.A. § 48-8-32.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this article. 
(2)  An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates provided by the Georgia Department of Revenue. The energy provider shall not be liable for failing to collect and remit the excise tax imposed under this article if a purchaser has failed to submit the uniform exemption certificate provided by the Georgia Department of Revenue to such energy provider. 
(Ord. No. 29-2012, 11-8-2012) 
Sec. 58-210. - Commencement of collections and due date. 
(1)  The excise tax imposed pursuant to this article shall become effective on January 1, 2013 or as soon as soon as possible thereafter. 
(2)  The excise tax levied pursuant to this article shall be imposed only at the time that sales and use tax on the sale and use of such energy would have been due and payable under the O.C.G.A. § 48-8-30 but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(3)  The excise tax shall be due and payable in the same manner as would otherwise be required under O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 8, Article 1. 
(4)  All sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month shall be due and payable to the county monthly on or before the 20th day of every month and each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross sales and purchases arising from all sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 29-2012, 11-8-2012) 
Sec. 58-211. - Expenditure of proceeds. 
The proceeds of the excise tax levied and collected pursuant to this article shall not be subject to any use or expenditure requirements provided for under any of the local sales and use taxes but shall be authorized to be expended in the same manner as otherwise would have been required under such local sales and use taxes or may be expended for any lawful purpose as governed by the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c). Any proceeds received by the city pursuant to this article shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 29-2012, 11-8-2012) 
Sec. 58-212. - Administrative provisions and audit. 
(1)  Chatham County is tasked with designating a collecting officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this article. 
(2)  The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this article, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealers collecting and remitting the excise tax. 
(3)  The collecting officer, or designee, may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of and locations within the city of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax to the energy dealer under this article. 
(4)  As part by the audit report required by the O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7 the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this article. 
(Ord. No. 29-2012, 11-8-2012) 
Chapter 62 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 

Sec. 62-1. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance pertaining to telecommunications systems and/or franchises, cable or open video systems and franchises therefor or cable television franchises or systems. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances shall be maintained separately. 
Sec. 62-2. - Franchise fee for state issued cable or video franchise. 
(a)  The city requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The city hereby authorizes city manager, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the secretary of state and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the franchise fee applicable to such applicant or holder of a state license. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2008, § 1) 
Chapter 66 - TRAFFIC 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq. 

Sec. 66-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted; penalties. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq., and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this municipality with like effect as if recited herein. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1983, § 10-1-1) 
Sec. 66-2. - Skateboards regulated. 
(a)  No person shall ride a skateboard anywhere in the city without complying with the terms of this section. 
(b)  Skateboards and portable ramps may be provided that skateboard ramps, defined as outdoor structures designed and principally intended to permit persons on skateboards to move continuously from one side to the other, shall not exceed six feet in height, shall be portable and shall be removed when not in use in the parking lot by the recreational building at Jaycee Park during reasonable hours. 
(c)  Skateboards, without the use of portable ramps and to be used for travel from one end of the island to the other, may be utilized between Highway 80 and 16th Street on Lovell Avenue. 
(d)  The use of skateboards and/or portable ramps used with them will not be allowed in any other public areas of the city unless specifically designated as recreational facilities by the city. 
(e)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $300.00 or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1983, § 10-1-3) 
Sec. 66-3. - Speed zones. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183 concerning local authorities power to alter lawful speed limits, the following is adopted. 
(b)  The following speed zones are established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law. 
On-System Highways 

 
  
School Zone 

 
Signs to be erected by the department of public transportation for all state routes. 
  
Off-System Highways 

 
Jones Avenue will be a no passing zone. 
Speed limit changes pending DOT approval (2/23/2006). 
(c)  Persons convicted of violating this article shall be punished as provided for by law. 
(Code 1983, § 10-1-4; Ord; of 2-23-2006; Ord. of 10-11-2007; Ord. No. 19-2016 , § 1, 8-11-2016) 
Sec. 66-4. - Through streets designated; restrictions. 
(a)  The following streets in the city are designated as through streets, and all vehicles are required to stop before entering or crossing the same: 
(1)  Butler Avenue from First Street through Nineteenth Street. 
(2)  Venetian Drive from Twelfth Street through Fourteenth Street. 
(3)  Chatham Avenue from Fourteenth Street to Seventeenth Street. 
(4)  Chatham Avenue from Seventeenth Street through Nineteenth Street. 
(5)  First Street from Butler Avenue to the city limits on U. S. Highway 80. 
(6)  Lovell Avenue from Second Street to Fourth Street. 
(7)  Second Avenue from Second Street to Fourth Street. 
(8)  Lovell Avenue from Fifth Street to Inlet Avenue. 
(9)  Second Avenue from Fifth Street to Seventeenth Street. 
(10)  Sixteenth Street from Jones Avenue to Chatham Avenue. 
(11)  The strand from Sixteenth Street to Eighteenth Street. 
(12)  Twelfth Street from Venetian Drive to Jones Avenue. 
(13)  Thirteenth Street from Venetian Drive to Jones Avenue. 
(14)  Fourteenth Street from Chatham Avenue to Jones Avenue. 
(15)  Van Horn Street from First Street to its northernmost point past and including Pulaski Street. 
(16)  Campbell Avenue from First Street to Van Horn Street. 
(17)  Meddin Drive from Van Horn Street to Taylor Street. 
(18)  Taylor Street from Van Horn Street to Meddin Street. 
(b)  No person shall operate or drive any vehicle across or into any street designated as a through street by this section or any other ordinance of the city from a street intersecting that through street without first bringing the vehicle to a complete stop; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to intersections where traffic is being directed by an officer of the police department or where traffic is directed by a traffic control device or sign, in both of which cases the traffic officer or control device shall be obeyed. 
(Code 1970, § 19-6; Code 1983, § 10-1-5) 
Sec. 66-5. - Yield right-of-way signs intersections. 
The following intersections are designated as yield-right-of-way intersections, and vehicles facing a yield-right-of-way sign are required to yield the right-of-way to other vehicles: 
(1)  Campbell Avenue traffic shall yield for Van Horn Street traffic. 
(2)  Parking lot traffic within the municipal parking lot east of the strand between Sixteenth and Eighteenth Streets shall yield for the strand traffic when exiting from that parking lot at the Eighteenth Street exit. 
(3)  Eastbound traffic on Cedarwood Street shall yield for Van Horn Street traffic. 
(Code 1970, § 19-7; Code 1983, § 10-1-6) 
Sec. 66-6. - Reckless driving. 
The term "reckless" shall be defined to include the following: 
(1)  The operation of an automobile at a speed in excess of that fixed by the mayor and councilmembers of the city. 
(2)  The failure to bring a motor vehicle to a full stop before crossing any boulevard or designated through street where there is a stop sign. 
(3)  The failure to observe traffic signals and to cross or attempt to cross where the red stop light is on at the time or to cross on any street in face of a stop sign before having brought that automobile to a full and complete stop. 
(4)  The weaving and driving of an automobile from one traffic lane into another, except where it is necessary to pass an automobile in the same direction and where the same can be done without endangering the safety of other vehicles or pedestrians in that street at that time. 
(5)  The failure to observe the rules of the road. 
(6)  The unnecessary and loud blowing of horns and sirens, except where it is necessary for the safety and security of the persons driving that automobile. 
(7)  Driving on a wrong side of the street. 
(8)  Backing into a parking space or driving out of a parking space in a negligent manner where under the circumstances the lives and property of other persons or vehicles in that street are endangered. 
(9)  Crossing a yellow line in the center of the street where the same is prohibited by traffic regulations or ordinances of the municipal authorities of the city. 
(10)  Racing or driving fast in a negligent manner on any street in the city, even within the speed limits where traffic conditions at that time require a lower rate of speed. 
(11)  Driving an automobile in a grossly negligent manner, or at a speed greater than fixed by municipal ordinances when passing in a school or hospital zone, and where those acts tend to endanger the lives of persons or the security of property at that time and place. 
(12)  Any driving of any automobile on any of the streets of the city in a wanton, willful or negligent manner without having that car under control at a time when traffic conditions warrant and require a lower rate of speed and greater precaution to insure the safety of others lawfully in that street. 
(13)  Taking away the right-of-way of an approaching vehicle. 
(14)  Driving on a street in a direction other than that fixed by ordinance. 
(15)  Driving or operating an automobile upon the sidewalks of the city, or through a park or square except that the same shall not apply to fire engines, police vehicles or ambulances in the performance of their duty. 
(16)  Driving or operating a motor vehicle upon the streets of the city without proper lights or brakes. 
(17)  Driving or operating a motor vehicle upon any of the beaches of the municipality. 
(18)  The failure to yield to a motor vehicle when required to do so by a yield-right-of-way sign. 
(Code 1970, § 19-9; Code 1983, § 10-1-8) 
Sec. 66-7. - Go-carts prohibited; penalty. 
(a)  Findings. The mayor and council, after receiving evidence regarding the hazards associated with the use of go-carts on public streets, and in order to reduce the risk of injuries to persons or damage to property, finds that an ordinance prohibiting the use of go-carts on the city's streets is necessary and appropriate. 
(b)  Prohibited conduct. Except in areas specifically permitted by mayor and council and except as mayor and council might permit in connection with special events or parades, it shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a go-cart on public streets within the city. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $300.00 or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days, or both. 
(Code 1983, § 10-1-40; Ord. No. 05-2010, 5-27-2010) 
Sec. 66-8. - Motorized cart use. 
(a)  Permitted/city employees. A city employee on city business, in a city vehicle, and in the exercise of their duties, may operate gasoline, diesel fuel, or battery-operated powered vehicles or carts upon the city's streets, parks, parking lots, beaches, and other public properties in the city limits. 
(b)  Motorized carts. Motorized carts shall be as defined under state law. 
(1)  Registration. It shall be the duty of every owner of a motorized cart that is operated over the streets and those areas accessible by the public to register the cart with the city within ten business days of the date of purchase or acquisition. Numerical decals shall be issued upon registration; and a record of each motorized cart number, along with the name and address of the owner, shall be maintained by the police department. The registration fee for motorized carts used in the city shall be $15.00 and the registration shall be effective until such time as the cart is sold or otherwise disposed of. 
(2)  Highway 80 Crossing. No motorized cart may be permitted to operate on Highway 80 and may only cross Highway 80 at the following designated locations: 
a.  Highway 80/Butler Avenue at locations south of the Park of Seven Flags; 
b.  At the traffic controlled intersection of 14th Street and Highway 80; 
c.  At the traffic controlled intersection of Campbell Avenue and Highway 80; and 
d.  At the traffic controlled intersection of Jones Avenue and Highway 80. 
(3)  City streets. All streets of the city shall be accessible for an appropriately registered and used motorized cart thereon except as to Highway 80 as stated above. 
(4)  Operation regulations. 
a.  All motorized carts must be equipped with headlights, tail lights, brake lights, a flashing or rotating yellow or amber light mounted on the top, seatbelts, turn signal lights and a horn, and the maximum speed capability of any motorized cart must not exceed 20 miles per hour. 
b.  All occupants of a motorized cart must wear seatbelts at all times. 
c.  Children car and booster seats used in a motorized cart must be approved by the manufacturer for use with lap belts only, without the necessity of a shoulder strap. Children's car and booster seats may only be used in the front seat or another forward facing seat within a motorized cart. 
d.  Motorized carts shall not be operated on the sidewalks or bike trails within the city. 
e.  All operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to motor vehicular traffic. 
f.  Only licensed drivers are permitted to operate motorized carts and each owner is required to provide insurance for liability purposes in an amount not less than $25,000.00 per person, $50,000.00 per accident, and $15,000.00 in liability insurance. Proof of insurance shall be provided at the time of registration and be maintained in or on the vehicle. 
g.  Motorized carts will only be operated by individuals who are at least 16 years of age and possess a valid driver's license. 
h.  It shall be unlawful for a motorized cart to be operated on the streets of the city except as expressly authorized in this section and every person convicted of a violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or both. 
i.  It shall be unlawful for any occupant of a motorized cart to throw or otherwise permit, bottles, cans, paper or rubbish, including cigarette butts, to be deposited in any public park, on the sidewalks, streets, beaches, lanes, highways or other public properties, or on private property of another, except into trash receptacles. Included would be the removal by wind or otherwise of such items from motorized carts due to having such items unsecured on such vehicles. "Rubbish" as used herein shall include any matter that does not occur naturally in the area and specifically includes garbage, food items, peels, shells, etc., whether or not biodegradable. 
(5)  Motorized cart rental regulations. Motorized cart dealers and distributors, as well as any other commercial establishment, may rent motorized carts to the public for use on the streets and those areas accessible by the public of the city. Renters shall be provided a copy of this article and a map illustrating Highway 80's designated crossings. Renters shall provide a signature as proof of their acknowledgment and understanding of this article's requirements. It shall be the responsibility of each such establishment renting carts to maintain a written record of each renter's signature of acknowledgement and understanding of this article's requirements. 
(6)  Signs. The city shall post signs giving notice of the existence of operating standards along appropriate public streets. 
(7)  Motorized carts must observe the parking regulations and ordinances applicable to motorized vehicles and all parking therefor shall be by payment of the appropriate charge for parking in authorized parking places and/or the display of a valid decal for parking. 
(8)  Penalty for littering. In addition to any other penalties provided by law, anyone convicted of violating subsection (b)(4) shall be fined not less than $100.00 for the first offense plus applicable court fees, and not less than $200.00 for subsequent offenses plus applicable court fees for any subsequent offense occurring within a 12-month period of a preceding offense. 
(Code 1983, § 10-1-44; Ord. No. 04-2010, 5-13-2010; Ord. No. 24-2010, 9-24-2010; Ord. No. 46-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014; Ord. No. 06-A-2015, § 1, 3-12-2015) 
Sec. 66-9. - Bicycle traffic. 
(a)  Except as provided herein and as otherwise provided, the uniform rules of the road shall be applicable to bicycle traffic, however, on one-way streets within the city with or without a designated bicycle lane, bicycles may properly be operated on such streets as close to the shoulder of the road as possible. 
(b)  Bicycles may not be operated on sidewalks along Tybrisa Street or the Strand Avenue. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2008) 
Sec. 66-10. - Vehicular traffic on Jones Avenue. 
Vehicles with over two axles are prohibited from traveling in a north-south direction on Jones Avenue between its intersection with Second Street and its intersection with Chatham Avenue in either direction. Such vehicles are not prohibited from crossing Jones Avenue at intersecting streets. Exceptions for certain vehicles for limited purposes may be allowed by application through the city police department. Two or more signs establishing the prohibition shall be placed in the right of way at such locations as deemed most reasonably calculated to give notice of the restriction to the motoring public as determined by the city police department with consultation with the city manager or the manager's designee. 
(Ord. No. 08-2015, § 1, 3-12-2015) 
Secs. 66-11—66-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 66-40—66-66. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION AND IMPOUNDMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 26B-2012, adopted October 11, 2012, repealed the former div. 2, §§ 66-67—66-71, and enacted a new div. 2 as set out herein. The former div. 2 pertained to vehicle impoundment and derived from Code 1970, § 19-8(c); Code 1983, §§ 10-2-1—10-2-5. 

Sec. 66-67. - [Title.] 
For convenience in reference, this division shall be entitled "Vehicle Immobilization and Impoundment Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 26B-2012, 10-11-2012) 
Sec. 66-68. - [Purpose.] 
The purpose of this division is to enhance the procedures of the city and the enforcement of its ordinances pertaining to the stopping, standing and parking of vehicles; their abandonment; the creation of obstructions to traffic; and the general health, safety and convenience of those who use and are upon the streets and sidewalks within its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 26B-2012, 10-11-2012) 
Sec. 66-69. - Definitions. 
(a)  Boot shall mean a device designated and manufactured to be attached to the wheel or tire of a vehicle to restrict the normal movement of a vehicle, as authorized by the city manager or the police authorities for the city. The device shall also be referred to as an "immobilization device" or the use of this device as "immobilization" or "immobilized." 
(b)  Citation shall mean a citation, notice or other document on a form prepared and intended to put a person on notice pursuant to the City Code or O.C.G.A. Title 40, which identifies a vehicle; sets forth the ordinance(s) or statute(s) being violated; and such other information as relevant to making cases for violation of such provisions. 
(c)  A day for the purposes of determining a period of time pursuant to this division shall be a 24-hour period of time commencing at the date, hour and/or minute when such time is noted upon a citation, notice or other document prepared with a copy maintained by an officer. When the date and hour is not noted, a day shall commence at 12:01 a.m. on the calendar date noted and expire at 12:00 midnight on the succeeding date. Any deadline which falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday recognized by the city shall be extended to the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
(d)  Vehicle shall include but are not limited to those described in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(29), (24.2), (25.1), (32), (33), (43.1) and (68). The term as used herein shall include motorized carts under section 66-7 of the Tybee Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  Owner shall mean the party in whom legal title to the vehicle is vested in accordance with the laws of the state in which the vehicle is certificated or registered. If competing claims of ownership exist as a vehicle is not titled, the owner shall be the party whose interest is most readily known to the city or as determined upon the advice of the city attorney. 
(f)  Responsible party shall mean one or more of the following: 
(1)  The owner of a vehicle as determined in accordance with the records of the title certifying authority of the state in which the vehicle is titled at the time of any violation at issue or such other record of ownership as may be established by credible evidence; or 
(2)  The operator of a vehicle at the time of any violation at issue; or 
(3)  The lessee of a vehicle when the parking enforcement official or police officials possesses actual notice of a written lease agreement which identifies the owner and lessee, with the address of the lessee and credible evidence that the lessee maintained possession, control or responsibility for the vehicle during the time any violation at issue occurred. 
If the titled owner is a corporation, the responsible party shall be an officer, director or employee who operates the vehicle in the course of the corporation's business or to whom the vehicle is generally made available by the corporation for use or the registered agent of the corporation as determined by the records of the corporation commissioner of the State of Georgia, provided that the registered agent shall not be personally subject to any violation or penalty pursuant to this division but may subject the corporation to its provisions. For a partnership, the responsible party shall be the general partner or any employee who operates the vehicle in the course of the partnership's business or to whom the vehicle is generally made available. If a vehicle is titled in the name of another entity or organization, the responsible party shall be the natural person(s) who by the principles of Georgia law would possess ownership or control of the entity or who operates the vehicle in the course of the entity's business or to whom the vehicle is generally made available. 
(Ord. No. 26B-2012, 10-11-2012) 
Sec. 66-70. - Subjects. 
The following shall be subject to the provisions of this division: 
(a)  A vehicle which has issued against it and outstanding without disposition eight or more parking citations or which has an amount issued against it and outstanding without disposition at least $300.00 in parking citations. 
(b)  An owner or responsible person having outstanding without disposition eight or more parking citations or who has an amount issued against him/her and outstanding without disposition at least $300.00 in parking citations. 
(Ord. No. 26B-2012, 10-11-2012) 
Sec. 66-71. - Vehicles. 
The following vehicles shall be subject to the procedures specified in this division for immobilization, relocation, removal and impoundment in accordance with the specified procedures for such action: 
(a)  Any vehicle which satisfies the requirements of section 66-70(a) of this division shall be subject to immobilization. 
(b)  A vehicle which has been immobilized one day shall be subject to removal and impoundment pursuant to this division. 
(c)  Any vehicle owned by a responsible party who has satisfied the requirements set forth above in section 66-70(b). 
(d)  A vehicle which an officer determines constitutes an immediate public health or safety obstacle. 
(Ord. No. 26B-2012, 10-11-2012) 
Sec. 66-72. - Immobilization of vehicles. 
The parking enforcement official or police officer may issue an order of immobilization which shall permit an officer to attach an immobilization device to the vehicle specified in the order when and where found in the City of Tybee Island. The order of immobilization shall permit the attachment of a boot to a vehicle located in any street or alley; on any sidewalk, public way or parking lot made available to the public whether privately or publicly owned or operated; or any other property owned or subject to the use and control of the City of Tybee Island. 
(a)  Immobilization shall be permitted under any of the following circumstances: when an order of immobilization is authorized or is issued as provided in this division; when a warrant is issued by a court of record of this state permitting the attachment or restraint of a vehicle. 
(b)  Whenever a vehicle subject to immobilization is located in a place where immobilization may be effected, an immobilization device shall be attached to a wheel of the vehicle. An immobilization notice shall be attached to a windshield or, if no windshield exists, to another prominent place on the vehicle, in a manner to withstand the normal effect of weather for a reasonable period of time. The immobilization notice shall contain the date, time and location where the vehicle is immobilized and the identity of the officer who immobilized the vehicle. The notice shall also contain a statement that the vehicle has been immobilized by the City of Tybee pursuant to this division and identify the ground(s) for immobilization. The notice shall also state that the vehicle may be released from immobilization by payment of the total violations assessed against the vehicle, including penalties, and the costs specified in this division which may be assessed for the enforcement and immobilization activities. The notice and the boot shall also state that, unless arrangements are made for the release of the vehicle within 24 hours, the vehicle will be removed and impounded as authorized in this division. The notice shall contain a warning that removing or attempting to remove the device or vehicle before release is obtained shall be a violation of the division. The address, telephone number and office hours where additional information may be obtained pertaining to the release of the vehicle, the enforcement of this division, or other information pertaining to action taken pursuant to this division shall also be stated. 
(c)  The parking restrictions and regulations otherwise applicable to the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of the City Code shall not apply to any vehicle immobilized pursuant to this division during its period of immobilization. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, damage, remove, destroy or take the immobilization device except as authorized pursuant to this division. 
(e)  A vehicle shall not be released from immobilization or impoundment except to the owner upon proof of ownership or the duly authorized representative of the owner. 
(f)  In addition to the fees, fines, and penalties as specified in this Code pertaining to any violations of its provisions, immobilization, removal, impoundment, and associated fees as provided by mayor and council and kept on file with the clerk shall be assessed against the owner or responsible person for the enforcement of this division. 
(Ord. No. 26B-2012, 10-11-2012) 
Sec. 66-73. - Impounding vehicles illegally parked. 
In the event any vehicle is parked in violation of section 66-102, or any other ordinance of the city, at a fire hydrant or in a prohibited area or in such a manner as to obstruct or impede or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or to become a hazard, the police authorities, at their discretion, shall have the right, in addition to placing a docket case against the defendant, to cause the vehicle to be removed and towed in a manner selected by the police authorities and to remain there until the prescribed fine is paid to the City of Tybee Island. 
A parking enforcement official or police officer may immediately have impounded any vehicle that the officer deems to be an immediate public health or safety obstacle. The parking enforcement official or police officer taking such action shall maintain a written record establishing the circumstances, necessity or danger which requires such action and any inquiry he has made and effort he has undertaken to determine and notify the responsible party for the vehicle which need only be reasonable in light of the circumstances and services available to the officer at that time. If the parking enforcement official or police officer is able to make contact with the responsible party, the written record shall specify the nature and substance of that contact and the efforts, if any, of the responsible party to take possession of and remove the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 26B-2012, 10-11-2012) 
Sec. 66-74. - Record of impoundment. 
It shall be the duty of the city police department to keep a permanent record of all vehicles impounded by the police department, together with the names and addresses of the owners of the vehicles, where available, numbers of their state license tags, description of the vehicle including motor numbers and the circumstances surrounding the impounding of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 26B-2012, 10-11-2012) 
Sec. 66-75. - Release of impounded vehicles. 
Any person claiming an impounded vehicle shall produce evidence of his identity and ownership or right of possession to the parking enforcement official or designated police officer. Upon payment of storage costs and towing charges and the execution of a release and receipt to the city for the vehicle, the parking enforcement official or designated police officer shall issue an order authorizing release of the vehicle to the claimant. 
(Ord. No. 26B-2012, 10-11-2012) 
Sec. 66-76. - Protest and bond. 
In case protest is made against the payment of any towing charge or storage costs, the parking enforcement official or designated police officer may authorize the discharge of the vehicle if the protestant shall be charged with the violation of a traffic ordinance and shall be required to make bond for his appearance and trial before the court. If such person is convicted for violating the traffic ordinance by the judge, in addition to other costs, the judge shall assess as costs the storage costs and towing charges which have accumulated in connection with the impounding of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 26B-2012, 10-11-2012) 
Sec. 66-77. - Disposal of unclaimed vehicles. 
(a)  In the event any impounded car is not claimed within 30 days from the date it is impounded, the city shall dispose of the property as herein provided. 
(b)  When any vehicle is impounded under this division, notice shall be served personally by the police department or other authorized official designated by the mayor and council to the owner to claim the vehicle within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice. The notice shall set forth the fact that the vehicle has been impounded in accordance with the provisions of this division, and that upon failure of the owner to claim the vehicle and pay all costs incurred in connection with the removal and storage thereof within 30 days, the vehicle will be sold or disposed of by the city, and that any proceeds arising from the sale thereof will be applied first to the payment of expenses incurred in connection with the removal, storage and sale of the vehicle and any remaining balance paid to the owner. 
(c)  If notice cannot be effected to the owner within seven days of the date of impoundment, an advertised notice shall be published, in the legal organ classified advertising section where public notices are placed, once a day for three consecutive days, giving notice to the owner. If no response is received from the written or advertised notice within 30 days after the date that the last notice was effected, the vehicle may be disposed of as an abandoned motor vehicle under this article. 
(d)  Upon the failure of the owner to claim the vehicle within 30 days from the date of the receipt of notice of impoundment, or from the date of the last notice to owner in the case of advertised notice, the vehicle shall be advertised and sold by the city. The advertisement shall be published on three consecutive days in the newspaper in which official city notices are published and shall describe and identify the vehicle to be sold, the fact that it has been impounded by the police department in accordance with the provisions of this division, and that it will be sold at the place where stored to the highest bidder for cash on a certain date ten days after the publication of the last notice, unless the vehicle shall have been claimed by the owner and all costs incurred in connection with the removal, storage, advertisement and sale thereof are paid prior thereto. 
(Ord. No. 26B-2012, 10-11-2012) 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles generally, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-60-4, 40-11-1—40-11-24. 
Secs. 66-78—66-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-101. - Parking zones. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall have the authority to place parking meters and/or pay and display meters or devices on public streets and operate parking lots within the city. It shall be unlawful to park in no parking zones as designated by section 66-102. 
(b)  The terms "to park" and "parking" shall mean the bringing of a vehicle to a stationary position for any period of time exceeding five minutes and shall include each vehicle whether occupied or unoccupied. 
(Code 1983, § 10-1-2; Ord. No. 04-2012, 3-8-2012) 
Sec. 66-102. - Parking restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in a no parking zone designated by a no parking sign or a yellow line, or within 25 feet of a fire hydrant. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in a parking lot or in a metered parking space without paying the required fees for use of such spaces. 
(Code 1983, § 10-1-7) 
Sec. 66-103. - Parking lot regulations. 
(a)  Fees for parking. The city may operate parking lots for the convenience of the public, charging fees for spaces used. Use of parking spaces without payment of or such other fees as established by the city, shall constitute a parking violation and shall result in a citation thereof. The city may have parking lot attendants collect parking fees, or may use other means such as automated entrance and/or exit devices with tickets or similar records or pre-numbered envelopes with tear-off receipts to collect parking fees. 
(b)  Misuse of city parking lots. The parking lots operated by the city are for the express purpose of providing convenient access to the public beaches and, therefore, any activity which restricts or hinders such access is undesirable and subject to prohibition. In the absence of an official event permit, in the public parking lots of the city, no person shall: 
(1)  Cook or prepare food. 
(2)  Play excessively loud music. 
(3)  Loiter without a legitimate purpose. 
(4)  Repetitively cruise through the parking lots not intending to park. 
(5)  Camp or sleep in vehicles. 
(6)  Engage in any other activity that blocks the free passage of vehicles into and out of the lots or the free passage of persons to and from the beach. 
(Code 1983, § 10-1-43) 
Sec. 66-104. - Limitations on idling vehicles/engines running. 
No tour bus, motor coach, delivery vehicle, bus, commercial van may stop or part with its engine running for longer than ten minutes, except where necessary to refrigerate perishable items and except for passenger buses that remain occupied by other than the driver. Refrigeration units on delivery vehicles necessary to refrigerate perishable items shall be allowed to continue running even if the engine to the truck is turned off. O.C.G.A. § 40-6-201 prohibits a vehicle from being left unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and effectively setting the brake. 
Unless it is necessary to leave the motor running to charge electronic devices, all city vehicles must be turned off whenever the driver exits the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, 6-10-2010; Ord. No. 38-2013, § 1, 12-12-2013) 
Secs. 66-105—66-134. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - METERED PARKING 

Sec. 66-135. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parking means the standing of a vehicle in a city-owned parking lot or upon a street whether that vehicle is occupied or not and whether that vehicle be accompanied or not by an operator for a period of time in excess of two minutes. 
Parking meter and mechanical parking time indicator mean a device which shall indicate thereon the length of time during which a vehicle may be parked in a particular place which shall have as a part thereof a receptacle or chamber for receiving and storing coins of United States money, a slot or place in which the coin may be deposited; a timing mechanism to indicate the passage of the interval of time during which parking is permissible and which shall also display an appropriate signal when the aforesaid interval of time shall have elapsed; also brief instructions as to its operation. 
Parking space, individual means a portion of the street or street right-of-way of sufficient length and depth to accommodate a vehicle to be parked, as shall be specified by the city. Also, a space for parking in a city parking lot or other area designated for vehicular parking. See, generally, LDC section 3-080(E). 
Pay and Display Meter means a device which will provide parking authorization by means of a receipt to be placed, in a fashion described in section 66-149, upon the dash of the vehicle for which parking time is permissible and authorized. 
Vehicle means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a public highway, except those as are used exclusively by human power. 
(Code 1970, § 19-16; Code 1983, § 10-1-21; Ord. No. 01-2012, 3-8-2012; Ord. No. 30-2014, § 1, 5-8-2014) 
Sec. 66-136. - Interpretation. 
This division shall be construed as a supplement to the general traffic regulations and all other ordinances of the city regulating the traffic, parking and use of streets, which shall be in force and effect in the congested area, except insofar as modified by the provisions hereinbefore set forth. Any authority heretofore or hereafter exercised under any ordinance, rule or regulation restricting or prohibiting parking, independent of time limits, shall in no manner be affected by this division or any to the provisions thereof. The purpose of this article is to assist in the regulation of overtime parking by the use of parking meters, and it shall be so construed. 
(Code 1970, § 19-17; Code 1983, § 10-1-22) 
Sec. 66-137. - Effect of regulations on taxicab stands, etc. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed as prohibiting the city from providing for free parking space for loading and unloading, for taxicab stands and for other matters of similar nature. 
(Code 1970, § 19-18; Code 1983, § 10-1-23) 
Sec. 66-138. - Designation of individual parking spaces. 
The city manager or parking services director is authorized and directed to designate any individual parking spaces as it deems proper along the streets within the city limits for the parking of vehicles. At each place where individual parking spaces are so designated, each vehicle shall be parked entirely within an individual parking space. It is a violation of the requirements of this section for a vehicle not to be parked entirely within an individual parking space. In order for a parking space to be designated, it shall not be necessary that it be curbed, marked, painted, or striped. 
In spaces designated by the city as being appropriate for only low speed vehicles, golf carts, motorcycles and/or motor scooters, it shall be a violation to park anything other than such a vehicle in a space designated for such vehicles. This provision shall have application to designated street parking and designated parking lot spaces. A violation hereof shall be treated as a violation of the prohibition on improperly parked vehicles and may be punished as provided in this Code. 
(Code 1970, § 19-19; Code 1983, § 10-1-24; Ord. No. 03-2012, 3-8-12; Ord. No. 30-2014, § 1, 5-8-2014) 
Sec. 66-139. - Parking meters—Installation; compliance. 
Parking meters shall be installed along the street right-of-way edge or in the immediate vicinity of individual parking spaces designated where parking is restricted. All such parking meters shall comply with the conditions set forth in the definition in section 66-135 and these meters shall be under the management, supervision and control of the city manager or parking service director. 
(Code 1983, § 10-1-25) 
Sec. 66-140. - Regulations for parking in individual parking spaces. 
(a)  Whenever a vehicle shall be parked in an individual parking space, where a parking meter has been installed, the person parking that vehicle shall deposit one or more quarters of United States money in that parking meter, if any meter displays the signal showing that legal parking is only permitted on such deposit. Upon the deposit of any quarters in that parking meter, that person shall be entitled to legal parking for a period of time indicated on that meter. That person may deposit more than one such quarters in order to receive additional periods of time. In addition, use of parking spaces in the city-owned parking lots by automated devices or by other ordinances. 
(b)  Notice to the public may be given by appropriate signs setting forth the length of time for which parking is permitted and the conditions thereof. These may be upon the parking meter stand or in the immediate vicinity of any parking space. 
(c)  Any vehicle which remains in an individual parking space after the prescribed time for parking, is determined to be illegally parked, but in no event shall it be considered illegal parking if the meter display signal shows that a proper deposit has been made for that parking. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles parked or standing in city-owned parking lots or upon the streets when those vehicles are parked or standing between the hours of 8:00 p.m. until 8:00 a.m. the following morning, except for no parking zones and adjacent to fire hydrants, and except for special occasions when the city manager authorizes parking requirements to apply during additional periods of time. 
(e)  The fines for parking violations shall be as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1983, § 10-1-26) 
Sec. 66-141. - Metered parking where time has expired prohibited; evidence of violation. 
All parking is prohibited in any parking space where a meter is installed which displays a signal showing that parking is not permitted or that parking time has expired, unless a deposit of a coin of the proper designated amount is made as herein provided. Any vehicle parked contrary to these provisions shall be deemed to be illegally parked when the time signal on the parking meter of the same shows the message "no parking permitted," or "time expired," or some similar message, and such message shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the unlawful parking of any motor vehicle by its operator and owner. 
(Code 1970, § 19-22; Code 1983, § 10-1-27) 
Sec. 66-142. - Overtime parking—Persons responsible. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this division for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of, or operated by, that person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as herein described. 
(Code 1970, § 19-23; Code 1983, § 10-1-28) 
Sec. 66-143. - Same—Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this division for any person to permit a vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking place adjacent to any parking meter while that meter is displaying a signal indication that the vehicle occupying that parking space has already been parked beyond the period of time prescribed for that parking space. 
(Code 1970, § 19-24; Code 1983, § 10-1-29) 
Sec. 66-144. - Damaging meter prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this division for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1970, § 19-25; Code 1983, § 10-1-30) 
Sec. 66-145. - Slugs prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this division to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter, any slug, device or metallic substance, or any other substitute for $0.25 coin of the United States. 
(Code 1970, § 19-26; Code 1983, § 10-1-31) 
Sec. 66-146. - Parking citation issuance; information required. 
It shall be the duty of the parking enforcement officers, city marshal, or police officers, to issue citations whenever vehicles are illegally parked, or unlawfully parked, with said citations showing: 
(1)  The number of each parking meter which indicates the vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent to any parking meter is or has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this division. 
(2)  The state license number of that vehicle; and if applicable, the city registration number of that vehicle. 
(3)  The time during which that vehicle is parked in violation of any of the provisions of this division. 
(4)  Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending that violation. 
(Code 1970, § 19-27; Code 1983, § 10-1-32) 
Sec. 66-147. - Ticketing vehicles; payment; penalty. 
(a)  Ticketing vehicles. Each such police officer, city marshal or parking enforcement officer shall attach to a vehicle illegally parked under the provisions of this division a notice to the owner or operator thereof that that vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this division and instructing that owner or operator to report to any police officer, city marshal or parking enforcement officer on duty in regard to that violation. 
(b)  Payment of fine. Each such owner or operator may, within ten days of the time when any notice was attached to that vehicle, pay the fine as specified on the parking violation ticket in return for which that person shall receive a receipt, the form of which is designated by the appropriate city personnel. 
(c)  Delinquency of payment. The failure of that owner or operator to make a full payment within ten days shall result in the issuance of a parking citation delinquency notice which shall demand full payment plus an $18.00 penalty by a specified payment due date. The failure of that owner or operator to make said payment will result in issuance of an administrative hearing notice which shall demand: 
(1)  Full payment of the parking violation fine, the $18.00 delinquency penalty, plus $10.00 for each issued citation; or 
(2)  The owner's or operator's appearance on a given date at specified time and location for an administrative hearing. 
(d)  Subpoena issuance. The failure of that owner or operator to make full payment for all issued citations or to have amounts due set aside at the administrative hearing, will result in the owner or operator being issued a subpoena to appear in court and subject to additional court fines and costs. 
(Code 1983, § 10-1-33; Ord. of 4-10-2005(02), § 1; Ord. No. 2005-10, 6-23-2005) 
Sec. 66-148. - Rules for collection of coins; responsibility of parking violations. 
(a)  The city manager or parking director shall designate employees to collect the coins deposited in parking meters. 
(b)  In collecting coins, the persons so designated shall abide by the following rules: 
(1)  The person collecting, counting and transporting the money from the meters must be accompanied by two other persons, one of which shall be a supervisor. 
(2)  All collections from parking meters will be made during regular working hours (designated hours). 
(3)  The police department will be notified when collections are being made for security. 
(c)  Any violations of these regulations will be cause for immediate dismissal. 
(d)  The control of parking violations will be the responsibility of the city manager or parking services director. 
(Code 1983, § 10-1-34) 
Sec. 66-149. - Pay and display meters. 
All provisions hereof in the preceding sections in Division 2 dealing with metered parking shall have application to pay and display meters which may be placed in or in the vicinity of parking spaces along right-of-ways and in parking lots within the city. 
The pay and display meter will issue a receipt that shall be placed on the dash of the vehicle on the driver's side, so that it is visible from the outside of the vehicle. Parking beyond the purchased interval of time in the use of a pay and display meter device shall subject the violator in all respects to the same penalties as if the violation was as to a coin-fed parking meter and as established in the preceding sections. 
Failure to place the receipt in the prescribed location shall subject the violator in all respects to the same penalties as if the violation was as to a coin-fed parking meter and as established in the preceding sections. 
(Ord. No. 02-2012, 3-8-2012) 
Secs. 66-150—66-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKING DECALS 

Sec. 66-180. - Decals for free parking authorized. 
There is established by the city the right to issue decals that will permit free parking on all public streets and city parking lots within the city. 
(Code 1970, § 19-30; Code 1983, § 10-1-35) 
Sec. 66-181. - Period; condition to issuance; courtesy decals. 
(a)  A decal shall be issued for a period of no longer than one year and will only be issued upon the presentation of a current, valid state registration indicating the code for tax purposes for the city and also indicating that the ad valorem tax, if any, thereon has been paid. The decal is intended to be issued only to city residents and evidence sufficient to establish residency within the city including deeds, homestead exemptions, utility bills, and/or an affidavit may be submitted for proof of residency. Decals may be validly used on motor vehicles such as automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, motorcycles, low speed vehicles, buses, trailers and other objects with state tags. Persons whose automobiles, etc., are not registered to a city address may obtain a decal by purchase, upon payment of a fee set by the governing body. An existing holder of a decal may be entitled to a replacement decal in the event of a change in vehicles, windshield replacement or similar circumstances. 
(b)  The governing body shall have the authority to grant courtesy decals to persons whose automobiles, etc., are not registered in the city's taxing district and others pursuant to a courtesy parking decal policy approved by the mayor and council and on file in the office of the clerk of counsel and the office of the city manager or the manager's designee. The manager or the manager's designee shall maintain a list of those individuals granted courtesy parking decals and the issued decal numbers to whom the governing body grants such decals pursuant to the policy. 
(Code 1970, § 19-31; Code 1983, § 10-1-36; Ord. No. 12-2016 , § 1, 8-25-2016; Ord. No. 15-2017-B , §§ 1, 2, 11-9-2017) 
Sec. 66-182. - Decal—Display on vehicles; design, etc. 
The decals shall be of whatever design, shape and color, as may be designated by the governing body. Decals shall be permanently displayed on automobiles and other motor vehicles by adhesive bonding to the outside front windshield on the driver's side, and for trailers and other things which have no front windshield, decals shall be permanently displayed by adhesive bonding on the outside rear portion of the trailer or other thing so as to be visible from the left rear area of the trailer or other thing for which the decal has been issued or sold. 
(Code 1970, § 19-32; Code 1983, § 10-1-37) 
Sec. 66-183. - Decals for the parking of motorized carts (golf carts). 
Decals for the parking of motorized carts (golf carts) may be issued pursuant to section 66-181(a) upon presentation of appropriate documentation to establish residency within the city. Residency may be established by providing a copy of the ad valorem/sales tax registration on the applicant's personal vehicle demonstrating payment of the tax to the city tax district and also a copy of the golf cart registration to ensure that it has been inspected and belongs to the resident presenting the application. When this proof is presented to the proper city official, one decal will be issued for each vehicle which is the subject matter of the proof. The fee for a parking decal for a motorized cart (golf cart) shall be as set by the mayor and council and on file with the clerk of council and the city manager or the manager's designee. Any disputes concerning the eligibility for a free or discounted parking decal pursuant to this subsection shall be resolved by the city manager whose determination shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 06-A-2015, § 1, 3-12-2015; Ord. No. 12-2016 , § 1, 8-25-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-A-2015, § 1, adopted March 12, 2015, amended § 66-183 to read as set out herein. Previously § 66-183 pertained to same—tax payment required and was derived from Code 1983, § 10-1-38 and Ord. No. 16-2010, adopted September 23, 2010. 
Sec. 66-184. - Misuse of decal; forfeiture of free parking. 
Should any person or family who has been issued a decal permitting free parking in accordance with provisions of this division fail to attach same to the automobile, etc., as required by section 66-182, or only temporarily attach same to their automobile, etc. whereby it is transferable to another automobile, etc., or in any other way misuse or abuse the privilege and rights granted by the parking decal, then any owner, person or family shall forfeit that parking decal and all of the attendant rights to free parking thereby afforded, as well as be subject to the general penalty of section 1-8. In addition, the person to whom the parking decal was issued shall be issued a citation by a parking enforcement officer, the city marshal, or a police officer, for illegal use of the decal, with said citation requiring the payment of a fine equal to the then current price of a parking decal plus $20.00. The affected party shall then be issued a substitute decal for the remainder of the year. 
(Code 1970, § 19-34; Code 1983, § 10-1-39) 
Sec. 66-185. - Restrictions on decal usage. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, decals applied to trailers, recreational vehicles, and boat trailers may not be used to authorize parking for more than 24 hours in one parking space from Memorial Day weekend beginning at 12:00 a.m. on Friday of the Memorial Day weekend through the Labor Day weekend ending at 12:00 p.m. on Labor Day. Commercial trucks and commercial vans with parking decals may not occupy a parking space for more than 24 hours on weekends and holidays from Memorial Day weekend beginning at 12:00 a.m. on Friday of the Memorial Day weekend through the Labor Day weekend ending at 12:00 p.m. on Labor Day. This provision, however, shall not be applicable to beach equipment rental businesses as long as authorized vehicles of such business are in the designated space. Further, no automobile or any other vehicle may be legally parked by use of a decal in the same parking spot continuously in excess of seven consecutive days. The penalty provisions provided in section 66-184 for misuse of decals shall have specific application to violations of the provisions hereof in addition to any other fines or penalties authorized by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 31-2014, 5-24-2014) 
Secs. 66-186—66-206. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 

Sec. 66-207. - Abandoned motor vehicles designated. 
The term "abandoned motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle or trailer: 
(1)  Which is left unattended on a public street, road or highway or other public property for a period of at least five days and when it reasonably appears to a law enforcement officer that the individual who left such motor vehicle unattended does not intend to return and remove such motor vehicle; 
(2)  Which has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a law enforcement officer and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone's having made claim thereto; 
(3)  Which has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a property owner on whose property the vehicle was abandoned and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without the owner's having made claim thereto; 
(4)  Which has been left unattended on private property for a period of not less than 30 days which does not have affixed thereto a valid current state motor vehicle license tag or a current municipal decal; 
(5)  Any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or junked motor vehicle or parts thereof when the parts are in such a condition to constitute a health hazard or unsightly nuisance after the same has been declared to be a nuisance by the governing body. 
(Code 1983, § 10-3-1) 
Sec. 66-208. - Removal by peace officer. 
(a)  Cause for removal. Any peace officer who finds a motor vehicle which has been left unattended on a public street, road or highway or other public property for a period of at least five days, or any peace officer who finds a motor vehicle which has been left unattended or which is discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or junked, or parts thereof, which have been held to be a nuisance as set forth in this Code and which is unabated for a period of at least five days on private property shall be authorized to cause such motor vehicle or dismantled parts thereof to be removed to a garage or other place of safety, if such peace officer reasonably believes that the person who left such motor vehicle unattended or such parts, or junked or dismantled, scrapped, ruined or junked motor vehicle declared to be a nuisance unabated, or the owner does not intend to return and remove said motor vehicle and/or parts. 
(b)  Authorization. Any peace officer shall be authorized immediately to cause such motor vehicle and/or parts to be removed to a garage or other place of safety when such motor vehicle poses a threat to public health or safety. 
(c)  Gross negligence. Any peace officer who under this section causes any motor vehicle to be removed to a garage or other place of safety shall be liable for gross negligence only. 
(d)  Unknown owner. Any peace officer or the law enforcement agency of this city which causes a motor vehicle and/or parts thereof to be removed to a garage, as authorized by this section, or other place of safety or which is notified of the removal of a motor vehicle from private property shall within 72 hours from the time of removal or notice and if the owner is unknown: 
(1)  Notify the department of revenue and the state crime information center of the description of the vehicle and the location to which such motor vehicle has been removed; and 
(2)  If available on the state crime information center network, determine the name and address of the last known registered owner of such vehicle. 
(e)  Information for last known owner. If the name and address of the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle is obtained from the state crime information center, the peace officer who causes the motor vehicle and/or parts to be removed shall, within three calendar days, make available to the person removing such motor vehicle the name and address of the last known registered owner of such motor vehicle, the owner of the motor vehicle as recorded on the title of such vehicle, and all security interest holders or lienholders. If such information is not available, the peace officer shall, within three calendar days, notify the person removing or storing such vehicle of such fact. 
(f)  Disposal and sale of vehicle or parts. Disposal and sale of any such vehicle or parts removed shall be in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-11-1—40-11-24 which is hereby adopted in its entirety. 
(g)  Authority of city. The city shall have the power and authority to contract with private individuals and firms for the removal of discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or junked motor vehicles or parts thereof from public and private properties. 
(Code 1983, § 10-3-2) 
Sec. 66-209. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to farm vehicles or vehicles located in an enclosed building on private property or to any motor vehicle which is located within the premises of any junkyard complying with the laws of this state relating to the licensing and regulating of motor vehicle junkyards. 
(Code 1983, § 10-3-3) 
Sec. 66-210. - Penalty. 
Any person which shall have been construed as conducting a nuisance on its property shall be subject to any or all of the penalties and punishment as prescribed in section 1-8. 
(Code 1983, § 10-3-4) 
Secs. 66-211—66-228. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS 

Sec. 66-229. - Parades without permit prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or in concert and in conjunction with any other person in a body, for any reason or object whatsoever, to form a parade, to operate a parade, or to parade over and upon any street, highway or alley within the city unless and until, and as prerequisite thereto, that person have made application therefor, setting out the object or purpose of the parade, to the clerk of council and received from the clerk of council a permit in writing therefor to be issued without charge. 
(Code 1983, § 10-4-1) 
Sec. 66-230. - Compliance with permit and other regulations. 
No funeral procession or parade except the forces of the United States army or navy, the military forces of the state and the forces of the police and fire departments shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with the terms of the permit issued by the clerk of council and any other regulations as are set forth in this article which may apply. 
(Code 1983, § 10-4-2) 
Sec. 66-231. - Funeral processions; identification required. 
A funeral procession shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of any vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by lighted head lamps or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the police department. 
(Code 1983, § 10-4-3) 
Sec. 66-232. - Driving through a procession. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when those vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this article. 
(Code 1983, § 10-4-4) 
Sec. 66-233. - Driving in a procession. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Code 1983, § 10-4-5) 
Secs. 66-234—66-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDICABS 

Sec. 66-261. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and cited as "The Pedicab Ordinance of 2005." 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-262. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Tybee Island, Georgia, a municipal corporation, the definition to include all area within the corporate limits of the City of Tybee Island. 
Company. The holder of a license to operate a pedicab business under the provisions of this article whether a person, firm, partnership or corporation. 
Coordinator. The individual employee or organizational unit of the city charged with the responsibility for administering and enforcing this article, except for specific responsibilities otherwise provided herein. 
Driver. Any person who drives or operates a pedicab on the streets of Tybee Island for a licensed company. 
Driver's permit. The written authority granted by the city for a person to operate a pedicab within the City of Tybee Island. 
License. The right and privilege granted by the City of Tybee Island for the operation of a business incorporating the use of one or more pedicabs within the corporate limits of the city. 
Passenger loading zone. A public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere which has been designated by the mayor and council as reserved for the loading and unloading of passengers. 
Pedicab. A bicycle with three or more wheels operated by one person for the purpose of, or capable of, transporting passengers in seats or a platform made a part of the pedicab. This definition shall not include a bicycle built for two where the operators are seated one behind the other, nor shall it include a bicycle with trainer or beginner wheels affixed thereto, nor shall it include a wheelchair or other vehicle for the purpose of transporting a handicapped person, nor shall it include a tricycle built for a child or an adult with a seat for only one operator and no passenger. 
Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any street, alley, lane, avenue, court, or other public vehicular right-of-way within the City of Tybee Island. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-263. - License required. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall operate a business involving the use of one or more pedicabs on the streets of the city unless a license for such business has first been granted by the city in accordance with the provisions of the applicable ordinance. The license shall be effective only for the calendar year stated in the license, unless suspended or revoked sooner as provided by ordinance. 
(b)  Application for the license shall be made on forms provided by the city and shall provide such information as is required for other business license applications, and such additional information as may be necessary to define completely the business operation. Renewal of the license shall be as required by the applicable ordinance. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-264. - Fixed place of business required. 
Each pedicab company shall maintain a designated address and shall coordinate off-street parking for all pedicabs not in service on the streets. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-265. - Indemnity for benefit of city. 
Any pedicab company operating under this article shall hold the city harmless against any and all liability, loss, costs, damages, or expense which may accrue to the city by reason of the negligence, default, or misconduct of the company in connection with the rights granted to such company hereunder. Nothing in this article shall be considered to make the city liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any pedicab company, its owner, operator, servants, agents, drivers, or other employees, during the operation of a pedicab business or service, either with respect to injuries to persons or damage to property which may be sustained. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-266. - Insurance. 
Any pedicab company desiring a license to do business shall give and maintain a policy of comprehensive general liability insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia for each pedicab in use as a transportation vehicle, with minimum general liability coverage of $1,000,000.00. Such insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or shall sustain damage to property caused by the negligence or misconduct of a pedicab company, its servants or agents. Copies of such insurance policies shall be filed with the city finance department and shall specifically provide that such policy shall not be cancelled without notice to the city. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-267. - Blanket policy. 
Any pedicab company operating in the city shall give and maintain a separate policy of comprehensive general liability insurance for each separate pedicab for hire, except where such company or person actually owns or holds legal title to more than one pedicab, in which event, such company or person may give one policy of comprehensive general liability insurance covering all the pedicabs actually owned. This latter provision, however, shall not apply to any group or persons separately owning pedicabs who may be jointly operating or doing business under a licensed pedicab company name. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-268. - Notice when canceled. 
Before any policy of insurance required by this article is canceled for any cause, nonpayment of premium or otherwise, notice thereof shall be given, in writing, to the finance department at least ten days before the same shall take effect. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-269. - Pedicab driver's permit. 
No person shall operate a pedicab for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or operates a pedicab company shall permit a pedicab to be driven, or operated under a pedicab company licensed by the city at any time for hire, unless the driver of the pedicab shall first have obtained and shall have then in force a pedicab driver's permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-270. - Application. 
Any person desiring a permit required by this article shall submit an application in writing to the city designee, on a form to be furnished by the city. The application shall be made under oath and shall state the age of the applicant, his or her address, and whether he or she has been convicted of a violation of any of the laws of the state or of this Code or other ordinances of the city, and if so, when and of what offense, and the sentence of the court. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-271. - Physician's certificate required. 
Each application for a pedicab driver's permit shall be accompanied by a certification from a reputable physician certifying that, in his or her opinion, the applicant is not afflicted with any disease or infirmity which might make him or her an unsafe or unsatisfactory pedicab operator. In the case of renewal of a pedicab driver's permit, the certification shall be updated every two years. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-272. - Qualifications of applicant. 
An applicant for a pedicab driver's permit under this article may not be less than 16 years of age, with no physical infirmities which might make the applicant an unsafe or unsatisfactory pedicab driver. No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs two or more times within one year prior to the date of the application for such permit, or who has been convicted of the offense three or more times within five years prior to the date of the application for the permit. Nor shall a permit be issued to any person who has within three years prior to the date of the application for such permit been convicted of any crime related to transporting persons for immoral purposes or has within three years prior to the date of the application for such permit been convicted of a felony. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-273. - Pedicab driver's permit fee. 
Before any permit is granted under this article, a pedicab driver's permit fee of $5.00 shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-274. - Current state driver's license required. 
Any person applying for a pedicab driver's permit under this article must show that he has a current motor vehicle operator's license issued or approved by the State of Georgia, and that the license is not under suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-275. - Operating after suspension or revocation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pedicab for hire for the transportation of passengers during any period in which his or her permit to do so is suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-276. - Administrative hearing and appeal. 
(a)  Administration. This article shall be administered by the coordinator, who shall have authority to recommend to the parking services administrator the suspension of a pedicab driver's permit for violation of this article or state law. The parking services administrator shall have authority to suspend a pedicab driver's permit for violation of this article or state law. 
(b)  Administrative hearing and appeal. 
(1)  Any decision of the parking services administrator to suspend a pedicab driver's permit may be appealed within ten days. All appeals shall be made in writing to the parking services administrator. Such appeal shall be heard by an administrative hearing panel made up of (a) the finance director, (b) a designee of the finance director, and (c) the Tybee Island police chief or his designee. 
(2)  The administrative hearing shall be informal and shall be presided over by the finance director or his or her designee. The majority decision of the administrative hearing panel shall be provided to the pedicab company or driver in writing within two days of the hearing. Decisions of the administrative hearing panel may, within twn days of notification, be appealed in writing to the city manager, whose ruling shall be final. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-277. - Identification and marking generally. 
Every pedicab shall have a sign plainly painted on each side of the vehicle, in letters not less than three inches high, containing the full name of the company operating the pedicab. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-278. - Numbers generally. 
There shall be painted on each side and on the rear of each pedicab a number at least four inches high, the number to be a separate and distinct number from that on any other public vehicle or taxicab in the city. The number shall be assigned to such pedicab and the owner thereof by the coordinator and shall not be altered or changed without the consent of the coordinator. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-279. - Registration of number and names of owner and operator. 
The number assigned a pedicab in accordance with this article together with the names of the owner and operator of the pedicab shall be registered with the coordinator in a file to be kept for that purpose. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-280. - Safe mechanical condition of pedicab required. 
Every pedicab operated on the streets of the city shall be maintained in a safe mechanical condition, with all safety equipment remaining intact and operative at all times when the pedicab is in service. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-281. - Cleanliness of pedicab required. 
Each vehicle operating under this article shall be kept painted and in a clean and sanitary condition, free of litter and debris, and at all times suitable for public transportation of passengers. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-282. - Pedicab inspections required. 
Each pedicab shall be inspected by the coordinator for compliance with the provisions of this article and shall pass the inspection before the vehicle may be used as as pedicab in the city. Each pedicab involved in an accident shall be inspected by the coordinator before it may be returned to service transporting passengers for hire. Each pedicab shall be inspected by the Coordinator at least once in each six months period to insure continued compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-283. - Authority for removal of pedicabs from the streets. 
The coordinator shall have the authority to remove from operation on the streets of the city any pedicab which is in violation of this article, and to prohibit operation of the pedicab until all deficiencies have been corrected. An order of the coordinator to remove a pedicab from the streets may be appealed as provided in section 66-276. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-284. - Rate of fare. 
(a)  Rate card required. No owner or driver of a pedicab shall charge a greater amount for the use of the pedicab than in accordance with the published and advertised rates which shall be displayed on each pedicab. Rates shall be displayed in such place as to be conspicuous and to be in clear view of all passengers. 
(b)  Published literature. Any published literature provided by pedicab companies shall describe specifically all services offered and the rate to be charged. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-285. - Soliciting passengers prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit passengers verbally or by gesture, directly or indirectly, upon the streets or other areas of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-286. - Use of designated stops or stands prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a pedicab to park or stand at any bus stop, tour bus stop, tour bus zone, or taxicab stand. Pedicabs may stop for the purpose of leading and unloading passengers at any designated passenger loading zone within the permitted area of operation. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-287. - Restriction on number of passengers. 
No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a pedicab as passengers than the rated seating capacity of the pedicab as determined by the tour services coordinator. A child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-288. - Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited. 
No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons, upon request, unless previously engaged or unable to forbidden by the provisions of this article to do so. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-289. - Prohibitions of pedicab drivers. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a pedicab to solicit business for any hotel or other business, or to attempt to divert patronage from one hotel or business to another, or to use a pedicab for any purpose other than transportation of passengers. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-290. - Pedicab movement prohibited under certain circumstances. 
No driver shall collect fare, make change, or take on or discharge passengers while his or her pedicab is in motion. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-291. - Property left in a pedicab by passenger. 
Any pedicab driver discovering in any pedicab under his or her control, personal property which was lost or left therein by a passenger of such pedicab, shall report the loss, and deliver all the property to the office of the pedicab company within 12 hours after the discovery of the property. The driver's report shall include brief particulars to enable the company to identify the owner of the property. The company shall retain the property on behalf of the owner for at least 60 days. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-292. - Safety equipment required. 
Each pedicab shall be equipped with electrically powered lights or lanterns and with reflectors, which lights shall be in use when operating during the hours of darkness and when raining. The lights and reflectors shall be mounted so that they are visible from a distance of 500 feet in any direction. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-293. - Area of operation. 
(a)  Pedicabs carrying passengers for hire shall be primarily operated on the streets designated for bike paths and shall be used on Bulter Avenue (Highway 80) for pick up only. 
(b)  Pedicabs are prohibited on the following streets and street segments within the area defined above, except to cross from one side to the other: Jones Avenue. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-294. - Traffic regulations. 
(a)  Pedicabs shall be prohibited from stopping in traffic or delaying any on-street traffic for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or for any other purposes. 
(b)  Every person driving a pedicab within the city limits shall be subject to the provisions of this article and shall operate pedicabs in accordance with the traffic laws of the State of Georgia and the City of Tybee Island. 
(c)  Considering the nature of operating pedicabs in areas of congestion and heavy traffic, pedicabs shall be operated with extra caution and due care for safety. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 66-295. - Impediment of traffic flow. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any pedicab to willfully impede the normal flow of traffic on any street at any time. Pedicabs shall be required to pull immediately to the nearest curb area when one or more vehicles are unable to safely pass or continue in normal traffic flow. 
The willful failure of any person to comply with this section shall constitute an offense which shall be punishable by a fine and/or suspension of the pedicab driver's permit pursuant to section 66-296 for a period not to exceed 30 days for the first violation of this section. Second and subsequent violations shall be punishable by a fine and/or suspension of the pedicab driver's permit for not more than 60 days pursuant to section 66-296. 
Sec. 66-296. - Compliance required. 
Failure to comply with this article or any of the laws, ordinances, and regulations of the city can result in suspension or revocation of a pedicab driver's permit and shall be punishable as an offense as provided in this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2005(2)) 
Chapter 70 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1—70-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 70-24. - Water-sewer department director. 
The city manager shall appoint, and provide general supervision of, a director of the water-sewer department, and said director shall administer and coordinate the activities of the water-sewer department. 
(Code 1983, § 6-1-1) 
Sec. 70-25. - Water conservation. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to ensure the protection of the public health, welfare and safety of the city in the event of environmental or mechanical problems that may cause a water shortage which will prevent adequate flow and pressure for both domestic and fire protection. 
(b)  Coverage. This article shall apply within the territorial limits of the city. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial and industrial water means water that is used as an integral part to produce goods and services by any establishment having financial profit as their primary aim. It does not include reclaimed or treated wastewater used for irrigation purposes. 
Conservation means the reduction in water use to prevent depletion or waste of the resource. 
Customer means all persons in whose name the city water department maintains an account for water use, or who are responsible for payment of water passing through a particular meter. All customers are responsible for any use of water that passes through the meter for which they are responsible. 
Domestic water means water that is used for personal needs or for household purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence. 
Emergency means any one or all the following are present: water supplies are below the level necessary to meet normal needs of the city causing a shortage; there is inadequate water treatment capabilities; mechanical difficulty that exists to the level that water supplies are below the level that normal needs cannot be met; or any other unforeseen circumstances which results in or may result in water supplies being at a level that normal needs cannot be met. 
Essential water means water specifically for firefighting, and necessary to meet the public health and safety requirements. 
Nonessential water means water not specifically for firefighting and does not promote public health and safety requirements. 
Water means all water available to the city for treatment by virtue of the city's water rights or withdrawal permits and any treated water introduced by the city into its potable water distribution system, including water purchased or offered for sale. Water does not include treated wastewater effluent reclaimed for reuse in irrigation and/or other approved uses. 
Water shortage means the lack of adequate available water to meet the normal demands due to lower than normal precipitation, reduced flows or soil moisture, and/or lowering of potentiometric surface in wells which causes water supplies to be less than usual, and contamination or possible contamination of a well. 
(d)  Priority levels. The following priority levels of users of the city water system are established: 
(1)  Priority level 1. Hospitals, health care facilities, police and fire department. Essential priority level 1 water use: 
a.  Use by hospital and health care facilities of such amount of water that is necessary for patient care and rehabilitation, including swimming pools necessary for patient care and rehabilitation. 
b.  Use by police and fire department of such amount of water that is necessary to protect the welfare and safety of the city. 
(2)  Priority level 2. Domestic use. 
a.  Essential priority level 2 water use: 
1.  Use by residential users of such amount of water that is necessary to sustain human life and the lives of domestic pets, and to maintain hygiene and sanitation. 
2.  Use by nonresidential users of such amount of water that is necessary to sustain human life and comfort in the workplace and maintain hygiene and sanitation. 
b.  Nonessential priority level 2 water use: 
1.  Use by residential users of such amount of water to water lawns, wash any vehicles, washing down sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard surfaced areas. 
2.  Maintaining fountains, reflection ponds, and decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes, except where necessary to support aquatic life. 
3.  Maintaining swimming pools. 
(3)  Priority level 3. Commercial use. 
a.  Essential priority level 3 water use: use by commercial users i.e., car washes, water parks. 
b.  Nonessential priority level 3 water use: 
1.  Serving water routinely in restaurants. 
2.  Increasing water levels in scenic and recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to support fish and wildlife. 
3.  Irrigating golf courses and any portion of its grounds, except reclaimed or treated wastewater. 
4.  Obtaining water from hydrants for construction purposes, fire drills, or for any purpose other than firefighting. 
(4)  Priority level 4. Industrial use. 
a.  Essential priority level 4 water use: 
b.  Nonessential priority level 4 water use: 
(e)  Authority. For the protection of the public health, welfare and safety of the city, the city manager has the authority to determine when certain conditions exists in the city requiring water conservation measures to be imposed. 
(f)  Responses to water shortages. Should the city manager impose water conservation measures, the following steps should be followed: 
(1)  Declaration of voluntary conservation measures. Whenever the city manager finds that a potential shortage of water supply is indicated, the city manager is empowered to declare a state of voluntary conservation, and to call upon all water customers to employ voluntary water conservation measures. 
(2)  Declaration of mandatory conservation measures. When it is found that there is a potential water emergency situation to occur or exist, the city manager can declare a state of mandatory conservation measures which will limit all water users to essential water use only. 
(3)  Declaration of water shortage. At this time the city manager can declare that a water shortage does exist and the rationing of water will proceed. Rationing is based on the priority level. Starting with those users that are categorized as priority level 4 will be the first to lose water. Priority level 3 will lose water next. Priority level 2 will lose water next. Priority level 1 will be the last to lose water. 
(g)  Warnings; disconnections; fines; penalty. Violators of any provisions in this article will be issued one warning by certified mail and/or citation. After issuing one warning, the city water-sewer department may disconnect the water service of any customer whenever it is determined that such person has failed to comply with the provisions of this article. Service disconnected under such circumstances shall only be restored upon payment of a reconnection charge to the city water-sewer department. 
(h)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Written warning. Any water customer violating a water use restriction will receive one written warning. 
(2)  Notice and enforcement fee. Any water customer violating a water use restriction after receipt of a warning will receive a water use violation notice and a $50.00 enforcement fee (added to their water bill). 
(3)  Disconnection of water service. Any water customer violating a water use restriction after receipt of a citation (and $50.00 enforcement fee) will have their water service disconnected (meter removed). A $150.00 reconnection fee will apply to all re-installations/reconnections. 
(4)  Use violation fee. Subsequent violations will result in a $1,000.00 water use violation fee for each occurrence. 
(i)  Water use restrictions. 
(1)  Step 1. Voluntary reduction of outside water usage. 
(2)  Step 2. Mandatory restriction of all outside water usage between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 12:00 noon with odd/even restrictions. Odd number addresses utilize water outside on odd-numbered days only. Even numbered addresses utilize water outside on even-numbered days only. 
(3)  Step 3. Mandatory restriction of all outside water usage at all times. 
(4)  Step 4. Mandatory restriction of all water usage, except for essential purposes. 
(Code 1983, § 6-1-2) 
Sec. 70-26. - Wellhead protection. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious incapacitation or reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to insure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(c)  Establishment of wellhead protecting zones. There is established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 100 feet. 
(d)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
(1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot any portion of which lies within wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one acre; and 
(2)  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. The following uses or conditions shall be and are prohibited within the wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under subsection (d) of this section; 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of pesticides; 
(2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)  Impervious other than roofs of buildings, and streets, driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under subsection (d) of this section; 
(4)  Sanitary landfills; 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(6)  Stormwater infiltration basins; 
(7)  Underground storage tanks; 
(8)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. 
(f)  Administration. The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this section, including without limitation, those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the Land Development Code, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Code 1983, § 6-1-3) 
Sec. 70-27. - Water service application; information; fee payment. 
Applications for water shall be made to the water department on the printed form provided by that department. Applicant must state specifically for what purposes the water is to be used and before water service is rendered the full amount of any required deposit, the extension of water lines and the tapping fee, as per application and agreement, must be paid. 
(Code 1970, § 20-14; Code 1983, § 6-1-4) 
Sec. 70-28. - Service pipe, curb stop and tap specifications. 
Service pipes from mains for private dwelling houses shall be one inch with three-fourths-inch branches; all pipes shall be made of polypropylene, PVC, or copper; only brass fittings are allowed; no tap or no curb stop shall be smaller than one inch and larger size taps and curb stops must be approved by the department director. 
(Code 1970, § 20-15; Code 1983, § 6-1-5; Ord. No. 45-2011, 10-27-2011) 
Sec. 70-29. - Cost of laying service pipes borne by applicant. 
The cost of laying water pipes from the mains to the property line will be borne by the applicant, as herein provided. 
(Code 1970, § 20-16; Code 1983, § 6-1-6) 
Sec. 70-30. - Shut off for violation of regulations. 
The city reserves the right to shut off the water at any time the provisions governing water service are violated. 
(Code 1970, § 20-18; Code 1983, § 6-1-7) 
Sec. 70-31. - Responsibility for compliance with regulations. 
Owners of real estate and the premises thereof are responsible that the water service furnished to them or to said property is used according to the provisions herein established; and are responsible for any tenant and other person occupying or using that property. 
(Code 1970, § 20-19; Code 1983, § 6-1-8) 
Sec. 70-32. - Connection to water system required. 
All owners of real property or water consumers within the city shall connect or cause to be connected all plumbing and water fixtures on the real estate owned by them, or on the premises occupied or using water, with the city water system. 
(Code 1983, § 6-1-9) 
Sec. 70-33. - Tapping/stubbing, meter, and aid to construction fees. 
(a)  Water and sewer tap and stub fees. 

 
*As determined by the city manager 
  

 
*As determined by the city manager 
Water tapping and sewer stubbing fees for a water consumer will be based on the following formula. The fee shall cover the cost of the meter and inspection of installation of same. Actual installation of both lines and meter shall be the responsibility of the applicant. This tapping stubbing fee is payable in advance. 
(b)  Meter costs. The cost for a water meter for sprinkler systems, swimming pools, etc., shall be based on the size of the meter deemed necessary by the water and sewer department supervisor and/or his designee. The following rates cover the cost of the meter only. The property owner is responsible for both installation of meter and running of necessary lines. 

 
(c)  Aid to construction fees. In addition to the above tap and stub fees, the following aid to construction fees will apply: 
(1)  The mayor and council seek to expand the city's existing wastewater treatment facilities, and 
(2)  The mayor and council desire to ease the burden of such expansion of its facilities on the current users. The city council enacts the following aid to construction to be applied to customers that wish to connect to the city's wastewater utility system: 
a.  In order to connect to the city's wastewater utility system all users shall pay an aid to construction fee in addition to any tap or other fee required. The aid to construction fee shall be paid prior to connecting to the city's wastewater system. A written agreement between the city and each user will be executed upon payment of fees and prior to construction of facilities. 
b.  The aid to construction fee shall be set by the city council as an aid to the cost of expanding or upgrading the city's wastewater treatment facilities and/or collection system, including future expansion of the plant or upgrading the facilities (including legal, engineering, construction, and administrative costs) at $4.00 per gallon per day of anticipated use. In addition, such fees may also be used as an aid to financing the improvements to the potable water system of the city, including, legal, engineering, construction, and administrative costs. 
c.  The aid to construction fee shall be calculated by the city and shall be based on the average daily consumption of each type of establishment as outlined in subsection (c)(2)d. of this section. 
d.  The following water use standards shall be used by the city in establishing the average daily consumption of users for the purpose of calculating the aid to construction fee. Where categories are not listed, the city through its consulting engineer will calculate the project's contributory load factor (wastewater usage) and present the calculated load factor to the city council for approval. 
e.  In connection with additions of heating and/or cooled space to existing structures, the aid to construction fee shall apply upon application for a building permit to such structures and shall be calculated at the rate of $0.50 per square foot of the additional heated and/or cooled space. 
_____ 

 
*$1,200.00/unit minimum; $1.00 per foot above 1,200 square feet. 
**Add 500 gallons per machine to amount indicated if laundry or dishwashing machines are to be installed. 
_____
(d)  Shallow water wells for irrigation. Consistent with the city's policy promoting the use of shallow water wells for irrigation and other appropriate purposes, where appropriate and consistent with all regulations pertaining to the same, any individual who has previously purchased a water meter for the operation of an irrigation system which is being rendered unnecessary by the implementation of a shallow water well shall be entitled to a refund on the charge for the water meter imposed pursuant to subsection (b) of this section upon returning the meter to the city. Thereafter, such system may not be reconnected to the city's water system without resecuring and repaying for the meter. 
(Code 1970, § 20-20; Code 1983, § 6-1-10; Ord. of 4-27-2006(2), § 2) 
Sec. 70-34. - Meters. 
(a)  Location of installation. Meters shall be installed as close to the property line of the customer as possible. All connections shall be inspected by a designated city employee from the water department. Only those properties where meters have been installed will be furnished water from the city water system. 
(b)  Access to premises. The duly authorized employee of the city shall have at all times free access to the premises for the purpose of readying the meter or removing the same for the purpose of testing its accuracy. 
(c)  Permanent fixture upon property. Each meter shall become a permanent fixture upon the property or premises where installed and may be transferred upon the transfer of ownership of the property or premises to provide for continued water service to that property. 
(d)  Meter size. The size of the water meter shall be in accordance with the decision of the department director. 
(e)  Responsibility of property owner. Water laterals are to be maintained by the property owner. The owner of the property serviced by city water service shall be responsible for maintaining the water pipes between the plumbing fixtures on the property to the property line or the water meter keeping them in good operating condition and free from all internal obstructions. 
(f)  Separate meters for multiple units. Duplexes, multiple-family dwellings and structures divided into several apartments, offices, or separate businesses, excluding hotels and motels, shall be so equipped that each unit can be supplied with a separate meter. The rate for each meter shall be based on the service rate schedule; provided, however, that in the case of existing buildings the city may allow one meter of the proper size to continue to be utilized. The rates for that meter shall be based on a standby minimum base charge for each dwelling unit or business unit. The actual water usage shall be computed on the primary unit, according to the meter reading, and so billed. In all such instances of multiple units, the property owner shall be billed for all service charges for all units. 
(g)  Circumstances for water service. Water meters shall be installed upon issuance of a building permit so that water may be available during the construction process. After a certificate of occupancy is issued by the city, normal occupancy-billing occurs. In the event a structure is unfit for habitation or use, due either to the absence of a certificate of occupancy or by condemnation, and the owner thereof nevertheless effects occupancy of the premises, the city shall not provide water and sewer services to the premises. 
(h)  Meters for shopping centers, stores and commercial establishments. In all shopping centers, stores, and commercial establishments occupied by more than one tenant, there shall be a separate meter installed to furnish service to each tenant. See also, subsection (f) hereof. 
(i)  Expense of maintaining and repairing meters. The cost of maintenance of water meters will be born by the city, except that repairs will be made at the expense of the person who receives the supply through the meter and the damages due to hot water backing into the meter or carelessness or accident on the part of consumers, tenants, or employees of consumers. The cost of such repairs will be billed to the consumer and must be paid for within 30 days after the bill is presented or the city may cut off the supply of water and water will not be turned on again until the charges are paid to the city. 
(j)  Charges when meter fails to register. If a water meter should become out of order or fail to register, the consumer shall be charged at the average daily consumption as shown by the meter when in order. 
(k)  Procedure when meter is inaccessible. If a meter reader is unable to procure a reading of a meter after two calls, due to the building being locked or vacant or the occupant not permitting entrance or entrance to the premises is made precarious by a vicious dog or otherwise or ingress to the meter is obstructed in any manner whatsoever, whether in the building or a vault, the water may be shut off by the city and an estimated charge made for the amount of water consumed. In the event water is shut off for any such reason, it will not be turned on again until free access to the meter is provided and payment of any arrearage is made. 
(Code 1970, § 20-21; Code 1983, § 6-1-11; Ord. No. 46-2011, 12-8-2011) 
Sec. 70-35. - Gravel wall wells and limerock wells. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dig a gravel wall well as hereinafter defined; provided, however, it shall be within the discretion of the governing body, upon petition, to permit any digging, installation and use of any well, provided an application is made and a permit is granted prior to the digging of that well. That well shall in no way be connected into the city water system. The maximum depth permitted for any gravel wall well shall be 100 feet, and this depth shall not be exceeded in any instance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, within the corporate limits of the municipality to dig or install a limerock well, as hereinafter defined. However where it is not possible for the city to provide water, it shall be within the discretion of the governing body upon petition to permit the drilling of a limerock well. 
(c)  At such time municipal or public water service is extended to the property line of the owner of a private well, the city shall either incorporate the well into its water supply system, or plug, cap, and abandon the well according to state health requirements. There shall be no charges or fees attached to this exchange between the city and the well owner. 
(d)  The term "gravel wall wells" are defined as wells that obtain their water from the saturated sands between the ground surface and the top of the limerock aquifer. These wells shall consist of a well screen surrounded by a seven-inch thick wall of gravel. 
(e)  "Limerock wells" are defined as those wells which are drilled into the limerock aquifer, containing a steel casing through the overlying sands so as to seal off the water above the aquifer. 
(Code 1970, §§ 20—23; Code 1983, § 6-1-12) 
Sec. 70-36. - Purposes and restrictions. 
The governing body shall provide proper application forms for the making of application for the digging of a gravel wall well. There shall be no human consumption of water obtained from the gravel wall well, and any gravel wall well shall be used only for purposes of watering lawns, flowers, shrubbery, etc. Neither shall the water from that well be used for the bathing of individuals or for swimming pools, nor for the washing and cleaning of clothing. 
(Code 1970, §§ 20—24; Code 1983, § 6-1-13) 
Sec. 70-37. - Well permit; fee; restrictions; inspections. 
(a)  The permit fee for sinking a well is $25.00 for inspection to ascertain that well is not connected to the city water system. 
(b)  Applicant should contact city hall for a permit and show the proposed location of the well on a scale drawing of the property verifying that the well is on the applicant's property and not the city right-of-way. 
(c)  Every effort shall be made to pump above the flood stage, however, if the applicant's property is extremely low lying, a two-foot platform will be sufficient. 
(d)  The shallow well system shall, in no way, be connected to the water supply running to a residence, as shallow well water is for outdoor use only. 
(e)  Signs shall be posted at each tap served by the well, stating that the water is not potable and this includes outdoor showers. 
(f)  The applicant shall notify the city inspections department for an inspection after installation to ensure compliance with the necessary requirements. 
(g)  If there is a separate meter for irrigation, the city will repurchase the meter for $350.00 for a three-fourths inch meter or $520.00 for a one inch meter. 
(Code 1970, §§ 20—25; Code 1983, § 6-1-14) 
Sec. 70-38. - Billing; delinquency; fees; etc. 
(a)  Billing; payment. Bills for water service shall be rendered promptly following the determination of usage and shall be due and payable at the city cashier's office at city hall no later than 20 days from the date of billing. Billing on each account shall occur monthly. Bills shall state the separate charge for water service, the charge for sewer service and the total thereof. Bills shall be declared delinquent if not paid within 25 days following the date of billing. 
(b)  Delinquency; notification. Water service may be discontinued whenever the total billing for water service, sewer service, and sanitation service (if included in the utility billing) is not paid in full and received at the city cashier's office on the due date. An exception to this provision is when the amount is equal to or less than one delinquency fee. If a customer disputes a bill, the customer shall give notice in writing and request a hearing before the due date of the bill. In such cases where notice by the customer is received, the designated representative of the city shall notify the customer of the date and time of the hearing during normal working hours. If a customer who has disputed a bill does not appear for the hearing, termination of service shall be authorized. The procedure pursuant to this subsection shall not be required when there is unauthorized use of water services. 
For purposes of this subsection, it shall be the duty of any user who is other than a customer, or any customer whose address shall be other than that shown on the application for water service to amend or file a new application for water service to reflect the name and/or address to which notice pursuant notice to this subsection should be transmitted. 
When any service is discontinued due to delinquency, it shall not be restored until the delinquent bill is paid in full, including a service charge. A delinquency fee of $15.00 shall be charged if the bill is not paid within 25 days of the date of billing. A flat fee of $35.00 shall be charged when service is resumed after normal working hours. The delinquency fee may be waived by the city manager only in cases when a sworn affidavit is provided by the utility customer that no billing was received due to circumstances beyond their control. 
(c)  Customer request for termination of service; deposit refunds. The city shall be authorized to require a deposit following a credit check of an applicant for service. In the event service is terminated at a customer's request, any balance remaining on a deposit may be refunded to the customer provided the customer has provided notice to discontinue service and a forwarding address. In the event services are not paid when due, services will be applied against the deposit and, in the event a balance remains due thereafter, such balance shall be billed to the customer. 
(d)  Tiered rate structure. The city is authorized to impose a tiered rate structure based on usage. A specific tiered structure shall be approved by the mayor and council by resolution and a copy of such resolution shall be maintained on file in the office of the clerk and in the office of the finance officer of the city. 
(e)  Deposit for new accounts. The city will require a deposit on new accounts for water and sewer services. The deposit amount on new accounts will be $200.00 for residential service and $500.00 for commercial service. For commercial service, the customer may request review after a period of 12 months of billings and, if appropriate, the rate will be reduced to the average billing. 
(f)  Notice of rate adjustments. The city shall provide for notice to affected customers of rate increases 30 days prior to the effective date of any rate change. However, a customer's failure to receive such notice shall not impair nor delay an increase. The city may choose to give notice in the same manner in which billing occurs, on the billing itself, or in any other manner determined by the city to be reasonably effective in notifying customers. 
(Code 1983, § 6-1-15; Ord. of 1-12-2006(1); Ord. of 7-13-2006(3); Ord. No. 11-2007, 12-20-2007; Ord. of 4-10-2008(5); Ord. of 10-23-2008(1)) 
Sec. 70-39. - Payment responsibility of owner/lessor. 
Any person owning property either within or without the city which is supplied water by the city shall be personally and individually responsible for the costs and charges of that water so furnished, notwithstanding that the property may be leased by the person owning the property to a tenant. 
(Code 1970, §§ 20—27; Code 1983, § 6-1-16) 
Sec. 70-40. - Lien against property. 
In final resort, the property owners shall be liable for all unpaid bills, charges and penalties due the city for water service and the amount of money involved shall be a lien against the property. 
(Code 1970, §§ 20-28; Code 1983, § 6-1-17) 
Sec. 70-41. - Damaging, tampering with water fixtures, meter, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or to knowingly suffer to be injured, any meter, pipe or fittings connected with or belonging to the city water plant, or to tamper or meddle with any meter, or other device or any part of the plant in any manner as to cause loss or to prevent any meter installed from registering the quantity which otherwise would pass through the same, or to alter the register, or break the seal of any meter, or in any way to hinder or interfere with the proper action or correct registration of any meter. The existence of any connection, meter alteration or any device whatsoever, which affects the diversion of water, without the same being measured or registered by or on a meter installed for that person, by the city, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to violate and of the violation of this section by the person using or receiving the direct benefits from the water passing through that connection, conductor, device or altered meter. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1983, § 6-1-18) 
Sec. 70-42. - Shutoff for repairs. 
The city shall have the right to shut off the water supply for the purpose of making any additions and repairs as may be desired or necessary to the water system, and the city shall not be liable to any customer for any damage resulting from that shutoff. 
(Code 1970, §§ 20—30; Code 1983, § 6-1-19) 
Sec. 70-43. - Bill adjustment for water leakage and special circumstances. 
The city shall have the right to adjust water and sewer bills in the case of water leakage and other special circumstances such as breaks in the water line. Because of treatment requirements, the circumstances under which bills might be adjusted are limited. A loss of water must be through or as a result of an "excusable defect" in the customer's water line or system. An "excusable defect" is one due to a rupture or leakage caused by weather, settlement, corrosion, wear, or accident. Visible leaks, such as faucet leaks, leaking toilet, above ground irrigation system components or hose leaks are ineligible. No credit will be granted for sewer charges on swimming pools, spas, or the like. Credit may also be determined by using the data from Mosaic leak detection system when available. The adjustment is limited to a maximum of three consecutive months and must be requested within 90 days of the repair. A plumbing repair bill or other evidence of repair must accompany a request for billing adjustment. The amount of adjustment to a water and/or sewer bill will be determined by crediting one-half of the rate charged to usage in excess of the average bill, and shall be approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 6-1-20; Ord. No. 13-2010, 8-26-2010; Ord. No. 23-2010, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 70-44. - Leak inspection charge. 
There shall be a $25.00 charge for special inspection requested by customers. If the re-read is a result of an error of the initial meter reading, this charge will not be assessed to the customer. The leak inspection charge will be assessed except where the leak occurred in city-owned facilities. 
(Code 1983, § 6-1-21) 
Sec. 70-45. - Capital cost recovery fees/water. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed upon any new applications for subdivisions, commercial or industrial developments and/or building permits a "Capital Cost Recovery Fee/Water" which shall be subject to the terms of this section. 
(b)  A capital cost recovery fee shall be paid to the city at the time of an application for the granting of a building permit and/or the connection to water facilities of the city, whichever first occurs. 
(c)  In addition to the capital cost recovery fee/water established herein, the connection or tap fee established by other ordinances will be paid and each property owner or developer is responsible for all cost of installing and maintaining the service connection from a building to a tap. 
(d)  The payment of the fee provided for herein shall not be a condition for any developmental approval by the city and shall solely constitute a condition for access to the public water supply. 
(e)  The capital cost recovery fee shall be $2,000.00 for each tap. 
(f)  The funds generated by the capital cost recovery fee/water shall be deposited into a capital cost recovery fee/water interest-bearing account to be maintained by the city to offset the anticipated future cost of alternative water sources and capital conservation improvements. The city will be exploring the methods of securing additional water sources conserving existing sources and the sole purpose for the use of these funds and interest generated thereon shall be the exploration for such sources, the securing and development of such sources, and the capital cost associated therewith. 
(g)  On at least an annual basis, the city, through staff and the mayor and council shall re-evaluate the progress on generating additional sources or alternate sources of potable water and shall consider adjustments necessary in the capital cost recovery fee/water after taking into account the then-existing capacity remaining within the city's current permitting capacity and the projected cost of alternative sources and other related factors, including, but not limited to, permitting capacity and impact of new technologies. 
(Ord. of 1-26-2006(1), §§ 1—7) 
Sec. 70-46. - Restrictions on outdoor landscape watering. 
(a)  Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the incorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial agricultural operation as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this section. 
(2)  The city building official shall be the enforcement authority for this ordinance. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(3)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 31-2010, 12-9-2010) 
Secs. 70-47—70-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 70-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and disposing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or body of surface water or groundwater. 
Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen concentration in moles per liter. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with any groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures or lagoons used for treating sewage presently owned or afterward acquired by the city. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Sewerage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Storm sewer and storm drain mean a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
Superintendent means the director or manager of the sewerage works of the city or its authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewerage or other liquids; and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1970, §§ 20—41; Code 1983, § 6-2-1) 
Sec. 70-73. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage and other objectionable wastes. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be a violation of this article to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes within the corporate limits of the city and located within 250 feet of a line of public sanitary sewer, now in existence or hereafter constructed, to which that house, building or property may be connected so that sewage will flow therefrom and into the sewer line by gravity, is required, at his own expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect those facilities directly with the line of public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 60 days after the date of official notice so to do. 
(Code 1970, §§ 20—42; Code 1983, § 6-2-2) 
Sec. 70-74. - Private sewage disposal system. 
(a)  Where permitted. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 70-73(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Permit required; application; fee. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent. The application for this permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the city at the time application is filed. 
(c)  Inspections; approval by superintendent. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(d)  Specifications. The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the department of natural resources, environmental protection division of the state. No permit shall be issued for any sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(e)  Connection with public sewer. At any time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection 70-73(d), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(f)  Operation/maintenance at owner's expense. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(g)  Requirements imposed by health officer. No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Code 1970, §§ 20—43; Code 1983, § 6-2-3) 
Sec. 70-75. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  Permit required prior to use. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(b)  Costs. All cost and expense incident to the connection of the building sewer from the owner's building to the public sewer shall be borne by the owner. Any connection from the owner's property into the public sewer shall be made by the owner, and inspected by a designated employee of the sewer department, and no connection into the public sewer shall be covered until approval of the superintendent of the department is granted. The owner shall pay the city a standard sewer tap fee for each tap into the public sewer. 
(c)  Separate sewers required; exception. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, then the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. In multi-unit developments exceeding one unit, which are to be sold as individual dwelling units, a separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each unit. 
(d)  Old sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent to meet all requirements of this article. 
(e)  General specifications. The building sewer shall be cast-iron pipe, ASTM Specification A-74; ASTM Specification C-13; or polyvinyl chloride with integral wall bell and spigot joints with a rubber ring gasket. Pipe and fittings shall conform to ASTM D-3034. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service shall be constructed of cast-iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast-iron pipe may be required by the superintendent where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast-iron soil pipe, except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the superintendent. 
(f)  Size, slope of sewer. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of that four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighths-inch per foot. 
(g)  Elevation; location, etc. Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipes and fittings. 
(h)  Lift stations. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by that drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means, which shall be maintained by the owner of the building, and discharged to the sewer. 
(i)  Excavations. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C-12, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(j)  Joints, connections. 
(1)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. 
(2)  Rubber joint cast-iron pipe may be used as an alternate. 
(3)  Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by approval of the superintendent. 
(k)  Connection with public sewer. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the Y branch, if that branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less and no properly located Y branch is available, a Y branch shall be installed by the owner in the public sewer at the location specified by the superintendent. Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter, and no properly located Y is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer when used with a flexible saddle and stainless steel bands to fasten to the main sewer, and concrete shall not be used. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the superintendent. 
(l)  Inspector to be notified. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. 
(m)  Excavation to be guarded; public property to be restored. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1970, § 20-44; Code 1983, § 6-2-4) 
Sec. 70-76. - Use of the public sewer. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall cause harm to any part of the city's water or sewer system, nor discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer nor shall any person discharge or cause to be discharged to any sanitary sewer any other prohibited discharges. When such discharges do occur, the person responsible shall be charged for the expenditures made by the city as a result thereof, plus shall be subject to section 1-8. 
(b)  Unpolluted drainage. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to those sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)  Prohibited discharges. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes which may contain more than 100 milligrams per liter of fat, oil or greases. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewerage works. This provision also includes ground or shredded paper products. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than nine, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewerage works. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of any characters and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle those materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance, including hydrogen sulfide, nitrous oxide and sulfur dioxide which should be limited to one mg/l or high concentrations of chlorine. 
(d)  Interceptors. 
(1)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that those interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be located to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(2)  Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. 
(e)  Maintenance of interceptors. When installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(f)  Review; approval of certain discharges by superintendent. 
(1)  The superintendent must grant prior approval before the admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having the following characteristics: 
a.  A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 milligrams per liter; 
b.  Containing more than 350 milligrams per liter of suspended solids; 
c.  Containing any quantity or substance having the characteristics described in subsection (f)(1)a. or b. of this section; or 
d.  Having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. 
(2)  Where necessary, in the opinion of the superintendent, the owner shall provide, at his expense, any preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
a.  Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 milligrams per liter and the suspended solids to 350 milligrams per liter; 
b.  Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in subsection (c) of this section; or 
c.  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of any waters or wastes. 
(3)  Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the superintendent and no construction of any facilities shall be commenced until this approval is obtained in writing. 
(g)  Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(h)  Manholes. When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. This manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. 
(i)  Tests, analyses, etc.; where samples are taken. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in subsections (c) and (f) of this section shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewerage, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided in subsection (h) of this section or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(j)  Special agreements. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1970, § 20-45; Code 1983, § 6-2-5) 
Sec. 70-77. - Protection of sewerage system from damage. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewerage works. 
(Code 1970, § 20-46; Code 1983, § 6-2-6) 
Sec. 70-78. - Power and authority of inspectors. 
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1970, § 20-47; Code 1983, § 6-2-7) 
Sec. 70-79. - Sewer service bills. 
Bills for sewer service shall be administered as per section 70-38 and section 70-106. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-8) 
Sec. 70-80. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 70-77, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in this notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of section 70-77 or who shall continue any violation hereof beyond the time limit provided for in section 70-73 or who shall continue any other violation beyond the time limit provided for in this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-8. 
(c)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of section 70-76 shall be charged for the expenditures made by the city as a result thereof, plus be subject to section 1-8. 
(Code 1970, 20-50; Code 1983, § 6-2-9) 
Sec. 70-81. - Industrial waste; treatment charges; payment. 
(a)  For industries desiring to use the wastewater treatment plant, an agreement shall be executed for payment on behalf of the participating industry for its pro rata share of the cost. These costs shall include the cost of building the plant, including debt service, as well as the operational and maintenance cost on a regular basis. The general formula for establishing charges for treating of industrial wastes is computed as follows: 

 
Where: 
Ci = Charge to industrial users, dollars per year. 
v = Average unit cost of transport and treatment. 
o = chargeable to volume, dollars per gallon. 
b = Average unit cost of treatment, chargeable to BOD. 
o = dollars per pound. 
s = Average unit cost of treatment, (including sludge o treatment) chargeable to SS (suspended solids), dollars per pound. 
Vi = volume of wastewater from industrial users, gallons per year. 
Bi = Weight of BOD from industrial users, pounds per year. 
Si = Weight of SS from industrial users, gallons per year. 
(b)  The formula as set forth deals with annual amounts based on information as supplied from bid data, industrial estimates, etc., for the purpose of maintaining a cash flow to cover cost of operation. The estimate is to be made in 12 equal installments, based on the figures of the preceding year as adjusted. This is to allow for increases in operational and maintenance cost. 
(c)  In the event future industries are allowed, all rules and regulations of 40 CFR 128 must be complied with. 
(Code 1970, § 20-54; Code 1983, § 6-2-10) 
Secs. 70-82—70-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWER RATES 

Sec. 70-106. - Water and sewerage charges; irrigation systems. 
(a)  From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived there shall be established a water-sewer service charge for each connection to the water-sewerage system of the city both inside and outside the city limits, and each water-sewer service customer shall pay the appropriate water-sewer charge established by the city council and on file with the city clerk. 
(b)  The rates for all water-sewer service customers shall have a minimum base charge and said minimum base charge shall be considered a set standard or readiness to serve charge and will be charged whether the premises are occupied or not. In cases of abandoned or unoccupied houses, the readiness to serve charge will continue until the meter is removed by the city, at which time the charge will be discontinued. 
(c)  The rate charges for water-sewer service shall be determined by the amount of water used and these charges shall be on file with the city clerk. 
(d)  The standby minimum base charge and the usage rate charges shall be increased annually commencing with calendar year 2005 in accordance with any increase of the Consumer Price Index For All Urban Consumers published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor from the base year of 2004 to the then current year. 
(e)  Irrigation systems water rates on irrigation meters (those not connected to the city wastewater treatment plant system) shall be on file with the city clerk. 
(f)  This section has application to water used by irrigation systems which are on an independent meter not connected to water entering the city's wastewater treatment plant system. 
(g)  In the event the owner or occupier of a property establishes that the property is not suitable for a shallow well, the city will repurchase any previously installed irrigation meter. 
(h)  All irrigation systems shall be equipped with rain sensors. 
(Code 1983, § 6-3-1) 
Sec. 70-107. - Water-sewer billing, collection and penalties. 
The procedures and methods for billing, collection of the water-sewer charges established in section 70-106, and the penalties for delinquent and nonpayment of these charges shall be in accordance with and as set out in sections 70-38—70-40 and sections 70-79 and 70-80. 
(Code 1983, § 6-3-2) 
Sec. 70-108. - Transfer/administrative fee. 
There is imposed a transfer/administrative fee of $35.00 for water and sewer accounts when service is transferred from one account into the account of another or into a new account name. 
(Code 1983, § 6-3-3) 
Sec. 70-109. - Senior citizen base charge. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions hereof, the stand-by minimum base charge for any citizen of the city that qualifies for the ad valorem homestead exemption provided by section 58-30 shall be entitled to a 50 percent reduction in the minimum base charge. 
(Code 1983, § 6-3-4) 
Secs. 70-110—70-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 70-131. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the Identity Theft Prevention Program. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § I) 
Sec. 70-132. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § I) 
Sec. 70-133. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Tybee Island. 
Covered account means (i) an account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and (ii) any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § I) 
Sec. 70-134. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer, and waste management. 
(c)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: None known. 
(d)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(f)  The city determines that there is a moderate risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways, if any: 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § I) 
Sec. 70-135. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer consisting of a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer, or for commercial accounts or non-natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such applicant shall also provide any information necessary for the department providing the service for which the covered account is created to access the applicant's consumer credit report. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § I) 
Sec. 70-136. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the director of the department providing the service or the finance department, as appropriate, or his/her designee on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § I) 
Sec. 70-137. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § I) 
Sec. 70-138. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
1.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § I) 
Sec. 70-139. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to his/her superior. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to his/her superior, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the superior in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by him/her: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to his/her superior. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to his/her superior, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the superior determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the superior: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § I) 
Sec. 70-140. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the Identity Theft Prevention Program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § I) 
Sec. 70-141. - Program administration. 
The city manager is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The head finance officer will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The city manager is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the Identity Theft Prevention Program. The city manager shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § I) 
Sec. 70-142. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the city manager shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § I) 
Secs. 70-143—70-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 70-161. - Short title. 
Treatment of address discrepancies. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § II) 
Sec. 70-162. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § II) 
Sec. 70-163. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
City means City of Tybee Island. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § II) 
Sec. 70-164. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the Customer Information Program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(l); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § II) 
Sec. 70-165. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § II) 
Sec. 70-166. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2008(2), § II) 
APPENDIX A - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Land Development Code is provided as an appendix in order to preserve its numbering scheme and arrangement, except that articles 15 and 16 have been added and adopted in chapter 1 as part of this appendix. 

ARTICLE 1. - INTRODUCTION 

Sec. 1-009. - Editor's note. 
All tables that are referenced in this Land Development Code will not be found in this Code they can be found in the most recent version of the Land Development Code on file in the city clerks' office. 
Sec. 1-010. - Enactment. 
In accordance with the authority granted by the Constitution of the State of Georgia as enacted by the state general assembly and ratified by general election, the city council of Tybee Island, Georgia, ordain and enact into law the City of Tybee Island Land Development Code. As part of this Land Development Code so enacted into law is "The Official Zoning Map of Tybee Island, Georgia." All other city codes and ordinances in conflict with this Land Development Code are repealed. 
Sec. 1-020. - Map. 
The map herein referred to, which is identified by the title, "Zoning Map of the City of Tybee Island, Georgia," is on file in the clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-030. - Purpose. 
The land development regulations and zoning districts as herein set forth have been made for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, general welfare, convenience and prosperity of the citizens of the city. The regulations and arrangements of districts have been designed to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, to facilitate the adequate provision of water, sewer, schools, parks and other public requirements and to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
Sec. 1-040. - Scope. 
This Land Development Code: 
(A)  Regulates the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of lot which may be occupied; the sizes of yards and other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; 
(B)  The uses of buildings; structures and lands for trade, industry, residence, recreation, conservation, water supply, sanitation, public safety, public activities; 
(C)  The preservation of scenic areas, protection against floods, rising waters and erosion, and other purposes; 
(D)  Creates districts for said purposes and establishes the boundaries thereof; 
(E)  Defines certain terms used herein; 
(F)  Provides for the method of administration, appeal and amendment, enforcement, duties and the provision of penalties for violation. 
Sec. 1-050. - Severability and conflict. 
If any section, subsection, clause, provision of these regulations shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, subsection, clause, provision or portion of these regulations which is not invalid or unconstitutional. Where the provisions of this Land Development Code are in conflict with each other or with other ordinances, the most restrictive provisions shall be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, 2-11-2000; Ord. No. 2000-06, amended 5-24-2000) 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 2-010. - Terms and definitions. 
(A)  Terms. Generally, words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; the term "used" includes the words "arranged, designed or intended to be used;" the term "occupied" includes the words "arranged, designed or intended to be occupied;" the word "structure" includes the word "building," "dwelling" or "unit;" the word "lot" includes the word "plot," "parcel" or "tract." 
(B)  Definitions. Specific definitions include the following: 
Accessory building means a building subordinate to the main building on the same lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to the use of the main building. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building to which the addition is connected by a common load bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction. 
Air rights, public means the ownership or control of that space at or above a horizontal plane over the ground surface of public land, or that which is used by law, easement, or right-of-way used for public purposes. The horizontal plane shall be at a height that is reasonably necessary or legally required for the zoned or intended use of the ground surface. 
Alley means any public way accepted for public use and 20 feet or less in width providing secondary access to abutting property. 
Amusement park means a commercially operated park with booths for the sale of food and drink and various devices for entertainment. Such devices include but are not limited to waterslides, Ferris wheels, merry-go-rounds, and roller coasters. 
Apartment building means a building designed for or occupied by three or more families with separate housekeeping facilities for each family. Such building shall include: apartment houses, apartments and flats, efficiency apartments, and studio apartments, but, not including boarding homes, hotels, or motels. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the code enforcement official's interpretation of any provision of this Land Development Code. 
Aquaculture project means the commercial cultivation of aquatic life, such as shellfish, fish, and seaweed. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated "AE" or "VE" zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community is subject to a one percent chance of flooding in any given year. 
Artificial light means any source of light emanating from a manmade device including, but not limited to, spotlights, street lights, commercial or residential lighting, construction and security lights. 
Average adjacent grade means the average natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of the structure. 
Awning means any shelter, cover, or projection extending beyond the outer face of the building wall, of either a rigid or non-rigid material, either collapsible, removable or of permanent rigid construction, designed and intended to be used for the purpose of shelter or protection for entrance and walkways. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation means a point of vertical elevation where it is estimated there is a significant probability of flooding from any source within a 100-year time frame. Such vertical distances are referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (mean sea level). See the recent flood insurance rate maps for estimated base flood elevation in a particular location. 
Base flood level means see "base flood elevation." 
Basement means an enclosure with floor level below natural grade on three sides. 
Beach means a zone of unconsolidated material that extends landward from the ordinary low-water mark to the line of permanent vegetation. 
Bed and breakfast: residential means a dwelling unit where overnight accommodations and a morning meal are provided to transients for compensation. 
Bed and breakfast: commercial means bed and breakfast establishments are subject to an approved commercial use site development plan. For more information see section 3-060, bed and breakfast establishments. 
Boatel means a combination of a motel and marina that is accessible to boats as well as automobiles and may include boat sales and servicing facilities, overnight accommodations for transients, and eating and drinking facilities. 
Breakaway wall means any type of wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and which is designed to break away, under abnormally high tides or wave action, without damage to the structural integrity of the building on which it is used. 
Buffer means open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms or any combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances. Comment: the two basic criteria for buffers are the width of the buffer and the type of material to be planted or installed. In designing buffers, the ordinance should allow flexibility and provide for fences and berms to be used in conjunction with landscaping. 
Building means see "structure." 
Building permit means the permit for any type of construction required by the Tybee Island Code of Ordinances. 
Caliper measure means the diameter of the main stem of a tree or sapling as taken by calipers four and one-half feet above grade. 
Campground means an area or tract of land for which accommodations for temporary occupancy are located or may be placed, including R.V. parks, tents, and major recreational equipment, and which is primarily used for recreational purposes and retains an open air or natural character. 
Caretaker's cottage means an accessory building or portion of a primary structure used or designed for use as a residence, specifically, as an accessory use to the principal structure. Such form of land use may be permitted in the "R-2" zoning district depending on the size of the lot. Other terms for this type of dwelling unit include: granny home, and mother-in-law cottage. By no means shall such a use be considered a separate primary structure eligible for a minor subdivision if either resulting lot created will be substandard in size. 
Carport means a roofed structure providing space for the parking of motor vehicles. 
Certificate of occupancy means a certificate issued by the zoning administrator stating that the occupancy and use of land, building or structure referred to therein complies with the provisions of this Land Development Code. 
Church or place of religious worship means an institution that people regularly attend to participate or hold religious services, meetings, and other related activities. 
Clinic means a building in which medical services for out-patients only are provided. 
Coastal high hazard area (V zones) means those areas that are subject to high velocity waters, including but not limited to hurricane wave wash. The area is designated on a FIRM as "zone V-1-30," "VE" or "V." 
Commercial development means development for the purposes of any professional, commercial, or industrial undertaking. 
Concession stand means a retail establishment selling food and drinks for consumption on or near the premises. This shall include lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks. 
Conditional use (special review) means a use permitted in a particular zoning district upon showing that such use in a specific location will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location or operation of the use as specified in this Land Development Code and authorized by the approving agency. Comment: conditional uses are permitted uses and are appropriate in the zoning district only when all conditions are met. For example, a house of worship may be desirable in a residential area but controls over parking, circulation, setbacks, and landscaping may be needed to prevent such use from adversely affecting surrounding residences. With conditional uses, separate regulations can be imposed to mitigate the adverse impacts. In some states, conditional uses are classified as special exception uses. In all cases, the conditions must be specific. The conditional use permitting process and criteria for determination is listed in section 5-070, standards for special review: (see also: special review permit definition). 
Conditions to zoning approval (conditional zoning) means a requirement adopted by the city council at the time of approval of a rezoning or special use permit which places greater or additional requirements or restrictions on the use and development of the subject property than provided in this zoning ordinance and is designed to ameliorate the negative effects of the rezoning or special use on neighboring properties and to protect the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
Condominium means a building containing three or more individually owned, attached, dwelling units and related, jointly owned, common areas. 
Deck means a raised, flat, and floored roofless platform adjoining a dwelling or structure. A deck is not considered to be part of the structure for living area measurement purposes; however, it is required to meet all front, side, and rear yard setbacks. Flooring for a deck is generally made of wood materials set upon piers. 
Developer means any person, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation engaged in development or proposed development of land. 
Development means any manmade changes to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Diameter, breast height (DBH) means the diameter of a tree trunk or trunks, measured in inches at four and one-half feet above existing grade. 
District, zoning means a mapped area for which a uniform set of land development regulations apply. 
Dockbuilder, as used herein, means any person engaged in the business of constructing, altering, repairing, dismantling or demolishing structures, docks, bridges, fixed or floating, abutting or on coastal marshlands or waters of the city or the state and every other type of structure, project, development or improvement including constructing, altering or repairing of such property, and all subcontractors so engaged. Each "dockbuilder" as defined herein shall register with the city. 
Drive-in restaurant means any place or premises where provisions are made for selling, dispensing, or serving of food, refreshments, or beverage to customers in automobiles or in other than a completely enclosed building. 
Drive-in window means a portion of any building or structure from which business is transacted, or is capable of being transacted, directly with customers located in a motor vehicle during such business transaction. Drive-in windows shall have at a minimum 150 feet of approach distance on the property in which vehicles may queue prior to reaching the window. 
Driveway means a private way that provides vehicular access from a street to a parking area, garage, dwelling, or other structure or land use activity. 
Dune crossover means an elevated structure for pedestrian and bicycle access across an area of sand dunes. A crossover is preferable to a walking path to save vegetation and wearing down of the dune to allow for grass to grow underneath. 
Dwelling means any building or structure or part thereof primarily used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used. The following further defines the different varieties of dwelling distinctions: 
a.  Dwelling, single-family means a detached building designed exclusively for occupancy by one family. 
b.  Dwelling, two-family or duplex means a building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for two adjoining dwelling units that are connected by a firewall or, if the units are positioned vertically, by a type one floor and ceiling construction where the units are joined. A "detached" two-family or duplex consist of dwelling units that are joined by structure other than a firewall or floor and ceiling. 
c.  Dwelling, multi-family means a building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for more than two adjoining dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a party wall or party floor where it joins at least one other dwelling unit in the building. This includes but is not limited to apartments, condominiums, townhouses, or any type of multi family structure. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms in a dwelling, apartment, boardinghouse, hotel or motel, designed primarily for occupancy by one family for living, eating, and sleeping purposes. 
Easement means a grant of one or more property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. 
Existing manufactured home parks or subdivision means a parcel of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale for which facilities were completed prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this Land Development Code is derived or prior to inclusion of property within city limits. 
Expansion of an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means preparation of additional sites by grading, installing utilities, pads, or streets, or otherwise adding service facilities. 
Existing structure means a structure for which a legal building permit has been issued, or a structure erected prior to the date of adoption of the governing code. 
Existing use means the nature of a property or a structure. An existing use may be described using terms such as vacant, abandoned, residential, commercial, owner-occupied, rental, retail, lodging and industrial. 
Family means any of the following occupying a dwelling unit, living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit: 
(1)  Any number of persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship, or duly-authorized custodian relationship; 
(2)  Two unrelated persons and any children related to either of them; or 
(3)  Not more than three persons not related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship, or duly-authorized custodial relationship. 
Fence means wood, metal, or masonry structure not greater than eight feet in height from average adjacent grade. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of a partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland of tidal waters, or 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodlight means unshielded reflector type light fixtures attached directly to a building or post. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), e.g., top of slab in concrete construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Foundation means a structural part of a building constructed below the ground level on which a building stands. The foundation transmits and distributes its own load and imposed loads to the soil in such a way that the load bearing capacity of the foundation bed is not exceeded. The solid ground on which the foundation rests is called the foundation bed. Various types of footing are used as a foundation. 
Frontage means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the point where the side lot lines intersect the street right-of-way. All sides of a lot that abut a street shall be considered frontage. On curvilinear streets, the arc between the side lot lines shall be considered the lot frontage. 
Garage, public means a garage operated as a business devoted primarily to the repair, storage, maintenance, service or sales of motor vehicles, or any combination thereof. 
Grade means any surface which has been cut to or built to the elevation indicated for that point. The surface elevation of a lawn, driveway, or other improved surface after completion of grading operations or from natural causes, such as wind blown sand. 
Greenspace means land that is undeveloped and covered with grass, trees, shrubs, or other vegetation. 
Gross leasable floor area means the total floor area of a commercial building designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines, and upper floors, expressed in square feet as measured from the center line of joint partitions and from outside wall faces. 
Guest cottage means living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same lot or parcel of land as the primary structure, used exclusively for housing members of the family occupying the main building and their nonpaying guests. Such quarters shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. By no means shall such a use be considered a separate primary structure and eligible for a minor subdivision if either resulting lot created will be substandard in size. 
Guest room means any room with a private bath and private entrance from the outside, hall, corridor, or lobby, which may be rented as a single rental unit. 
Hardship means the circumstances where special conditions, which were not self-created or created by a prior owner, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with the restrictions governing dimensional standards (such as lot area, lot width, setbacks, yard requirements, or building height) unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purpose of this Code. Unnecessary hardship is present only where, in the absence of a variance, no feasible use can be made of the property. 
Height of building , unless otherwise specifically defined or described by ordinance, means the vertical distance measured from the average adjacent grade of the building to the extreme high point of the building, exclusive of chimneys, heating units, ventilation ducts, air conditioning units, elevators and similar appurtenances. 
Height variance means a variance granted to exceed the maximum height limitations for allowed uses in a zoning district. 
Home business office means an office use that is conducted entirely within the dwelling which is carried on by the occupant thereof and no other individual, and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. 
Home occupation means an occupation customarily carried on within a home for gain or support, involving the sale of only those articles, products or services produced on the premises, conducted entirely within a dwelling unit and conducted entirely by persons residing in that dwelling unit, using only that equipment as is customarily found in a home and involving no display of articles or products. 
Hospital means any place or institution which maintains and operates facilities for the care, custody and/or treatment of two or more nonrelated persons as patients suffering mental or physical ailments, and which shall be eligible for a license as a hospital under state regulations, but shall not be construed to include any dispensary or first-aid treatment facilities maintained by any commercial or industrial plant, educational institution or convent, nor to include any nursing care home as herein defined. 
Hospital or clinic, special means a hospital which treats communicable diseases, insane or feebleminded patients, epileptics, drug addicts or alcoholic patients. 
Hotel means a building designed to provide accommodations for transients or persons for short-term residence, with or without meals, and including customary accessory uses in connection with the principal use. 
House means structures occupied by people for the sole purpose of shelter and accommodations. 
Industry means any activity involving the manufacturing or treatment or any commodity including the assembly, packaging, canning, bottling, or processing of any item. To change any commodity in composition, form, size, shape, texture, or appearance is deemed to be an industrial process. 
Intersection means the area, whether or not signalized, within which vehicles traveling upon different roadways joining at any angle might collide. 
Junkyard means a junkyard is an open area where waste or scrap materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packaged, disassembled or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, papers, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A junkyard includes an auto-wrecking yard but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
Kitchen means an area used for preparation of food, which contains: 
a.  A sink, 
b.  A refrigerator, 
c.  A stove or range top, and 
d.  An oven or utility connections suitable for servicing a range or oven. 
If all of the above components are present, the area shall be considered a kitchen. 
Light business means a retail or service establishment that operates a low impact business and has fewer than five employees working at any given time. 
Living area means the area of a dwelling unit, enclosed, which is protected from the elements and heated, including interior halls, closets, and utility and storage areas, but excluding garages, carports, screened porches, unenclosed, and unheated areas. 
Loading space means a space within the main building or on the same lot providing for the standing, loading, or unloading of trucks, and having a minimum dimension of 12 feet by 50 feet and minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet. 
Lot means a piece, parcel, tract, or plot of land occupied or to be occupied by one principal building and its accessory buildings and including the required yards and all lots of record included in any such piece, parcel, tract, or plot of land, and all lots otherwise designated by this Land Development Code. 
a.  Corner lot means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
b.  Flag lot means a lot with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor. 
c.  Interior lot means a lot, the side lines of which do not abut on a street. 
d.  Through lot means an interior lot having frontage on two or more streets. 

Lot of record means a lot whose existence, location, and dimensions have been legally recorded or registered in the county clerk of court's office in a deed or on a plat. 
Lot line means the property line, abutting right-of-way line, or any line defining the exact location and boundary of a lot. 
Lot width means the distance between the property lines measured at the building line. 
Lounge means a commercial establishment dispensing alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and where dancing and entertainment is permitted. 
Low profile luminary means light fixture set on a base which raises the light no higher than 60 inches off the ground and designed so that the light is directed downward from a hooded light source. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Land Development Code. 
Maintenance means an activity that restores but not changes the character, scope, size, or design of a serviceable area, structure, or land use to its previously existing, authorized, and undamaged condition. 
Major subdivision means any subdivision comprising four lots or more, or any subdivision involving a new street or change in an existing street. 
Manufactured home means a transportable factory-built home, designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to the enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which became effective June 15, 1976. Manufactured homes are not permitted uses in any district. 
Manufactured housing means a factory-built, single-family structure that is manufactured under the authority of 42 USC 5401, the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, is transportable in one or more sections, is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed to be used as a place of human habitation with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It is not constructed with a permanent hitch or other device allowing transportation of the unit other than for the purpose of delivery to a permanent site, and which does not have wheels or axles permanently attached to its body or frame. 
Manufactured housing park means a parcel of land which is used or intended to be used for the rental or lease of spaces, stands, or manufactured houses and the provision of services for two or more manufactured houses. 
Manufactured housing space, stand means a plot of ground within a manufactured housing park designed for the accommodation of one manufactured house for rent or lease and not to be bought or sold individually. 
Marina means a commercial establishment with a waterfront location used for the purpose of storing watercraft and pleasure boats on land, in buildings, in slips, or on boatlifts and including accessory facilities for purposes such as re-fueling, minor repair, and launching. 
Marine facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. 
Marquee means a roof-like structure suspended over an entrance to a structure. 
Mean sea level (MSL) means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this Land Development Code, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
Mezzanine means an intermediate story that projects in the form of a balcony covered and attached to the dwelling or structure. This is considered to be part of the structure for measurement purposes. 
Minor subdivision means any subdivision comprising three lots or less, and not involving a new street or change in an existing street. 
Mixed occupancy means occupancy of a structure or land for more than one principal use. 
Modular home means a factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with regulations of the Southern Building Code Congress International. 
Narrow means, for variance purposes, a lot width of less than the 60 feet as required for a residential lot in section 10-080(F)(6). A commercial lot does not have a narrow standard. 
Natural or artificial barrier means any river, pond, canal, roadway, railroad levee, embankment, hedge, fence, tree row or similar obstruction which limits access and/or visibility. 
Nesting season means May 1 through October 31 of each year. 
New construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this Land Development Code is derived. 
Nonconforming use means any building structure or use of land or building lawfully existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this Land Development Code is derived, which does not conform with the provisions of this Land Development Code or amendments thereto. 
Nuisance means anything, condition, or conduct that endangers health and safety, or unreasonably offends the senses, or obstructs the free use and comfortable enjoyment of property, or essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life. 
Nursing home means a home for aged or ill persons in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are provided with food, shelter, and care for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to diagnosis and treatment. 
Package shop means an establishment that sells alcoholic beverages only in sealed containers whose contents may not lawfully be consumed on the premises. 
Parking garage means a building designed and used for the storage of automotive vehicles operated as a business enterprise with a service charge or fee being paid to the owner or operator for the parking or storage of privately owned vehicles. 
Parking lot means an area or plot of land used for the storage or parking of vehicles, including all necessary additional space needed for vehicular access maneuvering thereto or therefrom. 
Parking space means a space not less than nine by 18 feet for one vehicle plus all necessary additional space needed for vehicular access thereto. 
Patio means an uncovered roofless area used for purposes of outdoor activity. The patio is not considered to be part of the structure for measurement purposes. 
Personal care home means a building or group of buildings, a facility or place in which is provided two or more beds and other facilities and services, including room, meals, and personal care for nonfamily ambulatory adults for compensation. The following are three specific types of personal care homes: 
a.  Family personal care home means a home for adults in a family type residence, noninstitutional in character, which offers care to two through six persons. 
b.  Group personal care home means a home for adult persons in a residence or other type building(s), non-institutional in character, which offers care to seven through 15 persons. 
c.  Congregate personal care home means a home for adults which offers care to 16 or more persons. 
Pervious means admitting of precipitation to infiltrate the surface or ground. 
Planned unit development (PUD) means any single-family planned unit development on one acre or more, which in design and construction complements the cultural and historical values of the surrounding area. 
Planning commission means a seven-member body appointed by the mayor and council to evaluate proposed land use changes and land development proposals in the city. 
Point source of light means the actual light source, such as the bulb, fluorescent tube, lamp, etc., from which light emanates. 
Pole lighting means light fixtures set on a base or pole which raises the source of light higher than 60 inches off the ground. 
Porch means a roofed, open structure projecting from the front, side, or rear wall of a building. 
Principal structure means the building or structure in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. This shall include any buildings which are attached to the principal structure by a covered structure. Lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
Principal use means the primary use of a zoned lot. 
Public hearing means an open public meeting for which interested parties may discuss a specific issue in an orderly manner before a public body. 
Public notice means a means of informing the general public of a particular event in a fair and timely manner. Official rules of public notice vary depending on the type of event. See section 5-050 for specific public notice requirements as they pertain to land use regulation addressed in this Land Development Code. 
Public utility means any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state, or municipal regulations to the public: natural gas, steam, electricity or other energy sources, water, sewage collection and disposal, and communication, including cable television. 
Recombination of lots means rearrangement of lot boundaries from those already established. 
Recreational vehicle park (RV park) means see "campground." 
Redevelopment means any proposed expansion, addition, or major façade change to an existing building, structure, or parking facility. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Residential development means one or more buildings or structures or portions thereof which are designed for and used to provide a place of abode for human beings, including one and two family detached dwellings, multifamily residences, row houses, townhouses, and other similar group housing, together with accessory uses and structures normally common to residential uses including but not limited to garages, sheds, boat storage facilities, tennis courts, and swimming pools. Residential development shall not include hotels, motels, or any other type of overnight or transient housing or camping facilities. 
Restaurant means an establishment, however designated, at which food is sold for consumption on the premises. However, a snack bar or refreshment stand at a public facility or nonprofit community swimming pool, playground, park, or marina operated solely for the convenience of patrons of the facility shall not be deemed a restaurant. 
Rezoning means the change in zoning classification of any parcel or parcels of land from one zoning district to another. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, water line, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and other similar uses. 
Roof pitch means the geometric angle from the lowest point of the roof to the highest point of the roof on any structure. 
Sand dune means mounds of sand deposited along a coastline by wind action, which are often covered with sparse, pioneer vegetation and are located landward of the ordinary high-water mark and may extend into the tree line. 
Sand-sharing system means an interdependent sediment system composed of sand dunes, beaches, and offshore bars and shoals. 
School means a facility that provides a curriculum of academic instruction, such as kindergartens, elementary schools, middle schools, junior high schools, and high schools. 
Septic tank means a watertight receptacle that receives a discharge of sewage from a building, sewer, or part thereof and is designed and constructed to permit settling of solids from this liquid, digestion of the organic matter, and discharge of the liquid portion into a disposal area. 
Service industry means the provision of services to businesses as well as final customers in which no goods are produced. Service industries include accounting, plumber, computer services, restaurants, tourism, and other such consumer services. 
Service station means a building or lot where gasoline, oil, and greases are supplied and dispensed to the motor vehicle trade, and/or where battery, tire and other similar sales and services are rendered. 
Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between the front, rear, or side lot lines and the existing or proposed edges of the structure. The term "required setback" means a line beyond which a building is not permitted to extend under provisions set forth in this Land Development Code establishing minimum depth and widths of yards. Eaves not exceeding 24 inches are exempt from setback requirements. Eaves in excess of 24 inches are not exempt from setback requirements to the extent they succeed 24 inches. 
Sewer, public means a system that is owned, maintained and operated by the city, and approved by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. 
Shallow means, for variance purposes, a lot that would result in a residential building depth of less than 20 feet. A commercial lot does not have a shallow standard. 
Sign means any area or surface on which lettering or pictorial material is displayed for the purpose of directing attention to a profession, business commodity, service or entertainment. Different varieties of signage are defined as follows: 
a.  Advertising bench means a sign painted, located on, or attached to any part of a bench, seat, or chair placed on or adjacent to a public place or roadway. 
b.  Animated sign means any sign that uses movement or change of lighting, either natural or artificial, to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
c.  Banner means any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is mounted to a pole or a building at one or more edges. Official flags of any institution shall not be considered banners. 
d.  Building marker means any sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental information about its construction, and is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material. 
e.  Bulletin board means any sign erected by a charitable, educational or religious institution or a public body, which is erected upon the same property as said institution. 
f.  Canopy sign means a message painted on or applied to a canopy, awning, or other roof-like structure. 
g.  Commercial message means any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, sale or sales event or other commercial activity. 
h.  Directional sign means a sign which directs the reader to the location of public or educational institutions, or to the location of historical structures or areas, or to the location of public parks or buildings. 
i.  Directory sign means signs identifying the name of the development, multi-use activities within shopping centers, office complexes or apartment complexes. 
j.  Flashing sign means an illuminated sign on which artificial light or reflected light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use. 
k.  Freestanding sign means a sign which is attached to or a part of a completely self-supporting structure. The supporting structure shall be set firmly in or below the ground surface and shall not be attached to any building or any other structure whether portable or stationary. 
l.  Handbill means a printed sheet to be distributed by hand. 
m.  Identification or information sign means signs of an informational nature bearing no advertising. 
n.  Illuminated sign means a sign illuminated directly or indirectly by gas, electricity, or other artificial light including reflective or fluorescent light. 
o.  Incidental sign means a sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking," "entrance," "telephone," and other similar directives. 
p.  Memorial sign means a sign or plaque erected in commemoration of a person, place or event. 
q.  Nonconforming sign means a sign existing at the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this Land Development Code is derived which could not be built under the terms of this Land Development Code. 
r.  Off-premises sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or attraction sold, offered, or existing elsewhere than upon the same lot where such sign is displayed. The term "off-premises sign" shall include an outdoor advertising sign (billboard) on which space is leased or rented by the owner thereof to others for the purpose of convening a commercial or noncommercial message. 
s.  Political sign means any sign consisting of political speech. 
t.  Portable sign means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels. Signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as a sign; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. 
u.  Projecting sign means any sign that shall be affixed at an angle or perpendicularly to the wall of any building in such a manner to read perpendicularly or at an angle to the wall on which it is mounted. 
v.  Roof sign means any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure. 
w.  Snipe sign means an off-premises sign made of any material that is tacked, mailed, posted, or otherwise attached to a tree, pole, stake, fence, or other object. 
x.  Temporary sign means a nonpermanent sign erected, affixed, or maintained on the premises for a short, usually fixed period of time. 
y.  Wall sign means a single faced sign which is in any manner attached or fixed flat to an exterior wall of a building or structure. Individual letters in addition to the box type (e.g., letters and symbols on an attached backing) sign may also be installed as a wall sign. 
z.  Window sign means any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information that is placed inside a window or upon the window. 
Significant trees means trees having a DBH of ten inches or greater of the following variety: southern red cedar, Juniperus silicola, or hardwoods native to [the] Georgia coast. Hardwoods: dicotyledon plants with woody stem including (but not limited to) oaks (Quercus), Magnolia grandiflora, hickories, (Carya), sugarberry or hackberry, (Celtis laeirgata), red bay (Persea borbonia), spiney ash or toothache (Xanoxylum clava-herculis), sycamore (Platanus occidentialis), tupeolo (Nyssa), sweetgum (Liquidamber styraciflora), American holly (Ilex opaca). 
Site plan means a sketch, prepared to scale, accurately and with complete dimensioning to include: the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses, significant trees, and proposed site development construction for a specific parcel of land. See subsections 5-080(A) and (C) for specific requirements for site plans. 
Site variance means a variance granted to vary from regulations and restrictions for allowed uses in zoning districts, such as setbacks, minimum lot sizes, etc. 
Slab means the structure built upon a concrete foundation to which a building is anchored. 
Special event means a temporary use that extends beyond the normal uses and standards allowed by the zoning ordinance of the city. "Special event" includes, but is not limited to, art shows, sidewalk sales, pumpkin and Christmas tree sales, haunted houses, carnivals, auto shows, grand openings, festivals, exhibitions, bazaars, weddings, and receptions. 
Special review permit means a permit issued by the mayor and council, after planning commission review and an advertised public hearing. Approval shall confirm that the proposed use meets all criteria set forth in section 5-070. 
Start of construction means beginning of work under a permit. 
Street means a public way which provides a principal means of access to abutting property. Streets are divided into two classifications as follows: 
a.  Arterial streets means those streets which are designated as arterials on the major thoroughfare plan and which are used or intended primarily for fast or heavy traffic. 
b.  Collector streets means those streets which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
c.  Street, lane means minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
d.  Marginal access street means those minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways; and which provide access to abutting properties, and protection from through traffic. 
e.  Minor streets means all other public ways which provide a means of vehicular access to abutting properties. 
f.  Opened street means a street shall be deemed to be opened if it is either of the following: 
1.  Available for public use and maintained by the city; or 
2.  Was constructed to city specifications following the adoption of the ordinance from which this Land Development Code is derived. 
g.  Private drive means a 20-foot (minimum) access easement dedicated perpetually for use by residences/lots. The city shall be responsible for neither maintenance nor city services within the easement, and such shall be stated on the plat of record. 
h.  Unopened street means a street or any part thereof shall be deemed to be unopened if it is not cleared, graded and available for public use. 
Structural alterations means any change, except for repair or replacement of the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the land, or attachment to something having a permanent location on the land, and not including manufactured homes. 
Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of immediate or future sale, legacy, or building development. All divisions of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets. The term includes the re-subdivision of land and when appropriate to the context relates to the process of subdivision or to the land subdivided. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the county tax assessor's appraisal or certified appraisal of fair market value of the structure either: 
(1)  Before the improvement or repair is started, or 
(2)  If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
Survey map or plat, (land) means a map, prepared to scale, of a particular piece of real estate signed and stamped by a registered land surveyor certified by the state. Such map or plat must also meet all other requirements of O.C.G.A. § 43-15-1 et seq. to be considered an official survey. 
Townhouses means a residential structure containing three or more attached single-family units designed as a single structure having common or party walls. Each unit shall have its own front door which opens to the outdoors, but, without access between adjoining units. 
Travel trailer means any vehicle or similar portable structure mounted on wheels, designed and intended primarily for short-term (under two weeks) occupancy for dwelling or sleeping or other purposes, and not exceeding 25 feet in length, and any recreational vehicle. 
Tree means any woody plant that has a diameter of six inches or more or any woody plant with a caliper measure of two inches or more if such tree is part of a previous tree mitigation plan. 
Tree removal means any intentional or negligent act which: 
a.  Cuts down or otherwise physically destroys a tree, 
b.  Will cause a tree to decline and die, including but not limited to: 
1.  Causing damage to the root system by application of toxic substances, operation of machinery, change in natural grade by excavation or filling above the root system or around the trunk; 
2.  Causing damage from injury or fire resulting in pest infestation; 
3.  Causing damage from extensive pruning or trimming. 
Undeveloped parcel/vacant lot means a parcel or lot on which there is no permanent structure or part thereof designed for human habitation, occupation, or use. 
Use variance means a variance granted for a use that is not permitted in that zoning district. 
Used car lot means any parcel of land used for storage, display and sales of used automobiles and where no repair work is done except the necessary reconditioning of the cars to be displayed and sold on the premises. 
Vacant means having no occupants or contents; empty or unoccupied. 
Vacant property means land or buildings that are not actively used for any purpose. 
Variance means an authorization by the mayor and council granting permission to depart from the literal enforcement of this Land Development Code. See criteria for variance, section 5-090. 
Vegetative state means land with plant growth, especially trees, shrubs, vines, ferns, mosses, and grasses. 
Walkway means any public or private route intended and suitable for pedestrian use. This term includes sidewalks, paths, and trails. 
Warehouse means one or more structures containing one or more exclusive, compartmentalized storage spaces with direct and private access, to be used for storage. 
Water, public means a system that is owned, maintained, and operated by the city, a community corporation, or a privately owned system serving a community and approved by the county health department. 
Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and distribution sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
Wetland protection district means all wetlands within the jurisdiction of the city as indicated on the wetlands map. Provided, however, that the wetlands map does not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this Land Development Code does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
Wetlands map means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps for the city. 
Yard means an open, unoccupied space, other than a court, on the same lot with a building, open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky. 
a.  Front yard means a yard across the full width of the lot extending from the front line of the lot. 
b.  Rear yard means a yard across the full width of the lot, extending from the rear line of the building to the rear line of the lot. 
c.  Side yard means a yard between the side line of the building and the adjacent side line of the lot, extending from the front yard to rear yard. The side yard extends from the front of the structure to the rear so long as the rear of the structure is at least 60 feet from the front lot line, otherwise, the side yard extends to the point which is 60 feet from the front lot line. 
Zoning administrator means that person or persons appointed by mayor and council to enforce the provisions of this Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 1995-17, 12-7-1995; Ord. No. 1996-09, 6-13-1996; Ord. No. 1996-28, 11-14-1996; Ord. No. 1996-14, 7-11-1996; Ord. No. 2002-14, 7-11-2002; Ord. No. 1996-15, 8-8-1996; Ord. No. 1999-08, 4-22-1999; Ord. No. 2000-07, 2-11-2000; Ord. No. 2002-14, amended 1-9-2003; Ord. No. 2000-07, amended 5-24-2000; Ord. No. 1999-, amended 12-17-1999; Manual, amended 11-10-1999; Ord. No. 1999-08, amended 5-24-1999; Ord. No. of 9-22-2005; Ord. of 3-13-2006; Ord. of 9-28-2006; Ord. No. 19-2013-A, § 1, 5-23-2013; Ord. No. 55-A-2014, § 1, 10-23-2014; Ord. No. 07-2017 , § 1, 5-25-2017; Ord. No. 10-2017 , § 1, 7-13-2017) 
ARTICLE 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3-010. - Zoning affects every structure and use. 
Except as otherwise provided, no structure or land shall be used and no structures or part thereof shall be erected, altered or moved unless in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district to which that structure or land is located. 
(Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005) 
Sec. 3-020. - Continuance of nonconforming uses/structures. 
(A)  Any structure or use existing at the time of the enactment of the ordinance, March 24, 1971, from which this Land Development Code is derived or an amendment to this Land Development Code, although that structure or use does not conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued as a nonconforming use or structure and structural repairs may be made to any such nonconforming structure, provided however, no such nonconforming use or structure shall in any way be expanded or extended and all work meets all applicable building, state, and federal, regulations including those set forth by FEMA. Whenever a nonconforming structure or use of structure becomes vacant or remains unoccupied owing to abandonment or discontinuance for a period of six months, such structure or use shall thereafter be made to conform to the provisions of this Land Development Code. Any nonconforming structure or use which is damaged by fire, flood, hurricane, explosion, earthquake, war, riot, or any act of God, may be restored, reconstructed and continued as the same nonconforming use and structure as existed before such damage, provided however, that a building permit to initiate restoration must be obtained within six months of the occurrence of damage, and if no such permit is obtained then only a conforming use or structure will be allowed upon the property. Provided further, however, that the mayor and council may grant an extension of this six-month period in their discretion. 
(B)  (1)  A nonconforming residentially used structure which is only nonconforming as a result of a setback encroachment on some portion of the property, may be expanded and enlarged beyond its ground footprint without a variance as long as no further encroachments into any setbacks are to be created and so long as all other provisions of the ordinances are complied with, such as all applicable building, state and federal regulations including those set forth by FEMA and all green space requirements are met. 
(2)  Any residentially used nonconforming structure may be demolished and rebuilt only if the rebuilt structure will be contained within the same nonconforming ground footprint as existed before demolition; such new structure will maintain the historic character and substance of the preexisting structure; and the new structure will not exceed the square footage of the prior structure by more than 50 percent. 
(C)  A nonconforming commercially used structure in a residential zone may not be extended or expanded physically and the nonconforming use may not be expanded or increased. No variance may be granted to the terms of this subsection. 
(Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 2005-04, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 10-2011, 4-14-2011; Ord. No. 18-2014, § 1, 2-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-030. - Reduction in lot area. 
No lot shall be reduced in area so as to result in less than the minimum lot area required under this Land Development Code; however, lots may be reduced in area upon approval of mayor and council provided: 
(A)  That the lot or lots as reduced will be consistent with the existing density and development pattern. 
(B)  That the lot or lots as reduced permits and maintains, without any variance, the required front, side, and rear yard setbacks. 
(C)  That the lot or lots as reduced is/are, or will be, connected to city water and sewer. 
(Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 30-2010, 10-28-2010; Ord. No. 18-2014, § 1, 2-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-040. - Substandard lots of record. 
Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, March 24,1971, which has a lot area which is less than that required by this Land Development Code shall be subject to the following: 
(A)  No substandard lot may be developed unless it is to be served by public water and sewer and all minimum front, side, and rear yard setbacks as required by this Land Development Code are met or a variance is granted pursuant to section 5-090. 
(B)  A single lot which has an area less than that required by these regulations may only be developed as a building site for a single-family dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 2002-26, 12-12-2002; Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 2002-26 Substandard lots of records, amended 2-5-2003; Ord. No. 01-2011, 1-13-2011; Ord. No. 18-2014, § 1, 2-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-050. - Obstruction to visions at street intersections. 
Intersection requirements are intended to provide better vehicle safety on the public roads. A clear sight triangle gives motorists a view of other oncoming motorists when approaching a road intersection. 
On all corner lots, no fence, shrubbery or other obstruction to traffic sight vision, except utility poles or light or sign standards, shall encroach into an area as measured from three feet above the level of the adjacent driving surface to ten feet above the level of the adjacent driving surface, within a triangular area formed by the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets and a diagonal line which intersects the right-of-way lines at two points, each 25 feet distance from the intersection of the right-of-way lines or, in the case of a rounded corner, from the point of intersection of their tangents except where site conditions require greater or lesser setbacks as determined by a traffic engineer. See Illustration 1 for visual clarification. 
Illustration 1 
(Ord. No. 1999-35, 10-28-1999; Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 1999-35, amended 11-10-1999; Manual, amended 11-10-1999; Ord. No. 38-2010, 11-18-2010) 
Sec. 3-060. - Bed and breakfast regulations. 
There are two types of bed and breakfast uses defined in this Land Development Code, a bed and breakfast and a bed and breakfast inn. A bed and breakfast is permitted in certain residential areas and intended to be residential in nature. Any slight diversion from the bed and breakfast parameters will change a residential use to a commercial use. A bed and breakfast inn is intended for commercial districts only. Therefore, there can be no variance from the regulations specific to a bed and breakfast. Such a variance will alter the use of the property and thus require a change in the zoning district. The regulations that list requirements for both types of bed and breakfast uses are as follows: 
(A)  Bed and breakfast (residential). 
(1)  Limited to no more than seven rental units consisting of sleeping and sanitary accommodations, and one dwelling unit to be owner occupied. 
(2)  The owner is required to live on premises and agree to make available proof of residency. 
(3)  Food service limited to breakfast for guests only and to be served between the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon and an afternoon snack. 
(4)  Under no circumstances will an alcoholic beverage license be issued. 
(5)  No less than one vehicle parking space per rental unit, and a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces for the owner are required on the property. Handicapped parking shall be provided as required by the O.C.G.A. Tit. 30, Accessibility Code. 
(6)  A buffer is required with a minimum height of six feet within each of the side and rear yard setbacks. 
(7)  One on-premises sign, not to exceed 12 square feet, may either be posted on the structure or on a post. A post sign may not exceed a height of six feet from the highest point of the sign. A post sign is to be located no nearer than ten feet of the right-of-way. No signs are to be allowed that are illuminated from within. Post signs may be downlit with no more than two spotlights with a maximum wattage of 75 watts per bulb located on each side of the sign. Signs posted on structure may be lit with no more than one spotlight with wattage not to exceed 75 watts. All sign designs must be submitted as a part of the conditional use permit drawn. 
(8)  A limited site plan approval is required to show the number and location of guest rooms, the parking plan, and the proposed design for the buffer. All site plans must be submitted on or along with a valid survey of the property. 
(9)  Small special events are permitted not to exceed 20 guests upon completion of a special review to include standards and restrictions to hours of operation, and requirements with respect to lighting, parking, signage, and buffering so as not to unreasonably interfere with the residential uses of abutting properties. During a special event the total number of guests on the property shall not exceed 20 people, including all occupants of rental units and all non-occupants attending a special event. Regardless of intent to shuttle people to the property, additional parking spaces on the property for four vehicles are required for special events. These four spaces are in addition to the off-street parking spaces required by subsection (5). Handicapped parking shall be provided as required by the O.C.G.A. Tit. 30, Accessibility Code. 
(10)  A public hearing before the mayor and council is required. This permit is only valid as long as all conditions specified are met. Any permitted use must adhere to the approved standards, restrictions and parking plans and any other conditions imposed by the mayor and council. 
(B)  Bed and breakfast inns (commercial). These land uses are subject to an approved site development plan as required for all commercial development under section 5-080. 
(Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. of 12-11-2008(5); Ord. No. 35-2010, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 17A-2014, § 1, 2-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-070. - Permissible structures per lot; accessory structures. 
(A)  Principle structure on a lot. Only one principle structure and its customary accessory structure are permissible per lot. Single-family residential lots shall be limited to one electrical meter. The one electrical meter standard shall not apply to solar power. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, in C-1 zoning districts, the property owner may petition the mayor and council for permission to allow an additional principle use structure per lot, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The property is one lot of 4,200 square feet or larger; 
(2)  The proposed use of the additional structure is permitted in the C-1 zone and is compatible with the existing or proposed principle structure use; 
(3)  The proposed use of the additional structure will further the needs of the owners or residents of the principle structure of the general population; 
(4)  All other requirements of the Land Development Code are met, including but not limited to, setback, greenspace, drainage, height limits, etc.; and 
(5)  The permitted additional structure must be restricted to the use approved by the mayor and council and may not be changed without approval by the mayor and council. 
(B)  Detached accessory structures on commercial lots. A detached accessory structure in a commercial district is exempted from the schedule of regulations in section 3-090, but shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  No detached accessory structure shall extend beyond the front building line of the principle structure except tents, umbrellas and enclosures. 
(2)  No detached accessory structure shall be more than one story in height. 
(3)  No detached accessory structure shall be located nearer than five feet to any lot line. 
(4)  No detached accessory structure will reduce the amount of parking required for commercial sites as required in section 3-080. 
(5)  No detached accessory structure will materially affect an approved drainage plan on an already improved site or increase the amount of run-off leaving the site in the event the site was improved without an approved drainage plan. Existing drainage for the principal structure will not be reviewed or required to be changed unless the approved drainage plan is not being followed. 
(6)  No detached accessory structure shall be erected or installed without the proper approval from the designated city department. 
(7)  Temporary enclosures. Temporary enclosures are permitted in commercial areas only. This includes any moveable, tent-like shelter intended to provide or actually providing protection from the elements for stored materials, vehicles, or other items, for which a building permit is not required and which a maximum size is 120 square feet. This would include temporary garages of tent-like construction, as well as tarpaulins of plastic or similar type materials supported by wooden or metal frameworks. Such temporary enclosures are to be considered structures under this section and, as such, are governed by the same setback requirements as other structures under this Land Development Code. Tents set up for special occasions, screenhouses, and other such seasonal, recreational enclosures are specifically exempted from this section unless they are used for storage as stated above after written approval from the designated city department prior to placement. However, if this temporary enclosure becomes permanently anchored, it will be treated as a permanent structure and subject to all permitting requirements. 
(8)  No temporary detached structure will be allowed on the residential use side(s) of a commercial lot where commercial and residential uses are adjacent. 
(C)  Location of detached accessory structures on residential lots. A detached accessory structure in either a residential district or on any lot containing a principle structure whose first floor is used for residential purposes is exempted from the schedule of regulations in section 3-090, but shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  No detached structure except a carport shall extend beyond the front building line of the principle structure. 
(2)  No detached accessory structure shall be more than one story in height. 
(3)  No detached accessory structure shall be located nearer than five feet to any lot line. A caretaker's cottage or guest cottage must meet the same front, side and rear setback requirements as required for a principle structure. 
(D)  Location of attached accessory structures on residential lots. An attached accessory structure in either a residential district or on any lot containing a principle structure, the ground floor of which is used for residential purposes, shall be considered as an integral part of the principle structure and shall be constructed, altered or otherwise be developed in accordance with the regulations governing flood damage prevention (article 8) and side yard, rear yard and front yard setbacks for principle structures in the district. 
(E)  Kiosks. A kiosk is considered a permanent structure for interpretation of the Land Development Code and ordinances of the city. A kiosk may be a principle structure or an accessory structure depending upon the circumstances existing on the property. A kiosk that is intended to operate as an independent business not associated with a principle structure or use shall require site plan approval. 
(F)  Principle structures in the Maritime-District. Within the Maritime-District (M-D) more than one principle structure shall be allowed for permitted uses with site plan approval and special review by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, 6-13-2002; Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 2002-11 Accessory, amended 8-29-2002; Ord. No. 2010-01, 2-25-2010; Ord. No. 11-2011, 4-14-2011; Ord. No. 54-2014, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
Sec. 3-080. - Off-street parking requirements. 
(A)  In all zoning districts, handicapped parking shall be provided as required by the O.C.G.A. tit. 30, Accessibility Code. 
(B)  Residential district parking requirements and residential off-street parking requirements. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided and maintained on site for all buildings, structures or premises being used in whole or in part for residential purposes, or for any other use permitted in residential districts. 
(1)  Residential dwelling units. For every dwelling unit, there shall be provided at least two off-street parking spaces. A caretaker's cottage is a separate dwelling unit and shall be provided at least two off-street parking spaces. 
(2)  Nursing homes, hospitals. One parking space for each five patient beds, plus one space for each staff doctor, plus one space for each employee on the largest shift. 
(3)  Theaters, auditoriums, gymnasiums and other places of assembly. One parking space for each four seats provided in the main auditorium or for each 50 square feet of floor area available for the accommodation of movable seats in the largest assembly room or area. 
(4)  Public and private elementary and secondary schools (except assembly halls, auditoriums and gymnasium used in conjunction therewith). One parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area devoted to such use. 
(5)  Private docks. At least two off-street parking spaces must be provided for any private dock proposed for construction on a lot that has not been otherwise improved. In the event that a private dock is proposed on a lot that has not been improved, the parking must be off-street (not on city right-of-way) and pervious. 
(C)  Control of access to structures used for residential purposes including but not limited to single family, duplex, triplex, two family, multifamily, townhomes, apartments, time shares, and condominiums whether owner occupied or held for rental. In order to promote the safety of motorists and pedestrians, the following regulations shall apply to all newly constructed driveways: 
(1)  A driveway opening which connects a lot with a public street shall not be greater than 25 feet in width at the property line. Driveways that serve duplex lots shall not have a width greater than 15 feet per unit measured at the property line. This section is not intended to prevent the installation of flared driveway ends. These flared ends, when constructed in accordance with adopted standards and specifications, shall not count towards the width of the driveway. 
(2)  There shall be no more than two driveway openings on any lot of any width. The total of the widths at the property line of two driveway openings shall not be greater than 25 feet. 
(3)  No driveway opening shall be constructed within 25 feet of an intersection, measuring from the nearest improved portion of the right-of-way. However, in any instance where there is not adequate space available and other access is not feasible, staff may permit a reduction in the distance to an intersection from a driveway in order to permit safe access to the property provided the speed limit on abutting or adjacent roads is 30 miles per hour or less. 
(4)  No curb on any city street or right-of-way shall be cut or otherwise altered without prior written approval of the designated city official. Driveway requirements specified in this section, notwithstanding, staff may issue a permit to a residential property owner to place approved materials in the city right of way, provided the owner is informed and acknowledges that the city will maintain the right to initiate any required action within the right of way and that permitting materials in the right of way shall not create any vested rights in the property owner and such permission may be terminated at any time. In addition, such permit by staff may only be made in the event the improvement does not create a safety issue or interfere with city metered parking and does not violate any city ordinance including, but not limited to, the requirements of section 3-165 to maintain 65 percent of the property setback area as greenspace. If the staff of the building and zoning department finds that a request under this section needs or should have additional review for any reason, it may request review by the mayor and council or, if the staff of the building and zoning department declines the applicant's request, the applicant may apply for the granting of the permit which will result in the application going to the mayor and council. However, before the mayor and council, a public hearing is not required but action may only be taken at a public meeting of the mayor and council. 
(5)  For water quality purposes, all newly-constructed driveways and replacements of more than 50 percent of existing driveways serving residential uses shall be constructed of materials designed to allow retention of the first one inch of stormwater. A new driveway includes the initial placement of any material on bare soil. Such new driveways and replacements of more than 50 percent of an existing driveway are subject to permitting and inspection(s). A permit and inspection(s) are also required for repair of less than 50 percent of an improved driveway. The retention requirement is based on a 24-hour, 25-year Tybee III SCS storm. A permit is required for installation of a new or replacement driveway. An inspection is required of each layer prior to the next layer being installed. The permit applicant shall be responsible for all engineering fees incurred by the city for review of materials, even when a material is not approved. Acceptable materials include: 
a.  Stone must be either AASHTO #57, #67, #78, or #89 open graded with no fines, or pea gravel with no fines, or a combination of two or more. Graded aggregate base (also known as "crusher run" or "crush and run") is not allowed. 
b.  Standard brick pavers are four-inch by eight-inch with minimum five-sixty-fourths-inch average continuous joints/borders with eight one-eighth-inch wide spacers per paver filled with masonry sand. See item (c) for base and header requirements. If larger bricks are used, thereby creating less linear joint and surface area joint, calculations by a state licensed design professional must be reviewed and approved by the city. See engineering fee information in subsection (1). 
c.  Permeable interlocking concrete pavers (PICP) are solid structural units installed with openings as described in the coastal stormwater supplement (CSS) through which stormwater runoff can rapidly pass into the underlying reservoir of a four-inch minimum depth open-graded stone, no fines. Openings may be filled only with pea gravel or larger stone, or with masonry sand. A concrete header curb or paver/concrete block ribbon with a maximum width of eight inches must be installed around the perimeter of the pavers. Building foundations and garage floors may serve as a portion of the perimeter. The edge of a paved road may not serve as a perimeter. Flush headers and ribbons are included in the driveway measurements. To not be included in the driveway measurements a header or ribbon must be installed lower than the driveway pavers, covered with adequate top soil, and seeded or sodded to facilitate vegetation. 
d.  Ribbon driveway designs are normally constructed of concrete but other materials may be considered. The ribbons are to be a maximum of 18 inches wide with a one to two percent cross slope to route runoff to adjacent pervious areas rather than down the strips to the street. The area between the strips may be either grass or stone as described in subsection (a). The area between the drive strips is to be flush or one-eighth-inch below the driving strip to encourage the percolation of stormwater runoff between the driving strips. 
e.  Concrete grid pavers (CGP) are precast concrete units that allow rainfall and stormwater runoff to pass through large openings that are filled with pea gravel, sand or topsoil and turf. A concrete header curb or brick/concrete block ribbon with a maximum width of 12 inches (flush or one-eighth-inch higher than the contained permeable pavement) must be installed around the perimeter of the permeable pavement. Building foundations and garage floors may serve as a portion of the perimeter. The edge of a paved road may not serve as a perimeter. Header and ribbons are included in the driveway measurements. To not be included in the driveway measurements a header or ribbon must be installed lower than the driveway pavers, covered with adequate top soil, and seeded or sodded to facilitate vegetation. 
f.  Plastic grid pavers (PGP) consist of flexible, interlocking plastic units that allow rainfall and stormwater runoff to pass through large openings that are filled with gravel, sand or topsoil and turf. A header curb is required and is included in the driveway measurement. 
g.  Pervious concrete (also known as porous concrete) is similar to conventional concrete in structure and form, but consists of a special open-graded surface course, typically four to eight inches thick, that is bound together with Portland cement. 
h.  Porous asphalt is similar to pervious concrete, and consists of a special open-graded surface course bound together by asphalt cement. 
For all other proposed materials, calculations are required from a state licensed design professional demonstrating compliance with the retention requirement of this section. 
(D)  Commercial off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided and maintained for all structures or premises being occupied or used in whole or in part for commercial activity as follows: 
(1)  With the submission of an application for a business license for either a new business or a business that has expanded the occupancy load of the principle structure, changed use, or created additional occupant loads through other structures where permitting has been required by the city, a parking plan must be submitted with the application for approval by the designated city official. If the plan represents significant changes in parking, the plan may be determined to require site plan approval by the mayor and council. 

 
(2)  For all uses, a rack able to accommodate eight bicycles may be substituted for one required standard parking space based on the schedule below. The calculation to meet the handicap parking requirement of subsection (A) shall be based on the number of required parking spaces prior to any rack substitution. 

 
(3)  Maritime district. 
a.  Parking shall be in conformance with the off-street requirements of the uses referenced in this section and the required dimensions of section 3-090. 
b.  Dock operators must provide one parking space for every 20 linear feet of each side of dock designated for recreational boaters. Docks leased to commercial boats must allow for one space per boat, plus one space per crew member and one space per each four seats for charter passengers. 
c.  All changes to parking in the maritime district that involve loading, unloading and transporting of boats will require a parking plan submitted to the city detailing the turn radii of drive aisles. 
(E)  Off-street parking dimensions. 

 
  

 
Dimensions of angle parking spaces: 

 
  

(F)  Exemptions from off-street parking requirements. 
(1)  Existing structures with 2,000 square feet or less of floor area that exist in a C-1 zoning district may expand the floor area up to 4,000 square feet without having to meet the off-street parking requirements as long as the structure is completely located within 1,000 feet of a municipal parking lot. 
(2)  A structure whose primary use is a church or place of religious worship shall be exempt from all off-street parking requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2000-08, 2-11-2000; Ord. No. 1995-17, 12-7-1995; Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 2004-12, amended 1-31-2005; Ord. No. 2004-10, amended 10-12-2004; Ord. No. 2004-10, amended 6-10-2004; Ord. No. 2000-08, 5-24-2000; Manual, amended 11-10-1999; Ord. of 1-12-2006; Ord. No. 13-2011, 4-14-2011; Ord. No. 04A-2013, 2-14-2013; Ord. No. 18-2013, § 1, 5-23-2013; Ord. No. 03-2014, § 1, 1-9-2014; Ord. No. 28-2014, § 1, 4-10-2014; Ord. No. 13B-2014, § 1, 8-14-2014; Ord. No. 07-A-2015, § 1, 4-23-2015 ; Ord. No. 02-2017 , § 1, 1-12-2017) 
Sec. 3-090. - Schedule of development regulations. 
(A)  Schedule of residential district dimensional requirements. 

 
(1)  In any residential district (R-I, R-I-B, R-2 and RT) where the average front setback distance for existing buildings on all lots located wholly or partly within 200 feet to each side of any lot, and within the same zoning district and fronting on the same side of the same street and on the same block as such lot, is less than the minimum setback required in such zoning district, the front setback on such lot may be less than the required setback but not less than the existing average setback distance for all lots within 200 feet to each side, provided that in no case shall the front setback on new construction be less than ten feet. When lots within 200 feet on each side are vacant such vacant lots shall be considered as having the minimum required setback for the purpose of computing an average setback distance. When existing structures on lots within 200 feet on each side exceed minimum front setback required in such zoning district, the required setback shall be used for the purpose of computing an average setback distance. 
See illustration and table for visual clarification. 

(2)  A second egress from an existing elevated home or existing home to be elevated in the future may encroach into the setback upon approval of the zoning administrator. The egress shall encroach as little as possible into the setback. 
(B)  Schedule of other than residential districts (commercial, maritime and transitional business-residential) dimensional requirements * . 

 
* When abutting public streets, any principal structure shall be located no nearer than five feet to that lot line. 
** Where a commercial establishment abuts a residential zoning, a suitable screen will be required. See section 3-160. This screen shall be either natural (planting) or manmade and shall be maintained in good order and approved by the zoning administrator. Minimum height is six feet. 
*** C-1(A) Retail uses and food/beverage service uses.  C-1(B) Hotel and motel uses, with 80 percent maximum lot coverage.  C-1(C) Residential uses, including single-family, two-family, and multi-family (triplexes, quadraplexes, townhomes, apartments, tourist homes, condominiums, timeshares, and similar uses), bed and breakfast uses, and public structures. 
(C)  Structures above 35 feet. If a variance is granted by the mayor and council for a building with a height in excess of 35 feet, in no event shall a building permit be granted without the following restrictions: 
(1)  Structures greater than 35 feet in height shall be fully equipped with fire safe guards consisting of sprinkler systems, smoke detectors and any other fire protection measures deemed necessary at the time by the mayor and council. 
(2)  Before a permit can be granted on said request, an affidavit of the builder and owner must be executed agreeing to same to be completed within an agreed upon reasonable time. 
(D)  Calculating maximum height for development on existing structures or slabs. In any situation, including specifically but not limited to, the batteries that were formerly part of Fort Screven, where new construction or remodeling of existing improvements is proposed, the elevation for purposes of calculating the finished height of the proposed structure shall be determined by the following rules: 
(a)  The finished height of any new construction or remodeling shall not exceed 35 feet from the lower of the existing elevation as determined from either of the following: 
(1)  The elevation of the top of the lowest floor's slab of the existing improvement or structure, or 
(2)  The elevation of the crown of an existing improved street, public or private, that abuts or is nearest to the property on which the proposed structure is planned. 
This section is applicable in circumstances where the existing structure, improvement, or slab is to be continued in use or in place, incorporated into the proposed improvement. If an improvement, slab and/or foundation is to be removed entirely, the elevation for new construction will be measured from the lower of the average adjacent grade of the lot or the elevation of the crown of an existing improved street, public or private, that abuts or is nearest to the property on which the proposed structure is planned. 
As used in this article, the phrase "is nearest to" is to be determined by a measurement in any direction and without regard to property lines, easements, etc. but rather is to be determined "as the crow flies," beginning with the closest point on the property to be developed to the nearest improved public or private street. 
As used in this article, the words "grade," "foundation" and "slab" shall be defined as demonstrated and depicted on the attached Exhibit "A" and this article is to be applied and interpreted consistently therewith. 
Editor's note— Exhibit A referenced in this section is not set out at length in this code, but may be found in the offices of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1995, 12-7-1995; Ord. No. 2002-6, 4-11-2002; Ord. No. 1995-17, 12-7-1995; Ord. No. 2003-01, 1-9-2003; Ord. No. 1990-09, 4-22-1999; Ord. No. 2000-12, amended 2-11-2000; Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 2002-01 JOY, amended 2-5-2003; Ord. No. 2002-06, amended 5-15-2002; 3-090, amended 3-20-2001, RT-deleted in error and is re-instated by Jackie Brown 3-20-2001; Ord. No. 2000-12, amended 5-24-2000; Ord. No. 1999-, amended 12-17-1999; Manual, amended 11-10-1999; Manual, amended 10-20-1999, Corrected prior update errors; Ord. No. 1999-09, amended 5-24-1999; Ord. of 1-26-2006(2); Ord. No. 14-2011, 4-14-2011; Ord. No. 24-2013, § 1, 8-8-2013; Ord. No. 18-2014, § 1, 2-27-2014; Ord. No. 40-2014, § 1, 8-14-2014; Ord. No. 23-2016 , § 1, 8-25-2016; Ord. No. 01-2017-C , § 1, 4-27-2017) 
Sec. 3-090.1. - Streams, lakes, coastal marshlands and freshwater wetlands buffer/setback. 
(A)  Intent and purpose. 
(1)  The rivers, streams, wetlands, and coastal marshlands constituting the riparian lands of the city are a significant natural resource and are essentially linked to the city's economy. The city council recognizes that these lands provide numerous benefits and are vital to the health, safety, and economic welfare of its citizens. The city council finds that buffers adjacent to these lands provide substantial benefits including: 
a.  Minimizing activities that degrade, destroy, or otherwise negatively impact the value and function of coastal marshlands; 
b.  Maintaining stream and river water quality; 
c.  Trapping sediment and other pollutants found in surface runoff; 
d.  Promoting bank stabilization and reducing erosion; 
e.  Protecting terrestrial coastal habitat for nesting and feeding wildlife; 
f.  Reducing the impact of flooding by increasing floodwater storage areas; 
g.  Enhancing the marshlands' scenic value and recreational opportunities; 
h.  Protecting property values of individual landowners; 
i.  Protecting and restoring greenspace and the natural character of the coastal region; and 
j.  Protecting important nursery areas for fisheries, which provide food and habitat to numerous species of fish and shellfish, including commercially important species. 
(2)  It is therefore the purpose and intent of this section to establish a coastal riparian buffer zone of restricted development and limited land use adjacent to coastal streams, rivers, marshes, and wetlands. The purposes of this coastal riparian buffer zone are to: 
a.  Protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare of the citizens of the city; 
b.  Minimize public and private land loss due to erosion, sedimentation, and water pollution; 
c.  Maintain water quality for human use and for protecting the important nursery areas for fisheries, which provide food and habitat to numerous species of fish and shellfish, including commercially important species; 
d.  Protect terrestrial coastal habitat for nesting and feeding wildlife; 
e.  Reduce the impact of flooding by increasing floodwater storage areas; 
f.  Protect the natural and native vegetation in the zone; 
g.  Protect the coastal region's visual character and unique natural resources; and 
h.  Avoid land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any land disturbing activities. 
(3)  The standards and regulations set forth in this section are created under the authority of the city's home rule and zoning powers defined in Article IX, Section 2 of the Georgia Constitution. 
(B)  Definitions. 
Access path means a pervious path designed, constructed, and maintained pursuant to applicable best management practices that provides for access to water-dependent uses through the buffer and takes the route that impacts the natural vegetation of the buffer to the least extent possible. 
Buffer encroachment permit means the permit issued by the city and required to undertake certain buffer encroaching activities as described in subsection (D). 
Coastal marshland or marshland means any marshland intertidal area, mud flat, tidal water bottom, or salt marsh within the estuarine area of the city whether or not the tidewaters reach the littoral areas through natural or artificial watercourses. "Vegetated marshlands" shall include those areas upon which grow one, but not necessarily all, of the following: salt marsh grass ( Spartina alterniflora ), black needlerush ( Juncus roemerianus ), saltmeadow cordgrass ( Spartina patens ), big cordgrass ( Spartina cynosuroides ), saltgrass ( Distichlis spicata ), coast dropseed ( Sporobolus virginicus ), bigelow glasswort ( Salicornia bigelovii ), woody glasswort ( Salicornia virginica ), saltwort ( Batis maritima ), sea lavender ( Limonium nashii ), sea oxeye ( Borrichia frutescens ), silverling ( Baccharis halimifolia ), false willow ( Baccharis angustifolia ), and high-tide bush ( Iva frutescens ). The occurrence and extent of salt marsh peat at the undisturbed surface shall be deemed to be conclusive evidence of the extent of a salt marsh or a part thereof. Coastal Marshlands Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Coastal riparian buffer or buffer means, on any given parcel of land, a natural or enhanced vegetated area of riparian land lying adjacent to a stream, pond, impoundment, wetland, or coastal marshland. 
Estuarine area means all tidally influenced waters, marshes, and marshlands lying within a tide-elevation range from five and six-tenths feet above mean tide level and below. Coastal Marshlands Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that greatly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, except those designed specifically to allow infiltration. 
Impoundment means any lake, pond, or other body of freshwater. 
Land disturbing activity means: 
(1)  Any installation of impervious cover; or 
(2)  Any grading, scraping, excavating or filling of land. 
Land disturbance permit means the permit issued by the city pursuant to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act and required for undertaking any land disturbing activity. 
Littoral area means the tidal area between the high water and low water marks. 
Minor land disturbing means activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which do not result in any soil erosion as defined in the current version of the minor land disturbing guidelines issued by the state department of natural resources. Such minor land disturbing activities may not result in total disturbance of more than 100 square feet. 
Native vegetation means vegetation that is naturally found in the area. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Riparian land means any land along the edge of a lake, stream, river, marsh, wetland, coastal marshland, pond or impoundment. 
Wetland means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil. Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. r.391-3-16-.03 (2006). 
(C)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all land disturbing activity on property containing or adjacent to coastal marshland or wetlands. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law. Approval or exemption from these requirements does not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
Best management practices shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall follow the design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
(1)  Grandfather provisions. This section shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.  Existing development and land disturbance activities as of August 14, 2014, except that new development or new land disturbing activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
b.  Any land disturbing activity that is scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of August 14, 2014. 
c.  Land disturbing activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development and that has been previously approved within one year of August 14, 2014. 
After August 14, 2014, this section shall apply to all new subdividing and platting activities. 
(2)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this section: 
a.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the stream, lake, impoundment, wetland, and/or coastal marshlands, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the mean high water line in coastal marshlands and wetlands or the top of the bank for streams, lakes, and impoundments. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed to allow the construction of roads, bike paths, or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of the type of paving material used. 
b.  Land disturbing activities by governments within a road right-of-way existing at the time the ordinance from which this section is derived takes effect, or approved under the terms of this section. Development activities are only allowed if they cannot reasonably be located outside the buffer. 
c.  Land disturbing activities within utility easements existing as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived or approved under the terms of this section when necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
d.  Emergency maintenance and repairs necessary to preserve life and/or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the city as soon as possible and within 24 hours of the commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a variance and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the city to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
e.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses, provided these activities are not incidental to other land disturbing activity and are conducted using applicable best management practices. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, no land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
f.  Stream crossings for water lines or stream crossings for sewer lines, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented. 
g.  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which do not result in any soil erosion as defined in the current version of the minor land disturbing guidelines issued by the state department of natural resources. Such minor land disturbing activities may not result in total disturbance of more than cumulative 100 square feet per parcel. 
h.  Pruning and selective clearing is permissible to maintain a viewshed provided such activities do not disturb more than 30 percent of the buffer's length as measured along the landward edge of the marshlands, and no trees above six inches in diameter are removed. 
i.  Activities for the purpose of constructing public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures, when designed, constructed, and maintained using applicable best management practices. 
j.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality, and/or aquatic habitat, when designed, constructed, and maintained pursuant to applicable best management practices. 
k.  Any trimming or pruning of vegetation for the purpose of creating a keyhole view corridor and/or access path and conducted in accordance with applicable best management practices. This exemption shall not allow for the removal of trees. 
l.  Creation of an access path to water-dependent uses through the buffer when designed, constructed, and maintained pursuant to applicable best management practices. 
m.  Structural maintenance and repair (not replacement or enlargement) of any damaged structure that existed in the buffer as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, provided the repair is less than 50 percent of the value of the structure, as determined by a local building inspector and is constructed and designed pursuant to applicable best management practices. 
(D)  Standards and regulations. All land disturbing activity that is not exempt from this section pursuant to subsection (C)(2) shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  A buffer shall be maintained for a minimum of 25 feet along both banks of streams and along all impoundments, as measured from the top of the bank of the stream or impoundment. All land disturbing activity is prohibited within the 25-foot buffer unless a variance or buffer encroachment permit is granted. 
(2)  A buffer shall be maintained for a minimum of 25 feet along all coastal marshlands, measured horizontally from the estuarine area. All land disturbing activity is prohibited within the 25-foot buffer unless a variance or buffer encroachment permit is granted. 
(3)  A buffer shall be maintained for a minimum of 25 feet along all wetlands as measured from the inland edge of the wetland. All land disturbing activity is prohibited within the 25-foot buffer unless a variance or buffer encroachment permit is granted pursuant to subsection (E) or subsection (G). 
(4)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer. 
(5)  The application of pesticides shall not be permitted in the buffer. 
(E)  Buffer encroachment permit. 
(1)  General. 
a.  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the coastal riparian buffer without first obtaining a buffer encroachment permit from the city to perform such activity. 
b.  Buffer encroachment permits may be issued by the city if the land disturbing activity constitutes construction of a porch, deck, boardwalk, or similar structure that is an accessory use to a residential dwelling, constructed and designed in accordance with applicable best management practices. In the case of construction of a structure to be located outside the buffer, an encroachment permit of no more than ten feet may be granted for construction purposes. All disturbed areas must be restored to a natural state. 
c.  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a permit: 
1.  Whether the buffer encroachment will result in a reduction of the quality of the water exiting the parcel, or a diminishment of a uniform coastal marshland scenic vista; 
2.  Whether the proposed development in the buffer will be conducted in accordance with all design guidelines, low impact development techniques, and other applicable best management practices; 
3.  Whether the proposed intrusion into the buffer is the minimum intrusion necessary to accomplish the purpose of the intrusion; 
4.  Whether a feasible alternative design exists that would result in no intrusion into the buffer. 
(2)  Application requirements and procedures. 
a.  The application for a buffer encroachment permit shall be submitted to the city and must include the following: 
1.  A site plan showing: 
(i)  The location of all riparian lands on or immediately adjacent to the property; 
(ii)  Identification of any streams found on the Clean Water Act § 303(d) list that are adjacent to the property; 
(iii)  Boundaries of the riparian buffer, as described by subsection (D), on the property; 
(iv)  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
(v)  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
(vi)  Detailed plans of all proposed land development and land disturbing activity on the site; 
2.  A description of any potential development impact on the buffer and how it will be avoided; 
3.  Any other documentation that the city may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the coastal riparian buffer ordinance is addressed in the approval process; and 
4.  Payment of the fee of $250.00. This fee will be forfeited if the project is subsequently abandoned. 
b.  The coastal riparian buffer shall be clearly delineated on all development plans and plats submitted for buffer encroachment permit approval, and buffer limits must be staked in the field in a manner approved by the city before and during construction with posted signs that describe allowable activities. Buffer boundaries shall be printed on all development and construction plans, plats, and official maps. 
c.  The applicant must pay the appropriate permit fee as provided in the fee schedule as adopted by the mayor and council and on file with the clerk of council. 
d.  In the event the designated city official(s) determines that all requirements for approval have not been met, it shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and shall automatically deny the permit. 
e.  An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the designated city official(s) to the city council provided that they file written notice of an appeal with the city clerk within 15 business days of the city's decision. Such appeal shall be considered by the city council at the next regular meeting held after the city's receipt of the written notice of appeal, provided that notice of appeal is received by the city council a minimum of ten full business days before the meeting. In the event an individual whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the city council, they may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court as provided by law. 
f.  The designated city official(s) shall inspect each lot for which a permit for a new land disturbing activity or for modification of an existing land disturbing activity is issued. This inspection shall occur on or before six months from the date of issuance of such permit. 
1.  If the land disturbing activity is not complete within six months from the date of issuance, the permit shall lapse and become void. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to engage in the land disturbing activity. If later, an individual desires to continue land disturbing activities at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
2.  If the land disturbing activity is substantially complete, but not in full compliance with this section the designated city official(s) shall give the applicant notice of the deficiencies and shall allow an additional 30 days from the date of inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse and become void. 
(F)  Inspection. The designated city official(s) or its authorized representative may inspect ongoing work in the buffer to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The landowner shall assist the designated city official(s) or authorized representative in making such inspections. The designated city official(s) shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this section, and to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land disturbing activities within the buffer protection area. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(G)  Variance procedure. Variances from the above buffer requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, and its shape, topography, or other existing physical condition prevents land disturbing activity consistent with this section, and such land disturbing activity cannot be authorized through issuance of a buffer encroachment permit, the city may grant a variance that shall allow a reduction in buffer width only to the extent necessary to provide relief from the conditions which prevented land disturbing activity on the parcel, provided adequate mitigation measures are implemented by the landowner to offset the effects of such variance. 
(2)  Variances shall not be considered when: 
a.  Following adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property; or 
b.  The owner previously applied for a buffer encroachment permit that was denied by the city. 
(3)  Except as provided above, the city shall grant no variance from any provision of this section. 
(4)  When a public hearing on the application for a variance is conducted, the city shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The city shall post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
(5)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, coastal marshlands, floodplain boundaries, and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation, and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance both inside and outside the buffer; 
d.  The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
e.  Documentation of the inability to develop the property without a variance; 
f.  Documentation that shows how buffer encroachment will be minimized to the greatest extent possible; 
g.  Documentation that shows how the buffer encroachment will not result in reduction of water quality or diminishment of a uniform coastal marshland scenic vista; 
h.  At least one alternative plan or an explanation of why such a plan is not possible; 
i.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed encroachment; 
j.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
k.  A proposed mitigation plan designed pursuant to applicable best management practices that offsets the effects of the proposed encroachment. If no mitigation is proposed, the application must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
•  Acceptable mitigation might include restoration and/or enhancement and protection of a degraded area of coastal riparian buffer on an adjacent or nearby property. 
l.  Payment of the variance fee of $200.00 for a residential project or $500.00 for a commercial project. 
(6)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  Whether the requirements of the riparian buffer represent an extreme hardship for the landowner, such that little or no reasonable economic use of the land is available without the reduction of the width of the riparian buffer; 
b.  Whether actions of the landowner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property; 
c.  The size, shape, topography, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property that may prevent land development; 
d.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer encroachment; 
e.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less or no intrusion; 
f.  The long-term water quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
g.  The water quality impacts of any construction that the granting of the variance would allow in the buffer; 
h.  Whether the issuance of a variance and the completion of the applicant's proposal will unreasonably interfere with the conservation of fish, shrimp, oysters, crabs, clams, or other marine life, wildlife, or other resources, including but not limited to water and oxygen supply; and 
i.  Whether the proposed development in the buffer will be conducted in accordance with all design guidelines, low impact development techniques, and applicable best management practices. 
(H)  Compatibility with other regulations and requirements. This section is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this section should be considered minimum requirements. Where any provision of this section imposes restrictions or protective standards different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive provision applies. 
The requirements of this section shall in no case be interpreted to preempt the need for other relevant local, state and federal permits and approvals. 
•  All land disturbing activities must comply with the requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 and all applicable best management practices therein. 
(1)  Setback area. In addition to the restrictions identified above, there is a setback area established within 25 feet from the edge of state waters and coastal marshlands as defined in subsection (B) and no land disturbing activities are permissible in the setback area except as provided by the exemptions stated in subsection (C)(2) and subject to the right of an applicant to seek an encroachment permit and/or variance under subsection (G) or section 5-090 or other applicable ordinance. The setback from such area is to be measured from the estuarine, wetland, or marsh area horizontally from the edge of such area. 
(I)  Violations, enforcement and penalties. Any action, or inaction, which violates the provisions of this section or the requirements of an approved site plan may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action, or inaction, which is continuous with respect to time, is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the city determines that a permittee or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this section, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such permittee or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this section without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this section and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hour notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the permittee or other responsible person in writing of its intended action and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than 72 hours (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hour notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the permittee or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
a.  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the permittee or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the permittee or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the permittee or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the permittee or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke, or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked, or modified permit may be reinstated after the permittee or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the permittee or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the permittee or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within 72 hours, or such lesser period as the city shall deem appropriate (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hour notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty on the permittee or other responsible person not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains un-remedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this section, the city may issue a citation to the permittee or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 39-C-2014, § 1, 8-14-2014) 
Sec. 3-100. - Beach, dune, or vegetation disturbance/crossover maintenance and construction. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to damage, destroy, remove or alter in any way the beach, dunes or vegetation thereon without having first obtained the proper federal, state and local permits. Special review shall be required for any alteration, construction or disturbance of beach, dunes or vegetation thereon including the alteration or construction of dune crossovers; provided, however city projects, approved special events or the maintenance of existing dune crossovers, including the replacement of supports, decking boards, pilings and or handrails, for placement in the same location as then currently exist, shall not require special review. 
There shall be a ten-foot setback measured from the landward toe of the landward-most dune as delineated by the state department of natural resources. 
(Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. of 4-23-2009; Ord. No. 23-2011, 4-14-2011; Ord. No. 23-2011(A), 8-11-2011; Ord. No. 27-2013, 8-22-2013; Ord. No. 43-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 3-110. - Single-family residential standards/manufactured home standards/recreational vehicle standards. 
All single-family residences, whether site built or manufactured housing, must meet the following standards: 
(A)  Structure and design standards. 
(1)  Corrugated metal or plastic panels are prohibited as roofing materials. 
(2)  The exterior wall shall be material similar to traditional site-built housing. These materials may include clapboards, simulated clapboards such as conventional vinyl or metal siding over a minimum covering of one-half inch exterior wood sheathing, wood shingles, shakes, stucco, brick, brick veneer, concrete block, or similar materials, but shall not include smooth, ribbed or corrugated metal or plastic panels. 
(3)  The minimum horizontal dimension of the unit as installed on the site shall be 24 feet. 
(4)  All structures must meet wind-loading requirements of federal emergency management administrator and the SBCCI Codes. 
(B)  Manufactured home safety standards. For the purposes of public safety, all manufactured homes or other such forms of modular or manufactured housing are subject to the following requirements. 
(1)  Manufactured home stand requirement. Prior to the issuance of a manufactured home relocation permit the owner of the parcel or lot for which the manufactured home is to be placed must have an approved manufactured home stand. Such stand must have the following: 
a.  Street access. Each manufactured home stand shall be provided with access frontage to a width of at least 30 feet to a public or private street or road. 
b.  Electric power supply. Each manufactured home stand shall be provided with an adequate, properly grounded, waterproofed electrical receptacle with a minimum rated capacity of 100 amps. A properly sized over current device shall be installed as a part of each power outlet. 
c.  Sewage disposal. Each manufactured home stand shall be provided with the means of disposing of kitchen, bath, and putrescible waste directly into a properly installed and inspected septic tank system or an approved community sewerage collection system. 
d.  Water service connection. Each manufactured home stand shall be provided with the means of connecting and being serviced by municipal water service. 
(2)  Manufactured home development in flood hazard areas. Due to the danger of placing a manufactured home in a flood hazard area, the following anchor requirements are required if a manufactured home is placed on a lot which is located in or adjacent to a flood hazard area as described by the federal emergency management association. 

 
This table is based on a minimum working load per tie of 3,150 pounds with a 50 percent overload (4,725 pounds total). 
a.  Multiple-wide manufactured homes shall only be required to have diagonal ties and anchors in accordance with the chart above unless the manufacturers installation instructions require more. 
b.  Single section manufactured homes shall have diagonal and vertical ties and anchors in accordance with the chart above unless manufacturer's instructions require more. 
(3)  All principal structures shall be placed on a permanent foundation. For the purposes of this section, a permanent foundation shall mean a concrete slab, concrete footers, foundation wall, pilings or post construction which complies with the city building code. 
(4)  Manufactured home siding, stairs, and foundation requirements: 
a.  All manufactured homes shall have siding materials consisting of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, or metal lap. The exterior siding material shall extend to ground level except that when a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the siding material need not extend below the top of the foundation. 
b.  Skirting and/or siding must be in place within 45 days from the date the relocation permit is issued. 
c.  Stairs and landings shall comply with section 112 — stairway construction of the state building code and must adhere to the following: 
1.  The height of the riser shall not exceed seven and three-fourths; inches, and treads, exclusive of nosing shall not be less than nine inches wide. 
2.  Every tread less than ten inches wide shall have a nosing, or effective protection, of approximately one-inch over the level immediately below that tread. 
3.  The width of the landing shall not be less than the width of the stairways they serve. 
4.  Every landing shall have a minimum dimension measured in the direction of travel equal to the width of the stairway. Such dimension need not exceed four feet when the stair has a straight run. 
5.  All stairways having treads located more than three risers above a floor or grade shall be equipped with a handrail not less than 30 nor more than 34 inches above the leading edge of the tread. 
6.  The minimum width of any stair serving as a means of egress shall be a minimum of 36 inches. 
7.  If handicapped ramps are added they must be at least three feet wide and the slope of the ramp shall not exceed one foot for every 12 feet. 
(5)  Foundation requirements on all manufactured homes are as follows: 
a.  Supports or piers shall not be more than two feet from the exterior end wall. 
b.  All grass and organic material shall be removed and the foundation must be placed on stable soil. 
c.  Crossover wires must be placed between the two halves. 
d.  All nails or staples shall be removed or sealed. 
e.  Reserved. 
f.  Dryer vents must be vented to the exterior of the manufactured home; not underneath. 
g.  In no case shall wheels, any undercarriage or transporter unit be left on any structure. 
(6)  Manufactured home additions and auxiliary structures. Any significant feature added to a manufactured home that was not part of the manufacturer's original design is considered to be either an addition or an auxiliary structure. 
a.  All habitable spaces added to the manufactured home shall be constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act or within the provisions of the state building codes. 
b.  All auxiliary structures (such as porches, decks, awnings, cabanas. stairs, etc., unless provided and approved by the manufacturer) shall be entirely self-supporting, unless designed and approved by a professional engineer or registered architect. All such structures shall be constructed in accordance with the state building codes. 
(C)  Temporary use of recreational vehicles on private property for dwelling purposes. No recreational vehicle shall be used for dwelling purposes on any lot in a residential district unless a temporary permit is acquired. Such permit shall be valid for up to seven days and the lot is only eligible for a permit three times per calendar year. Only one vehicle may be granted a permit for a lot during the duration of the permit. The temporary permit may be obtained from the zoning administrator during normal hours of operation at the city hail. There is no fee for this permit However, violation of this clause will be subject to the same enforcement as all other regulations of this Land Development Code. 
(Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. Ord. No. 25-2011, 6-9-2011; Ord. No. 18-2014, § 1, 2-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-120. - Access to public street required. 
No structure shall be constructed or erected upon a lot, or parcel of land, which does not abut upon an open public street or permanent easement of access to an open public street. Such easement shall have a minimum width of 20 feet unless an easement of lesser width was of record prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 26-2011, 7-28-2011; Ord. No. 18-2014, § 1, 2-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-130. - Structures to be moved. 
(A)  Existing structure to be moved. Any structure which has been wholly or partially erected on any premises located within the city shall not be moved to any other premises in the city until a permit for such removal is secured from the building and zoning department. Any such building or structure shall conform to all provisions of this Land Development Code in the same manner as a new building or structure. Structures that are determined to be historic and are contributing to the historic character of the neighborhood or are eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places may be exempt from having to come into compliance with current building codes as determined by the State Historic Preservation office. 
(B)  Modular structures to be moved. No structure shall be moved into the city from outside the city until such compliance has been shown and such permit has been secured. Before a permit may be issued for moving a structure, the building official shall inspect the same and shall determine if it is in compliance with all city and state regulations. In addition, all modular units wishing to be located within the city limits must first provide to the community development office the appropriate state certification for the construction of such a structure from the department of community affairs. 
(Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 36-2010, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 18-2014, § 1, 2-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-140. - Unsafe structures. 
Nothing in this Land Development Code shall prevent the temporary strengthening to a safe condition of any structure declared to be unsafe by the building official. 
(Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 37-2010, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 18-2014, § 1, 2-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-150. - Prohibited uses in residential districts. 
Under no circumstances shall the following be permitted in any residential zoning district: 
(A)  The parking or storing of unoccupied house trailers or converted buses in excess of 24 feet shall not be permitted. 
(B)  Commercial tractor trailers or rigs shall not be parked or stored on residentially zoned property at any time with the exception of trailers used for supply and equipment storage of a properly permitted construction site. 
(C)  It shall be a prohibited use in all residentially zoned districts to park or store power driven construction equipment, used lumber or metal, or any other miscellaneous scrap or salvageable material in quantity. 
(Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 09-2011, 4-14-11; Ord. No. 18-2014, § 1, 2-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-160. - Protective screening of adjacent property where commercial use and residential use abut. 
No buffer is required for a commercial use adjacent to a commercial use. In cases where a commercial and residential use abut or will abut and where: 
(A)  New construction is proposed; or 
(B)  Existing improvements are to be expanded by enlarging the footprint of existing occupied or usable improved space by 25 percent or more; or 
(C)  A change in the kind, character or degree of use of improved property is proposed, and there is no existing buffer in place on the property that is to be improved or any existing buffer on such property would not meet the requirements below, the owner or applicant shall be required to seek special review unless a buffer satisfying the following requirements is met: 
(1)  Basic requirements. 
a.  An arboreal landscaped buffer not less than five feet wide with a well maintained masonry wall or privacy fence no less than eight feet in height above grade shall be provided and properly maintained along its entire length by the users of the property to be built upon or expanded. Such buffer shall be planted with deciduous trees, evergreens, flowering trees, ornamental trees, or any combination of the same not set further than ten feet apart at any given point along the buffer. The buffer shall be measured from the property line of the property to be improved. A street, sidewalk or other like improvement may be permissible as a buffer under subsections (C)(2) and (3). In no instance will a dumpster or mechanical unit be permitted in a buffer. 
b.  The area beneath and between the planted trees shall be kept free of foreign debris and unmanaged undergrowth. All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
c.  All planting plans shall be first submitted to the city zoning department during the review process for approval of the planting materials and arrangement thereof in accordance with the provisions of this Land Development Code. 
(2)  Special review. In any case of any plans or proposed plans which do not meet the requirements of subsection (C)(1), council may treat the proposed plan as requesting special review which shall be required in connection therewith. The mayor and council may impose conditions or buffers designed to protect the properties including adding or reducing buffer requirements, restricting or expanding uses within the buffer area, additional or reduced fencing, vegetation and/or any other restrictions or conditions reasonably designed to protect the abutting property as well as the property sought to be improved. 
(3)  For the special review referred to above, such review shall be combined with the site plan application filed with any proposed application for site plan review in connection with improvements, changes, or additions to any commercial use to abut a residential use. No separate public hearing shall be required for the special review nor any additional filing fee required of the applicant. It is the intention hereof that council conduct special review of the landscaping application if it differs from those conditions specified by subsection (C)(1) in every case in connection with the site plan application. 
(Ord. No. 1999-24, 8-12-1999; Ord. No. 2000-09, 2-11-2000; Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 2000-09, amended 5-24-2000; Ord. No. 1999-24, amended 10-7-1999; Ord. No. 15-2011, 9-22-2011; Ord. No. 12-2014-A, § 1, 2-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-165. - Greenspace. 
In all zoning districts, 65 percent of the designated setback area of a lot shall remain in a vegetative state. This greenspace requirement shall require that at least 65 percent of the required setback area for a parcel remain in a natural vegetative state, and is not to be reduced by setback area averaging or variances granted so that the square footage required is calculated without regard to the averaging or a variance granted. 
(Ord. No. 1999-24, 8-12-1999; Ord. No. 2000-10, 2-11-2000; Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 2000-10, add 5-24-2000; Ord. No. 16-2011, 6-9-2011; Ord. No. 18-2014, § 1, 2-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-170. - Home occupations and home business offices. 
Profit-making activities conducted in homes fall into two classes: home occupations and home business offices. 
(A)  Home occupation. If permitted in a land use district, it must comply with the following requirements. It shall be allowed, provided that it: 
(1)  Is carried on by a member(s) of the family residing in the dwelling unit only. One employee who is not part of the family is permitted; 
(2)  Is conducted entirely within the principle structure; 
(3)  Utilizes not more than 25 percent of the total floor area of the principle structure; 
(4)  Produces no alteration or change in the character or exterior or change in the principle structure from that of a dwelling; 
(5)  Involves no sale or offering for sale of any article not produced or assembled by members of the family, or any service not entirely performed by members of the family, residing on the premises; 
(6)  Creates no disturbing or offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, traffic hazard, unhealthy or unsightly condition; 
(7)  There shall be no sign or external indication of the business. 
(B)  Home business office. If permitted in a land use district, it must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  There shall be no sign or external indication of the business office. 
(2)  No more than two vehicles and/or trailers used in the conduction of the business may be parked at the home location. 
(3)  The office may occupy no more than 25 percent of the floor area of the principle structure. 
(4)  The office must be located in the principle structure. 
(5)  Only residents of the dwelling may engage in work at the office. 
(Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 17-2011, 6-9-2011; Ord. No. 18-2014, § 1, 2-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-180. - Satellite receiving dish antenna. 
A satellite dish shall be allowed in all zones; however, in all residential zones the following requirements shall apply: 
(A)  Dish shall not extend more than three feet above the highest point of the roof nor be greater than 18 inches in diameter. Satellite receiving antennas placed upon the ground shall not exceed 18 inches in diameter. 
(B)  Location of the antenna must be approved by the building official prior to installation. 
(C)  A property owner who has in place a nonconforming antenna at the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived may continue to maintain the antenna. 
In all zoning districts, antenna will be placed so as not to create a hazard to traffic or public utilities. 
(Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005) 
Sec. 3-190. - Swimming pool requirements and placement. 
All swimming pools, spas, and saunas shall comply with the following requirements: 
(A)  Application for a permit to construct a swimming pool, spa, or sauna must be submitted to the building official. The structural plans must be approved by the building official prior to the issuance of a permit and the beginning of construction and/or excavation. A drainage plan prepared by a registered professional engineer will be required unless the city staff determines that due to the size, method of construction, location, or other characteristics of the proposed swimming pool, spa, or sauna, a drainage plan is unnecessary under the circumstances. 
(B)  Swimming pools, spas, and saunas and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment may be located in either the side or rear yard and shall be at least five feet from the property line. 
(C)  Swimming pool, spa, and sauna construction must meet all requirements of the codes adopted by the City of Tybee Island. 
(D)  Once a swimming pool, spa, or sauna and its accessories have passed a final inspection it shall be a violation of this section to remove or alter any of the equipment that is required by: the International Residential Code — Appendix G, the International Building Code — Section 3109, the National Electrical Code, and the Georgia State Amendments. Failure to maintain the safety related and/or electrical equipment in good and working order shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(E)  No swimming pools, spas, or saunas shall be placed across, on, or beneath any utility easements nor shall any utility easement be granted which bisects a swimming pool, nor be located within five feet of any marsh buffers as delineated by the state department of natural resources. 
(F)  When a swimming pool, its deck, or other accessory to a swimming pool is proposed for construction on a site that has already been improved, the swimming pool plans and permit application will be reviewed by the city engineer. 
(1)  if there is an approved drainage plan for the site the city engineer will review the plans for the swimming pool, deck and accessory structure to ensure that the proposed improvements will not materially affect the drainage of the site. If they will materially affect the drainage of the site the applicant will have to have a drainage plan prepared by a design professional before a permit for the swimming pool, deck or accessory will be issued. 
(2)  If the site was improved without a drainage plan, the city engineer will review the pool plans and permit application to ensure that the swimming pool, deck or accessory structure will not increase the amount of run-off leaving the site. 
(G)  Any permit for a swimming pool is required to contain a soil and erosion plan for the proposed site prior to the issuance of a permit and commencement of any construction related activity. 
(Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 28-2010, 10-28-2010; Ord. No. 18-2014, § 1, 2-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-200. - Decks, walkways and patios. 
Decks and patios, as defined in Article 2, and walkways no higher than one foot above the nearest adjacent grade may be placed anywhere within the property boundaries. Decks and patios, as defined in Article 2, and walkways that extend beyond one-foot of the nearest adjacent grade shall be required to meet all front, side and rear setback requirements. 
(Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 29-2010, 10-28-2010; Ord. No. 33A-1-2012, 12-13-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 33A-1-2012, adopted December 13, 2012, amended App. A, § 3-200 to read as set out herein. Former App. A, § 3-200 pertained to decks and patios. 
Sec. 3-210. - Child day care facilities. 
Child day care facilities, when located in a district as a permitted use shall have a minimum of 100 square feet of outdoor play area [and] shall be provided for each child. Such outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four feet in height. 
(Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005) 
Sec. 3-220. - Amusement parks and areas of amusement. 
Whether an area is owned, leased or rented, the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages is not permitted on the property of any amusement park or within any area of commercial amusements, including but not limited to a merry-go-round, ferris wheel, bounce house, water slide, pony ride and/or any other such commercial entertainments, whether or not located on the property of any amusement park. Such area of amusement shall at a minimum be confined within secure fencing posted with prominent signage at each entrance stating: 
No Alcohol Beyond this Point. 
Additional regulation of an amusement may be imposed by city council during consideration of a special event application. See chapter 54, article III — Special events. 
(Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 20-2011, 4-28-2011; Ord. No. 05-2014, § 1, 1-9-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-2014, § 1, adopted January 9, 2014, amended § 3-220 to read as set out herein. Previously § 3-220 was titled amusement parks. 
Sec. 3-230. - Turtle nesting protection. 
The beaches of the city serve as a prime nesting site for sea turtles, an endangered species. Coastal development threatens the survival of sea turtles because artificial lighting discourages nesting females and causes disorientation of hatchlings during the nesting season, which runs from May 1 through October 31 each year. It is the intention of the city to offer protection to these endangered sea turtles by providing standards for lighting in the shore protection area adjacent to the city's beaches. For the purposes of this section, the protected nesting area shall be the sand beaches of the city. 
(A)  Exceptions. The following point sources of artificial light are exempt from the provisions of this section: 
(1)  All lights necessary for the safe navigation of vessels utilizing the waters surrounding the city; 
(2)  All lights necessary to mark obstructions to the safe use of airspace over, above and around the city; 
(3)  All lights necessary for regulating the safe passage and movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the city; 
(4)  Any light that has been specifically designated by the fire and/or police commissioner(s) as necessary for the security and safety of the human inhabitants of the city. 
(B)  New development. Building and electrical plans for new construction including parking lots, dune crossovers, and all other outdoor lighting that can be seen from the beach shall comply as follows: 
(1)  Floodlights shall be shielded and mounted so that no light illuminates the beach and the point source of light is not visible from the beach. 
(2)  Pole lighting shall be shielded and mounted so that light is directed away from the seaward side of the pole and the point source of light is not visible from the beach. 
(3)  Low profile luminaries shall be positioned so that no light shines directly onto the beach. 
(4)  Dune crossovers shall utilize low profile shielded lighting so that no light illuminates the beach and the point source of the light is not visible from the beach. 
(5)  Lights illuminating structures and grounds shall be shielded or screened so that they do not illuminate the beach and the point source of light is not visible from the beach, or they shall be turned off from sunset to sunrise during the period of May 1 through October 31 of each year. 
(6)  Temporary security lights at construction sites shall not be mounted higher than 15 feet above ground and shall be positioned not to illuminate the beach. 
(C)  Existing development. All lighting shall come into compliance with the following standards: 
(1)  Lights illuminating structures and grounds shall be shielded or screened so that they do not illuminate the beach and the point source of light is not visible from the beach, or they shall be turned off from sunset to sunrise during the period of May 1 through October 31 of each year. 
(2)  Lights illuminating crossovers shall be shielded or screened so that they do not illuminate the beach and the point source of light is not visible from the beach, or they shall be turned off during the period of May 1 through October 31 of each year. 
(3)  Security lighting shall be shielded or screened so that the beach is not illuminated and the point source of light is not visible from the beach, or low profile luminaries may be used. 
(D)  Publicly owned lighting. Streetlights and lighting of publicly owned beach access areas must be in compliance with the following: 
(1)  Streetlights shall be located, shielded or shaded so that they will not directly illuminate the beach and the point source of light is not visible from the beach. 
(2)  Lights at parks or other public beach access points shall be shielded or shaded so that they will not directly illuminate the beach and the point source of light is not visible from the beach or, if not necessary for security or public safety, utilization may be discontinued during the nesting season. 
(Ord. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 21-2011, 6-9-2011; Ord. No. 18-2014, § 1, 2-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-240. - Wetlands protection. 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required prior to the issuance of a permit for any regulated activity within the wetland protection district. If the corps determines that wetlands are present and that a Section 404 permit or letter of permission is required, no permit for the regulated activity will be issued until the corps has issued the Section 404 permit or letter of permission. If the corps determines that there are no wetlands present on the proposed development site, the city may proceed with its normal permitting procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2000-11, 2-11-2000; Ord. No. Correction to dates, amended 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 2000-11 Wetlands Protection, add 5-24-2000; Ord. No. 22-2011, 4-28-2011; Ord. No. 18-2014, § 1, 2-27-2014) 
Sec. 3-250. - Private parking lots. 
Notwithstanding any other ordinances or provisions to the contrary, individuals and entities owning commercially zoned property, including C-1 and/or C-2, and for the R-2 properties currently licensed, a list of which is attached hereto, and a currently permitted lot in the North End Cultural Overlay District, suitable for vehicular parking may apply to the city for a business license so as to be authorized to charge for parking on their property so long as the property abuts a public road. The business license shall authorize the holder thereof to rent parking spaces solely on the holder's property between the hours of 10:00 a.m. to dusk or one-hour before and one-hour after a city approved special event. Trash and recycling containers must be provided on site. Property markers/corners must be marked in orange on the property during hours of operation. It shall be unlawful to rent spaces in any district without a valid business license issued by the city. All spaces must be full sized parking spaces. It shall be unlawful to park vehicles that are not wholly on the private property of the approved location. Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of licensing. 
With submittal of the application for business license, each applicant must provide the city with a valid professional survey of the lot which is to be used along with the site plan showing the parking spaces and structure(s). These submittals are required to have a scaled drawing of the parking spaces to be located upon the proposed location to the standards of the required off-street parking dimensions of subsection 3-080(e) including drive aisles widths. All spaces must be sized to accommodate full sized vehicles. If the applicant for a private parking lot is not the property owner, a notarized affidavit authorizing the applicant to operate a private parking lot is required. 
After the submittal of the application, staff shall have the authority to recommend to council a maximum number of spaces allowed to be utilized at the requested parking lot. Upon submittal of the application with all pertinent application materials and following proper notification to adjacent property owners of the application, the mayor and council will consider the request for application at a scheduled meeting of the city council. Public comments, if any, will be allowed to be made at these meetings. 
Council may reject any such application or may approve the application with conditions designed to protect neighboring properties and households and customers including, but not limited to, restricting the number of vehicles allowed to be parked on site, the location of vehicle parking, the type of vehicles permissible for the location, the hours of operation, the requirement of security measures, buffers, noise control methods and any other conditions or requirements reasonably designed to lessen the impact of activity upon other properties or citizens. 
All private parking lot properties shall be marked with a maximum of one sign not to exceed two square feet in area located at a minimum of five feet off the improved portion of the public right-of-way and not attached or placed on any sign, utility pole, bench, rock or any form of vegetation. The sign shall contain the name of the contact person or company and a telephone number. 
Any and all vehicles owned by the property owner(s), the parking lot attendant(s) and by friends or family of the property owner(s) and/or attendants(s) or otherwise parked on the property shall count toward the maximum number of spaces that are to be rented. 
Application for renewal of a license to operate a private parking lot shall be due by December 15 for the upcoming calendar year. The applicant shall provide with submittal for renewal all the items that had been required with the initial application. Each application for renewal of a license to operate a private parking lot on Tybee Island will be subject to an annual review during the month of January for compliance. Any and all incident reports and citations shall be considered during the annual review. If compliance has not been met the license may be revoked by city council upon a hearing that will take place during a regularly scheduled city council meeting or an application for renewal may be rejected. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as giving any person a right to provide or to continue private parking facilities but, rather, the authorization to provide such is a privilege and not a right. Following notice and hearing, the mayor and council may revoke, suspend, or refuse to renew any license previously granted upon a finding that the license-holder, his agent, representative, or employee has failed to comply with all terms and conditions of the license or has failed to comply with other relevant ordinances of the city or other applicable law(s). 
Amended site plans excluding the annual review will cost an additional $50.00 to cover administrative cost. Each license is subject to the base annual business license fee and regulatory fee upon approval of the application. The owner shall provide proof of insurance coverage prior to licensing. 
(Ord. No. 02-2010, 2-25-2010; Ord. No. 09-2010, 5-27-2010; Ord. No. 19B-2012, 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 14-2013-A, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
ARTICLE 4. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 4-010. - List of districts. 
The following districts of the City of Tybee Island are hereby created: 
(A)  R-1 single-family residential; 
(B)  R-010-B single-family residential; 
(C)  R-2 one and two-family residential; 
(D)  R-T residential tourism; 
(E)  C-1 beach business; 
(F)  C-2 highway business; 
(G)  NM neighborhood marina; 
(H)  TBR transitional business-residential; 
(I)  PC parks-conservation; 
(J)  EC environmental-conservation; 
(K)  PUD planned unit development; 
(L)  MD maritime district; 
(M)  Reserved; 
(N)  Reserved; 
(O)  South End business overlay district; 
(P)  North End parks and public overlay district; 
(Q)  North End cultural overlay district; 
(R)  Neighborhood grocery store district. 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, 2-11-2000; Ord. No. 2000-13, amended 5-24-2000; Ord. of 6-26-2008(1); Ord. No. 29-2008, § I, 1-8-2009, § I; Ord. No. 15-2009, 10-22-2009) 
Sec. 4-020. - District boundaries. 
The location of boundaries and zoning districts shall be shown on a map entitled "Tybee Island Zoning Map" dated April 22, 1999, as amended and readopted on December 10, 1999, and as amended and readopted on March 27, 2014, and said map may be amended subsequent to the adoption thereof; and said map is made part of this Land Development Code and a second original of such map shall be attached to the minutes of the meetings for the first and second readings of this Land Development Code and said map is hereby incorporated herein to the same extent as if the information set forth on said map was fully described and stated herein. Amendments to the zoning map shall be reflected on the "Tybee Island Zoning Map of the City of Tybee Island" when they become effective and said map shall be on file in the office of the clerk of council of the city. This section repeals the prior zoning map and substitutes the map dated March 27, 2014, in its stead. 
Tybee Island Zoning Map block 
The city zoning map was adopted following public hearings the 27th day of March, 2014. This map incorporates the map originally adopted April 22, 1999, and readopted on December 10, 1999, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1999-07, 4-22-1999; Ord. No. 1999-, amended 12-17-1999; Ord. No. 1999-07, amended 5-24-1999; Ord. No. 19-2014, § 1, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 4-030. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Unless otherwise shown on the zoning map, the boundary lines of districts are: 
(A)  Rear lot lines; 
(B)  The centerline of streets, alleys or extended from such points where specific linear distances are denoted on the "official zoning map;" 
(C)  Railroad right-of-way lines; 
(D)  Shore line of creeks, rivers, and ocean; or, 
(E)  The corporate limit line as it exists at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
Questions regarding the exact location of district boundary lines shall be determined by the mayor and council in accordance with the provisions of this Land Development Code. 
Sec. 4-040. - Zone line dividing a lot. 
In most instances, zoning district lines on the zoning map are drawn to follow streets, land lot lines, property lines, and other natural divisions. In the event a zone line should divide a lot or parcel of land, the entire lot or parcel shall be considered to be that of the least intense land use classification. 
Sec. 4-050. - Zoning districts. 
(A)  R-1 residence district. This land use district is established to minimize development densities in certain portions of the island to prevent overall development on the island from exceeding its environmental carrying capacity. Also, to provide for quiet, livable, low-density single-family neighborhoods including compatible and supporting low impact educational, religious, and public institutions, as well as limited provisions for bed and breakfast operations. The character of development in these areas is oriented for permanent residents. This district shall remain single-family residential with some light family oriented service uses. Commercial and industrial uses are incompatible with this district. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right. In a R-1 residence district, land may be used and buildings or structures may be erected or used for the following purposes: 
a.  Single-family dwellings; 
b.  Nonhabitable accessory buildings; 
c.  Public utility structures; 
d.  Home business offices; and, 
e.  Public community buildings, libraries, recreation centers and museums. 
(2)  Uses permitted after special review. In an R-1 residence district, land may be used and buildings or structures may be erected or used for the land uses listed below after a hearing has been held by the planning commission and the mayor and council has granted approval at a scheduled meeting: 
a.  Bed and breakfast, residential; 
b.  Reserved; 
c.  Primary and secondary schools; 
d.  Nursing homes and ancillary activities; 
e.  Public parks and neighborhood playgrounds; 
f.  Churches, including Sunday schools or educational buildings; 
g.  Schools of general education, including kindergarten and day nurseries; 
h.  Guest cottages; and, 
i.  Home occupations. 
(B)  R-1-B residence district. In an R-1-B residence district, land may be used and buildings or structures may be erected or used for the purposes stated above in the R-010 residence district regulations; the only distinguishing factor being one of density. [See section 3-090(1), "schedule of residential district dimensional requirements."] The purpose of R-010-B districts is to provide a transition from R-010 to higher density development. This is intended to ensure adequate infrastructure capacity and mitigate adverse impacts associated with more intensive land uses. 
(C)  R-2 one- and two-family residential district. The purpose of this district is to provide for affordable development of single-family and duplex style development. This district is intended for medium density residential neighborhoods which are quiet and livable. This district includes a mixture of one- and two-family homes with compatible educational, religious, and public institutions as well as limited home occupations. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right. In an R-2 residence district, land may be used and buildings or structures may be erected, altered, or used for the following purposes: 
a.  Uses permitted in R-1 residence district; and 
b.  Two-family dwellings, (see also subdivision regulations). 
(2)  Uses permitted after special review. In an R-2 residence district, land may be used and buildings or structures may be erected or used for the land uses listed below after a hearing has been held by the planning commission and the mayor and council has granted approval at a scheduled meeting. 
a.  Uses permitted after special review in R-1 residence district. 
(D)  R-T residential tourist district. The purpose of this district is to provide for areas where tourists and residents are mixed. Development in this district is primarily residential; however, limited accommodations are made for the housing of the tourist population visiting overnight, weekends, weeks, or extended periods. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right. In an R-T residential tourist district, land may be used and buildings or structures may be erected, altered or used for the following purposes: 
a.  Uses permitted by right in R-2 residence district only. 
(2)  Uses permitted after special review. In an R-T residence district, land may be used and buildings or structures may be erected or used for the land uses listed below after a site plan has been submitted to the zoning administrator, a hearing has been held by the planning commission, and the mayor and council has granted approval at a scheduled meeting. 
a.  Apartment houses and condominiums exceeding two units. 
b.  Bed and breakfast inns, exceeding five units per lot subject to an approved site development plan as required in Article 5. 
c.  Theater facilities or houses that are historical in nature, when the review process includes standards and/or restrictions as to hours of operation, and requirements with respect to lighting, signage, and buffering so as not to unreasonably interfere with the residential uses of abutting properties. A parking plan shall also accompany any such application. Any permitted use must adhere to the approved standards, restrictions and parking plans and any other conditions imposed by the mayor and council. 
Neither a site plan nor special approval is required on internal changes to existing structures unless it causes or requires external changes to meet the requirements of this Land Development Code. 
(E)  C-1 beach business district. The purpose and intent of commercial districts is to provide central locations for city business and services to meet the market needs of the city's residents and visitors. The focus of the C-1 beach business land use district is to provide for commercial and residential land uses that support and complement recreational use of the beach and general tourism of the island. The land uses permitted in this district provide for a substantial amount of the island's employment base. The amount of C-1 acreage is directly proportional to the city's economic activity. These land uses are designed to harness economic activity of the daytime visitor as well as residents and overnight visitors. 
Multi-family uses are not permissible in the following areas included within the C-1 beach business district: 
(i) On the lots abutting Butler Avenue on the east and west sides thereof, from 14th Street, commencing at its southernmost intersection with Butler Avenue, to Izlar Avenue at its southernmost intersection with Butler Avenue; 
(ii) On lots abutting Tybrisa Street on the north and south sides from Butler Avenue to Strand Street; and 
(iii) On lots on Strand Street abutting that street on the western boundary thereof from 14th Street beginning at its northernmost intersecting point with Strand Street to 17th Street at its northernmost intersecting point with Strand Street. Notwithstanding the foregoing, multi-family residential uses shall be permissible on floors above the first or ground floor of business establishments located in such areas. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right after site plan approval. In a C-1 beach business district, land may be used and buildings or structures may be erected or used for the land uses listed below after a site plan has been submitted to the zoning administrator, the planning commission has reviewed the site plan and made comments, and the mayor and council has granted site plan approval at a scheduled meeting. 
a.  Apartments, condominiums, townhouses, guest cottages, hotels, motels, time shares, tourist homes, bed and breakfast inns; plus single-family, two-family, three-family, and four-family dwellings; 
b.  Apothecary shops; 
c.  Gift shops; 
d.  Barbershops, beauty shops; 
e.  Finance, investment and insurance offices; 
f.  Florist shops; 
g.  Restaurants, concession stands; 
h.  Commercial amusements, including amusement parks and other commercial games and sports; 
i.  Retail stores; and 
j.  Public structures. 
(2)  Uses permitted after special review and site plan approval. In a C-1 beach business district, land may be used and buildings or structures may be erected or used for the land uses listed below after a site plan has been submitted to the zoning administrator, a hearing has been held by the planning commission, and the mayor and council has granted approval at a scheduled meeting. At these public meetings, the proposed land is reviewed under criteria for both site plan approval and special approval. 
a.  Lounges and package shops, for the retail sale of malt and alcoholic beverages. 
b.  Dwellings or structures rented for special events. For all uses in a dwelling or structure to be rented for special events as defined herein, special approval and review shall include consideration of all relevant factors including but not limited to the availability of parking or an appropriate parking plan, the hours of operation and any limitations to be placed thereon, the capacity of the dwelling or structure in terms of occupancy, compliance with applicable noise limitations with the express authority of the mayor and council to impose stricter requirements than would otherwise be permissible for the impacted zoning districts; the use of live entertainment or amplified sound equipment subject to limitations to be placed thereon; and approval by the planning and zoning department; the methods of lighting signage and buffering as necessary to provide reasonable protection to nearby property owners. 
Each such authorized structure shall be subject to an established occupancy as determined by the fire marshal and events that are likely to result in an occupancy greater than that permitted shall require an additional application to the city with adequate information for staff to assess the additional impact from the anticipated occupancy including all of the factors listed herein and to permit staff to grant a permit for such event with additional conditions. For events that contemplate the use of premises outdoors, the occupancy shall be based upon a calculation of one person per 15 square feet of usable exterior space. 
As used herein the term "dwellings or structures rented for special events" means a facility used or available for hire for festivities, parties, receptions, weddings, ceremonies and similar activities or occasions conducted on the property. 
A "parking plan" as used herein may include off-site parking arranged by the applicant or owner subject to the approval of the planning and zoning department; parking must accommodate one place per four persons as determined by occupancy as specified herein. 
Any permitted use must adhere to the approved standards, restrictions, plans and conditions imposed by the mayor and council and/or the planning and zoning department. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any approved site plan or any other ordinance to the contrary, the city has adopted a policy pertaining to special use of designated off-street parking areas in C-1 beach business district so as to allow a commercial business to use its private off-street parking area for an outdoor event when all of the conditions are met under the policy. The policy is on file with the clerk of council and with the zoning department. The policy may be changed from time to time by the mayor and council in accordance with this Code. 
Neither a site plan nor special approval is required on internal changes to existing structures unless it causes or requires external changes to meet the requirements of this Land Development Code. 
(F)  C-2 highway business district. The purpose and intent of commercial districts is to provide central locations for city business and services to meet the market needs of the city's residents and visitors. The focus of the C-2 highway business land use district is to provide for commercial land uses that support and complement the motorized consumer. C-2 districts are intended for location along arterial streets where the negative impacts of traffic congestion, noise, intrusions into residential neighborhoods will be minimized. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right after site plan approval. In a C-2 business district, land may be used and buildings or structures may be erected, altered or used only for the following purposes once the required site plan has been reviewed by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and council: 
a.  Service stations; 
b.  Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants; 
c.  Gift shops (goods sold within an enclosed building); 
d.  Motels; 
e.  Grocery stores; 
f.  Tourist homes and bed and breakfast inns; 
g.  Parks, playgrounds and recreation facilities under the supervision of the city; 
h.  Professional and business offices; 
i.  Retail stores; 
j.  Marinas; and 
k.  Seafood warehouses, retail and wholesale sales. 
(2)  Uses permitted after special review and site plan approval. In a C-2 highway business district, land may be used and buildings or structures may be erected or used for the land uses listed below after a site plan has been submitted to the zoning administrator, a hearing has been held by the planning commission, and the mayor and council has granted approval at a scheduled meeting. At these public meetings, the proposed land is reviewed under criteria for both site plan approval and special approval. 
a.  Lounges and package shops for the retail sale of malt and alcoholic beverages. 
b.  Dwellings or structures rented for special events. For all uses in a dwelling or structure to be rented for special events as defined herein, special approval and review shall include consideration of all relevant factors including but not limited to the availability of parking or an appropriate parking plan, the hours of operation and any limitations to be placed thereon, the capacity of the dwelling or structure in terms of occupancy, compliance with applicable noise limitations with the express authority of the mayor and council to impose stricter requirements than would otherwise be permissible for the impacted zoning districts; the use of live entertainment or amplified sound equipment subject to limitations to be placed thereon; and approval by the planning and zoning; the methods of lighting signage and buffering as necessary to provide reasonable protection to nearby property owners. 
Each such authorized structure shall be subject to an established occupancy as determined by the fire marshal and events that are likely to result in an occupancy greater than that permitted shall require an additional application to the city with adequate information for staff to assess the additional impact from the anticipated occupancy including all of the factors listed herein and to permit staff to grant a permit for such event with additional conditions. For events that contemplate the use of premises outdoors, the occupancy shall be based upon a calculation of one person per 15 square feet of usable exterior space. 
As used herein the term "dwellings or structures rented for special events" means a facility used or available for hire for festivities, parties, receptions, weddings, ceremonies and similar activities or occasions conducted on the property. 
A "parking plan" as used herein may include off-site parking arranged by the applicant or owner subject to the approval of the planning and zoning department. Parking must accommodate one place per four persons as determined by occupancy as specified herein. 
Any permitted use must adhere to the approved standards, restrictions, plans and conditions imposed by the mayor and council and/or the planning and zoning department. 
c.  Miniature golf courses. 
d.  Uses as of right: 
1.  Residential uses permissible in the R-2 district including those permissible as of right and after special review. The uses permissible in R-2 after special review shall also require special review to be permissible in the C-2 zone. 
2.  Following required site plan approval for commercial development residential uses above commercial shall be allowed by right if onsite parking is available. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any approved site plan or any other ordinance to the contrary, the city has adopted a policy pertaining to special use of designated off-street parking areas in C-2 highway business district so as to allow a commercial business to use its private off-street parking area for an outdoor event when all of the conditions are met under the policy. The policy is on file with the clerk of council and with the zoning department. The policy may be changed from time to time by the mayor and council in accordance with this Code. 
Neither a site plan nor special approval is required on internal changes to existing structures unless it causes or requires external changes to meet the requirements of this Land Development Code. 
(G)  N-M neighborhood marina district. The purpose of this district is to reserve those waterfront areas which have value for commercial land uses involving pleasure and commercial watercraft. The N-M district is intended to be used for neighborhood marina facilities with a modest scale of operation. These facilities shall be developed to be compatible with any adjacent residential properties and shall not be detrimental to persons or property on or off the site. 
(1)  General requirements. A site plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and to the mayor and council for approval that meets the requirements of Article 5 and contains the following information: 
a.  A document indicating the general operating hours of all activities to be included in the marina and what safeguards are to be used to insure that the marina's activities will not become or represent a nuisance or hazard to the surrounding property owners or tenants thereof. Examples of additional subjects to be covered shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, probable flooding, erosion, fire, explosion and subsidence of the proposed buildings and structures. 
(2)  Design standards. The development plan shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Access shall be located, designed and improved for safety, convenience, efficient circulation, on the property and minimum interference with normal traffic flow on adjoining streets. Driveways and curb cuts intersecting with public rights-of-way shall be marked and shall not exceed a maximum width of 30 feet. Curbs, blockades, bumper blocks or other devices shall be used to control and channel traffic, to separate pedestrian ways from vehicular ways, and to prevent entry to and from adjoining streets except via a designated driveway. 
b.  Yards shall be provided as required for the adjoining districts and shall be landscaped and improved in a manner appropriate to the residential character of the adjacent district; provided, however, that a street front and residential side setback be a minimum of five feet when a six-foot minimum height solid faced and continuous fence, or other structure with no openings shall be erected and maintained. Any hedge and other screening structures shall screen the adjoining property from the activities of the marina. 
c.  The structure(s) housing the activities of the marina shall not occupy more than 40 percent of the total lot area. 
d.  Only one principal use sign shall be visible from the adjacent public street. That sign shall not exceed a maximum size of 32 square feet in area nor eight feet in any outer dimension. Any sign if illuminated shall be externally lit, nonflashing and containing no neon illumination. The maximum height of the sign shall not exceed 15 feet above the average ground elevation of the base of the sign or from the structure foundation to which it is attached. No sign shall be located closer than five feet to the property line or street right-of-way. 
e.  Plans for extensions and/or business expansion will be accompanied by a detailed proposal and submitted to the governing body for approval prior to implementation. 
f.  All structures built within this district shall comply with the same height requirements specified in section 3-090 for R-020. 
(3)  Uses permitted by right after site plan approval. In an N-M neighborhood marina district, land may be used and buildings or structures may be erected or used for the land uses listed below after a site plan has been submitted to the zoning administrator, the planning commission has reviewed the site plan and made comments, and the mayor and council has granted site plan approval at a scheduled meeting. 
a.  Boat launching facilities; 
b.  Bait shops; and 
c.  Retail sale of boating provisions. 
(4)  Uses permitted after special review and site plan approval. In an N-M neighborhood marina district, land may be used and buildings or structures may be erected or used for the land uses listed below after a site plan has been submitted to the zoning administrator, a hearing has been held by the planning commission, and the mayor and council has granted approval at a scheduled meeting. At these public meetings, the proposed land is reviewed under criteria for both site plan approval and special approval. 
a.  Lounges and package shops, for the retail sale of malt and alcoholic beverages; 
b.  Restaurants; 
c.  Watercraft and equipment rental; 
d.  Watercraft sales and dry dock storage; 
e.  Wholesale and retail seafood sales; and 
f.  Machine repair shops. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any approved site plan or any other ordinance to the contrary, the city has adopted a policy pertaining to special use of designated off-street parking areas in N-M neighborhood marina district so as to allow a commercial business to use its private off-street parking area for an outdoor event when all of the conditions are met under the policy. The policy is on file with the clerk of council and with the zoning department. The policy may be changed from time to time by the mayor and council in accordance with this code. 
Neither a site plan nor special approval is required on internal changes to existing structures unless it causes or requires external changes to meet the requirements of this Land Development Code. 
(H)  Reserved. 
(I)  PC public parks-conservation district. The purpose of this zoning district is to create an area or areas to be conserved for public use, to preserve areas established by tradition and custom for public use, and to prevent development of these areas for other than approved public and/or municipal use. Permitted uses include parks-public, playgrounds; ball fields and/or sports arenas, picnic facilities, public schools, public libraries, public parking and municipal buildings/structures, other public uses as approved by the governing body of the city. 
Notwithstanding the above-described permitted uses within public parks, special review (section 5-070) and site plan approval (section 5-080) requirements shall be applicable to any proceedings (to include motions of council or petitions by the public) to alter the uses currently in existence within the area of Memorial Park that is generally depicted on the diagram attached hereto, so that public hearings in connection with any alteration of structures or the installation or addition of new structures or facilities or uses is required before any construction, building activities or preparation therefore may occur or any new uses permitted. 
(J)  EC environmental-conservation district. The purpose of this district is to protect the ecologically sensitive areas of the city and to limit the active development to those uses which are compatible with natural limits of the land. No building permit can be issued for either a use permitted by right or a use permitted after special approval until the proper state and federal permits have been acquired by the applicant. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right. In an EC environmental-conservation district, land may be used and structures may be erected or used for the following purposes: 
a.  Growing of gardens; and 
b.  Piers, docks, and wharfs. 
(K)  PUD planned unit development district The existing planned unit development districts, at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, shall remain. No further planned unit development district shall be created. The existing planned unit development districts are Northshore Subdivision, Seaside Colony, Oceanside Dunes, Oceanview Townhomes, and Gulick Row. 
(L)  Maritime district. The purpose of this district shall be to protect the character of the commercial development along Lazaretto Creek within the city limits. In the maritime district, land may be used and buildings or structures may be erected or used for the following purposes. 
(1)  Uses permitted after site plan approval. In a maritime district, land may be used and buildings or structures may be erected or used for the land uses listed below after a site plan has been submitted to the designated city official, the planning commission has reviewed the site plan and made comments, and the mayor and council has granted site plan approval at a scheduled meeting. 
a.  Boat launching facilities; 
b.  Bait shops; and 
c.  Retail sale of boating provisions; 
d.  Aquaculture projects; 
e.  Assembly hall, club, or lodge; 
f.  Boat building and repair facilities; 
g.  Commercial charter or sightseeing watercraft facilities; 
h.  Commercial fishing and crabbing; 
i.  Government buildings; 
j.  Marina; 
k.  Recreational activities carried on wholly within a building including theaters, dance halls, and activities of a similar nature; 
l.  Passenger cruise lines; 
m.  Private or community dock; 
n.  Public utility structures; 
o.  Wholesale/retail seafood/sales/warehouses; 
p.  Restaurant — (no alcohol) — limited to sit down facility with no drive through; 
q.  Restaurant, sit down facility which serves alcoholic beverages (must have council approval for liquor, beer, wine, and Sunday sales) and no drive through; 
r.  Watercraft rentals. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any approved site plan or any other ordinance to the contrary, the city has adopted a policy pertaining to special use of designated off-street parking areas in the maritime district so as to allow a commercial business to use its private off-street parking area for an outdoor event when all of the conditions are met under the policy. The policy is on file with the clerk of council and with the zoning department. The policy may be changed from time to time by the mayor and council in accordance with this code. 
Existing structures. Site plan approval is not required for interior changes to existing structures. Site plan approval is required for exterior changes to existing structures. 
(M)  Reserved. 
(N)  Reserved. 
(O)  South End business overlay district. All commercial and multi-family residential uses are permissible subject to site plan approval, or special review and site plan approval, as is required by the particular zoning classification of the property. In this district, the site plans established herein shall prevail over any setbacks in any other part of this Code, specifically including section 3-090 regardless of the use of the property. Mixed uses of the property are permissible. Site plan approval and special review is required for new construction and redevelopment of existing sites. New construction and when a project includes the redevelopment of a parcel, a development agreement with the owner/developer and the city specifying the site plan, location of utilities, improvements, setbacks, driveway locations and dimensions and lot coverage may be required. 
Signage within the district shall be as specified herein to the extent of any inconsistency with the sign ordinance. Permissible signage shall include sandwich boards not to exceed three feet by five feet, which may be displayed during business hours on sidewalks immediately adjacent to the business advertised on the sandwich board. No advertising benches shall be permissible in the district. The existing advertising benches located in the Fourteenth Street parking lot may remain until such time the city provides public benches. 
Within the district, café style seating on sidewalks may be permissible provided that sidewalks in the area involved, must be at least ten feet in width. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no outdoor selling of merchandise on public or private sidewalks is permissible in the district except as may be allowed in connection with authorized special events. 
Policies and procedures applicable in this district are on file in the offices of the planning and economic development director and are incorporated herein. 
(P)  North end parks and public overlay district. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the north end parks and public overlay is to promote the development of properties in a manner that integrates public uses, open space, municipal uses, and recreational uses compatibly into a residential area. The north end parks and public overlay will provide for a livable environment for residents and visitors alike. 
(2)  Applicability. The north end parks and public overlay may only be implemented within specific geographic areas as defined in exhibit A (water/sewer plant, DPW, campground, TIPD). The north end parks and public overlay shall be restricted to the redevelopment and enhancement of uses existing at the time of adoption of this subsection and to the development of uses to enhance or further support existing uses. Such uses include but are not limited to expansion of the water and sewer plant, expansion of the department of public works, expansion and/or enhancement of the River's End Campground, expansion and/or enhancement of the city's police department, the dedication of areas for parks, recreational facilities, or open space. Regulations applicable in the R-1 Zone shall not apply in the overlay district. 
(3)  Permitted uses. The following uses, though not exclusive, are specifically permitted within the north end parks and public overlay: 
a.  Municipal and public safety uses including but not limited to the city water and sewer department, the city department of public works, the city police department; 
b.  Public campgrounds; 
c.  Parks and open space to include passive and active parks; 
d.  Picnic grounds, barbecue pits and similar cooking facilities; 
e.  Shelters, observation decks, platforms, pavilions, storage sheds; patios, and restroom facilities; 
f.  Pedestrian walkways, sidewalks, and bicycle trails; and 
g.  Jogging trails, tennis courts, swimming pools and bicycling paths. 
(4)  Prohibited uses. The following uses, though not exclusive, are specifically prohibited within the north end parks and public overlay: 
a.  Any activity involving operating, riding, or the use of the following: 
1.  Survival games; 
2.  Any activity involving the use of firearms, including hunting, skeet shooting and target practice; 
3.  Crossbow or archery; 
4.  Private dumping of trash, waste or other materials of any kind; and 
5.  Fireworks. 
(5)  Site plan review. Any expansion of existing uses requires site plan review by the planning commission and approval by the mayor and council. 
Any new use that is expressly permitted by this subsection requires site plan review by the planning commission and approval by the mayor and council. 
All submittals for site plan review must comply with section 5-040 of this Land Development Code. 
(Q)  North end cultural overlay district. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the north beach overlay is to promote the development of properties in a manner that promotes arts, cultural, heritage, and educational opportunities in conjunction with recreational and light commercial uses while protecting surrounding residential uses from adverse impact. The north beach overlay will provide for a livable environment for residents and visitors alike. 
(2)  Applicability. The north beach overlay may only be implemented within specific geographic areas as defined in exhibit A [attached to the ordinance adopted January 8, 2009, codified in this subsection]. 
Existing conditions of zoning which apply to north beach overlay properties shall be repealed upon official designation of the north beach overlay. 
(3)  Permitted uses. The following uses, though not exclusive, are specifically permitted within the north beach overlay: 
a.  Municipal and public safety uses; 
b.  Cultural, educational and historical facilities, including re-enactment activities; 
c.  Parks and open space to include passive and active parks; 
d.  Picnic grounds, barbecue pits and similar cooking facilities; 
e.  Shelters, observation decks, platforms, pavilions, storage sheds; patios, and restroom facilities; 
f.  Pedestrian walkways, sidewalks, and bicycle trails; 
g.  Jogging trails, tennis courts, swimming pools and bicycling paths; and 
h.  Publicly owned facilities operated under lease or agreement with the city for commercial or fraternal purposes. 
(4)  Prohibited uses. The following uses, though not exclusive, are specifically prohibited within the north beach overlay: 
Any activity involving operating, riding, or the use of the following: 
a.  Golf courses, except for miniature golf courses. 
b.  Survival games. 
c.  Any activity involving the use of crossbows, archery, firearms, including hunting, skeet-shooting and target practice. 
d.  Dumping of trash, waste or other materials of any kind. 
e.  Fireworks. 
(5)  Site plan review. Any expansion of existing uses requires site plan review by the planning commission and approval by the mayor and council. 
Any new use that is expressly permitted by this article requires site plan review by the planning commission and approval by the mayor and council. 
All submittals for site plan review must comply with section 5-040 of this Land Development Code. 
(R)  Neighborhood grocery store district. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the neighborhood grocery store district is to preserve what was previously an existing non-conforming use and to protect adjoining and nearby properties from intrusion of commercial property and to further preserve the residential character of the area while meeting the needs of the community for a grocery store. The neighborhood grocery store district will provide a means of improving the existing parcels within the district without negatively affecting the aesthetic character of the area. The neighborhood grocery store district is to provide a livable environment for residents and visitors while preserving a grocery store operation and to provide for the operation to adequate parking and improved traffic flow into and out of the grocery store area. 
(2)  Applicability. The neighborhood grocery store district shall encompass those properties currently described as Property Identification Numbers 4-0006-19005 and 4-0006-19013, also known as Lots 21A, 21B, 22A and 22B, Ward 3, Tybee Island, Georgia, and Property Identification Numbers 4-0006-19-14 and 4-0006-19015, also known as Lots 20-A and 20-B, Ward 3, Tybee Island, Georgia. 
(3)  Permitted uses/setbacks. 
a.  The following uses are the exclusive permitted uses within the neighborhood grocery store district and are subject to site plan review: 
1.  A grocery store with associated parking as required. A grocery store is herein defined as a store where most of the floor area is devoted to the sale of food products for home preparation and consumption, which typically also offer other home care and personal care products, and which are substantially larger and carry a broader range of merchandise than convenience stores. The grocery store is not allowed to have facilities for providing gasoline to motor vehicles or other service, mechanical or garage type activities for motor vehicles. 
2.  Single-family residences. 
3.  Multi-family residential above grocery associated warehouse of no more than two unites. 
4.  Non-habitable accessory buildings, public utility structures; home business offices and, following special review: bed and breakfast residential, guest cottages, home occupations, and two family dwellings. 
b.  Setbacks in this district for new structures shall be as provided in the R2 district under section 3-090. 
c.  This district shall have the same lot size and height restrictions applicable in the R2 district under section 3-090 for new construction or new structures. 
(4)  Parking. Off-street parking for a grocery store operation shall require one parking spaces per every 370 feet of gross grocery store floor area under roof on a square foot basis regardless of the use of such area so as to include offices, stock rooms, freezers, etc. Parking for all permitted uses other than a grocery store shall be as required in section 3-080. 
(5)  Buffer. A buffer of not less than three feet, including arboreal features and suitable fencing, shall be provided where the grocery store and parking is adjacent to the right-of-way of Lovell Avenue and neighboring residential property. 
(6)  Notwithstanding any approved site plan or any other ordinance to the contrary, the city has adopted a policy pertaining to special use of designated off-street parking areas in the neighborhood grocery store district so as to allow a commercial business to use its private off-street parking area for an outdoor event when all of the conditions are met under the policy. The policy is on file with the clerk of council and with the zoning department. The policy may be changed from time to time by the mayor and council in accordance with this Code. 
(7)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the following conditions shall be applicable to the parcel described as Parcel Identification Number 4-0006-20-009: 
a.  Parking of vehicles. The only motor vehicles that may be parked on this property are those which are either owned or leased by the owner of the adjacent grocery store, the store employees, located on the lot on the east side of Lovell Avenue adjacent to the subject lot and residents of the building on this identified parcel. 
b.  Temporary storage containers used to store products which are sold in the grocery store located on the lot on the east side of Lovell Avenue adjacent to the subject lot are allowed. 
The temporary storage containers must be capable of being removed immediately upon notice provided by the appropriate authorities. Provided, however, that if a permanent structure is built on this log, pursuant to R(3)(a)(3), the parking of temporary storage containers shall be impermissible. 
c.  A warehouse to be used solely by the grocery store located across Lovell on Butler Avenue and any allowable residential uses above is permissible. 
d.  Notwithstanding the lot size restrictions applicable to this district, the minimum lot area a two family shall be at least 4,680 square feet. 
e.  Any two family residential units constructed on the parcel shall not be used as short term rentals and, therefore, no rentals for occupancy of such a unit may be for a period of less than 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, 11-8-2001; Ord. No. 2003-22, 10-9-2003; Ord. No. 1999-10, 4-22-1999; Ord. No. 1995-17, 12-7-1995; Ord. No. 2004-7, amended 1-31-2005; Ord. No. 2004-07, amended 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 2004-02, amended 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2003-22 Business Districts, amended 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 2001-24, amended 12-12-2001; Manual, amended 11-10-1999; Ord. No. 1999-10, amended 5-24-1999; Ord. of 2-27-2007; Ord. of 4-26-2007(2); Ord. of 6-26-2008(2); Ord. of 6-26-2008(3); Ord. of 10-23-2008(2); Ord. No. 29-2008, § I, 1-8-2009; Ord. of 5-14-2009; Ord. No. 15-2009, 10-22-2009; Ord. No. 08-2010, 5-27-2010; Ord. No. 37-2011, 8-25-2011; Ord. No. 22-2012, 7-12-2012; Ord. No. 23-2012, 7-12-2012; Ord. No. 08-2013, 1-10-2013; Ord. No. 26-2013-A, § 1, 8-22-2013; Ord. No. 35-2013-A, § 1, 12-12-2013; Ord. No. 50-A-2014, § 1, 8-28-2014; Ord. No. 56-2014, § 1, 10-9-2014; Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, 1-15-2015; Ord. No. 2016-01 , 2-11-2016; Ord. No. 30-2016 , §§ 1—3, 11-10-2016) 
ARTICLE 5. - PROCEDURES FOR ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 5-009. - Permit prerequisite for construction. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence excavation for, or construction of any building or structure, or moving of any existing building or structure without first obtaining a permit from the designated city official. No permit shall be issued for the construction or alteration of any building or structure until proper approval has been granted and fees have been submitted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-2013, 1-10-2013) 
Sec. 5-010. - Permits required for construction. 
The following is a list of permits needed for construction of a building or structure or the movement of a building or structure that may be needed for any type of land development in the city. 
(A)  Building permit . All building permits seeking to expand the exterior of any existing structure or seeking to construct any new structure must be accompanied by a valid survey depicting, among other things, the present location of all property lines and structures then on the property. 
(B)  Relocation permit . A relocation permit is required any time a manufactured home, trailer, out building, house or structure is moved from any location to any lot or parcel within the city limits. Buildings used for the purpose of storage only with no need for electricity or plumbing are exempt from this requirement. Electrical, mechanical and plumbing permits are included within this permit. 
(C)  Sign permit . Prior to the erection of a sign for either on-premises or off-premises advertising, the zoning administrator must first issue a permit in accordance with the sign regulations set forth in article 6. Permits are required for both temporary signs as well as permanent signs. 
(D)  Demolition permit . Prior to destruction of a building, structure, or sign, a demolition permit is needed. Such permit may be attained from the city code enforcement department. 
(E)  Electrical permit . An electrical permit is needed before installing any electrical wiring or fixtures. This permit is not needed if a relocation permit or building permit has already been issued on the structure. 
(F)  Plumbing permit . A plumbing permit is needed whenever a plumber installs a new plumbing system in an existing structure. This permit is not needed if a relocation permit or building permit has already been issued on the structure. 
(G)  Mechanical permit . A mechanical permit is needed before a licensed installer may install any mechanical device such as a heating and/or cooling system for air or water. This permit is not needed if a relocation permit or building permit has already been issued on the structure. 
(H)  Land clearing, disturbance or excavation permit . Regardless of the use of the land, a permit is required prior to the clearing of trees, topsoil, or water on any parcel of land in the city. A drainage plan with supporting calculations is required prior to the issuance of any permit for all new construction. The plan and calculations shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the state to provide such services. Furthermore, there shall be no excavation or addition of soil, trees, or water until all proper permits are obtained. This permit is not needed if a relocation permit or building permit has already been issued on the structure. 
(I)  Tree removal . A tree removal permit is required if a person intends to remove either a significant tree or any number of trees that will result in a tree density of less than required. This permit is required regardless of any other permits obtained. 
(J)  Reserved. 
(K)  Prohibit placing materials in the marshlands . Notwithstanding any other provision of any ordinance or regulation to the contrary, no permit for building, land clearing, land filling or for the addition of materials to any area of "marsh," "marshlands," "coastal marshlands," "vegetated marshlands," or isolated freshwater wetlands as such terms are now or hereafter defined by the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280 et seq.) or to any area of isolated freshwater wetlands shall be issued in the absence of a variance granted by the mayor and council subject to the strict application hereof pursuant to section 5-090. In addition to those provisions of article V, chapter 22 of the City Code which may be applicable, it shall be unlawful for any person or entity to place in marsh, marshland, or coastal marshlands as so defined any material whatsoever, in the absence of a permit issued pursuant to a variance properly granted. 
(L)  Construction of docks, walkways, etc.; liability insurance. This subsection is intended to supplement and expressly not repeal existing provisions of Tybee's Code of Ordinances relating to permits required for construction, relating to building permits, regarding wetlands protection, regarding beach dune or vegetation disturbance. 
All those individuals engaged in the construction or repairs of docks, walkways, marinas or marine facilities, or any other structure on or over coastal marshlands as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282(3) shall, prior to the commencement of any such construction, preparation or work provide to the City of Tybee Island evidence of liability insurance and/or bonds and/or letters of credit specifically covering environmental and other damages. Such applicant shall also provide for coverage and/or bonds and/or letters of credit in the nature of a performance bond requiring the completion of the work if it is not performed in accordance with the anticipated completion schedule filed with the city and shall further include the cost of removal of any equipment, debris or materials of any nature not removed by the dockbuilder. When a bond or letter of credit is used for the purposes described herein such bond or letter of credit shall be issued to the benefit of either the City of Tybee Island or the owner of the property depending upon the circumstances and the building official of the city shall be authorized to determine to whom the bond or letter of credit should be payable. 
The amount of insurance, bond, or letter of credit shall be based on the nature, scope and cost of the anticipated work and shall take into consideration the potential consequences of spills, removal of equipment, debris or materials and other risk and shall be in such amount as is set by the building official of the city or his designee. 
Including but not limited to fuel spills, fires, submersions of equipment and building supplies, etc., all dockbuilders shall be required to report any accidents, casualties or events which occur in connection with activities provided for in this subsection and which are likely to cause damage or which may cause damage to property, persons, the environment or coastal marshlands and in no event shall the responsible party wait more than two hours after the occurrence of such event, casualty or occurrence. 
Any violation of this subsection shall subject the offender to punishment under section 5-160. 
(Ord. No. 2001-13, 7-12-2001; Ord. No. 2001-02, 1-11-2001; Ord. No. 2005-02, amended 4-11-2005; Ord. No. 2005-07, amended 3-3-2005; Ord. No. 2005-03, amended 3-3-2005; Ord. No. 2005-02, amended 2-4-2005; Ord. No. 2004-16, amended 1-12-2005; Ord. No. 2004-16, amended 1-12-2005; Ord. No. 2004-16, amended 1-12-2005; Ord. No. 2001-13, amended 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 2001-02 Shore Protection, amended 4-19-2001; Ord. No. 1999-16, amended 6-4-1999; Ord. of 3-23-2006; Ord. of 1-11-2007(2); Ord. of 10-9-2008(3)) 
Sec. 5-020. - Permits or actions required by this Land Development Code. 
The following are permits or actions that may be required depending on the construction and particular land use district for which it will take place. 
(A)  Special review permits . There are specific land uses permitted in certain zoning districts only after a review by the planning commission, a public hearing has been held by the mayor and council, and the mayor and council has determined that the use is appropriate based on certain criteria. These uses are listed throughout article 4 and the criteria listed in section 5-070. See section 5-040(A) and (B), and section 5-070. 
(B)  Site plan approval . All land development activities other than residential one and two-family structures, regardless of the zoning district, must present a site plan of such development to the planning commission for review, and to the mayor and council for approval prior to the issuance of any land development permits. In the C-1 zoning district, all land-disturbing activities require site plan approval. See section 5-040(A) and (C), and section 5-080. 
(C)  Zoning variance . Where strict enforcement of this Land Development Code may present an unnecessary hardship upon a lot or parcel of land, the owner may apply for a zoning variance. Such action requires a public hearing by the planning commission and approval by the mayor and council at a scheduled meeting. See section 5-040(A) and (D), and section 5-090. 
(D)  Amendment to the zoning map . An amendment to the zoning map is considered to be an amendment to this Land Development Code. Such action requires a hearing by the planning commission and approval by the mayor and council at a scheduled public hearing. See section 5-040(A) and (E), and section 5-110. 
(E)  Amendment to the text of this Land Development Code . An amendment to the text of this Land Development Code follows the same process as an amendment to the zoning map. However, a text amendment requires different materials to be included with the application. See section 5-040(A) and (E), and section 5-110. 
(F)  Subdivision of land . Whenever a lot, parcel, or tract of land is divided into two or more parts, the owner must submit a preliminary subdivision plat to the zoning administrator. The preliminary plat shall be reviewed at a hearing held by the planning commission. The preliminary plat will be reviewed at a scheduled meeting of the mayor and council. Once the preliminary plat is approved by mayor and council, required infrastructure improvements may be permitted on the property. After the required infrastructure improvements are completed and inspected by the building inspector, a final plat may be submitted to the zoning administrator. The final plat shall be reviewed at a hearing held by the planning commission. The final plat will then be reviewed following a scheduled meeting of the mayor and council. Once the final plat is approved by the mayor and council, all parcels created by the subdivision may be recorded in the office of the Superior Court of Chatham County and subsequently become real estate. See section 5-040(A) and (G), and sections 5-130, 5-140 and 5-150. 
(G)  Sign permit approval . All signs erected, and signs which are altered or repaired at a cost of 50 percent of the replacement value unless specifically exempted by this Land Development Code, must be permitted by the city. All signs not specifically exempted from the permit and/or licensing requirement of this Land Development Code shall be permitted by the city. An application for a permit shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and accompanied by plans and specifications of the sign in all its structural parts, and by accurate information designating the exact location of the proposed sign for review by the planning commission and approval by the mayor and council. The zoning administrator shall collect a standard fee for each permit and/or license at the time the permit or license is issued. See section 5-120, and article 6. 
(H)  Use of recreational vehicles on private property for residential purposes . This is a temporary permit issued by the zoning administrator during normal hours of operation at the city hall. See general provisions section 3-110(C) for restrictions. 
(I)  Permits required in conjunction with permits in this Land Development Code . The following are permits required by other government entities that may be applicable to a development project in Tybee Island: 
(1)  Land-disturbing permit . Under the Georgia Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7), any major subdivision of land over 1 1/10 of an acre for single-family development and any construction within 200 feet of state waters requires a land-disturbing permit from the department of natural resources, environmental protection division (EPD). 
(2)  Dune crossover . The state department of natural resources (DNR) maintains dune delineation lines and suspected wetland areas. In these places DNR provides revocable permits for private docks and dune crossovers. 
(3)  Dock permits and construction in wetlands . In conjunction with Georgia DNR, the United States Army Corps of Engineers maintains the authority to delineate the location of wetlands and is responsible for permitting any land-disturbing activity in them under section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act. 
(4)  Individual well and sewer systems . If a lot or parcel is not served by city water and sewer utilities a permit is required from the Chatham County Board of Health. There are only a few areas on the island not served by both. 
(5)  Entrances on state and federal highways (curb cuts) . If the development of a lot, tract, or parcel requires an entrance onto a state or federal highway, a permit is required by the state department of transportation. 
(6)  Shallow wells for irrigation only . If a property owner decides to use a shallow well for the irrigation of his or her landscape, a well drilling permit must be obtained from the city code enforcement department and the pump installation and design must meet the plumbing codes set forth in article 9 of this Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 1999-14, amended 6-4-1999) 
Sec. 5-030. - Fees. 
Fees for each individual permit or zoning action are subject to change by the mayor and council. Please see the schedule of fees adopted by mayor and council which are displayed in city hall. 
(Adopted Schedule as of 7-12-2001; Ord. No. 2001-14, 7-12-2001; Ord. No. 2001-14, amended 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 09A-2013, 2-14-2013) 
Sec. 5-040. - Application for permits or actions under this Land Development Code. 
(A)  Minimum requirements for all applications. All applications for zoning actions shall be dated upon submission and require the following minimum information: 
(1)  Name, address and signature of applicant. If the applicant is appointing an agent as the point of contact for the project, that agent must be designated on the application. 
(2)  Brief description of the land development activity and use of the land thereafter to take place on the subject property. 
(3)  Address and location of the subject property for which such land development activity shall take place. 
(4)  Name and address of owner of the subject property. Note: applicant must either have proof of ownership of the property or a signed affidavit from the owner granting the applicant permission to conduct such land development activity. 
(5)  Current zoning and use of the property or properties. 
(6)  Name and address of all adjacent property holders. 
(7)  Name and address of known participating contractors (building and construction, surveyor, architect, engineer, installer, developer, etc.). 
(8)  The application type, date of application, and action taken on all prior applications filed for the reclassification of the whole or part of the land proposed to be reclassified. 
(9)  If within two years immediately preceding the filing of the applicant's application for a zoning action, the applicant has made campaign contributions aggregating to more than $250.00 to the mayor or any member of council or any member of the planning commission, it shall be the duty of the to disclose the following in the application: 
a.  The name of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution or gift was made; 
b.  The dollar amount of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the zoning action and the date of each contribution; and 
c.  An enumeration and description of each gift having a value of $250.00 or more made by the applicant to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the zoning action; 
d.  In the event that no such gift or contribution was made, the application shall affirmatively so state. 
(B)  Additional application requirements for special review. In compliance with section 5-090, all applications for uses permitted in a zoning district for special review must also include the following minimum information: 
(1)  A more detailed description of the activities, number of units, and hours of operation of the proposed special use; 
(2)  A site plan [see Subsection (C) of this Section], with architectural renderings. Building plans may be required at the discretion of city staff, the planning commission, or the mayor and council; 
(3)  A proposed starting date of land disturbance or construction, and a tentative date of completion for all improvements, and use opening or date of first occupancy; and, 
(4)  A list of activities undertaken by the developer and subsequent occupant to mitigate all adverse impacts upon the surrounding properties before, during, and after the completion of development activities. 
(C)  Additional application requirements for all site plan requirements and approval. The designated city official, with input from other departments or consultants, may waive or delay the required submission of some of the requirements for site plans as situations and the project warrant. Unless waived by the designated city official, the site development plan shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  A valid survey of the property, signed and sealed by a State of Georgia certified land surveyor, depicting the location, size and other pertinent data of all land uses on the site including types, location and height of buildings, parking, open areas, landscaping, and all existing trees; 
(2)  Dimension setback lines from property lines and street right-of-way lines; 
(3)  Adjacent thoroughfares and all curb cuts within 500 feet, including: 
a.  Proposed new cut(s) onto public rights-of-way with turning radii, and width; 
b.  Dimensions of all rights-of-way; and 
c.  If a corner property, compliance with section 3-050, obstruction to visions at street intersections, shall be illustrated; 
(4)  Drainage plan to conform with all ordinances, standards, specifications and policies adopted by the city; 
(5)  Location of all utilities, and water/sewer plans and design considerations; 
(6)  Tabulated data including at least: 
a.  Gross density of dwelling units; 
b.  Parking ratio per dwelling unit, and compliance with section 3-080, off-street parking requirements; 
c.  Percent and amount of land coverage by use; 
d.  Percent and amount of floor area by use and by type; 
e.  Flood zone(s) and minimum finished floor elevations; 
(7)  Topographical map showing existing and proposed 1-foot contours and natural features; 
(8)  Soil erosion and sediment control plan required for all projects whether a Land Disturbing Activity Permit is required or not; 
(9)  Tree removal plan, tree protection plan, and tree establishment plan; 
(10)  City staff or the planning commission or the mayor and council may require elevations or other engineering or architectural drawings covering the proposed development; 
(11)  The city's engineering consultant or his designee will review a site plan prior to the mayor and council acting upon a zoning decision; 
(12)  The extent and nature of any variances or zoning amendments necessary to the proposed project. 
(D)  Additional application requirements for a zoning variance. Applications for a zoning variance shall be submitted to the designated city official. All applications for a zoning variance must also include the following minimum information: 
(1)  Site plan and/or architectural renderings of the proposed development depicting the location of lot restrictions. 
(2)  Narrative describing the hardship and the reason for the variance request. 
(3)  A survey of the property signed and sealed by a State of Georgia certified land surveyor. No application for the same type of zoning variance request, which has been previously denied, shall be accepted by the designated city official until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the defeat by the mayor and council of such variance request. 
(E)  Additional application requirements for a Land Development Code or zoning map amendment. Applications for amendment of these regulations may be in the form of proposals to amend the text of these regulations or proposals to amend the zoning map. Applications for amendment shall be submitted to the designated city official. No application for a zoning change requesting the same zoning district classification and affecting the same parcel of property or part thereof shall be accepted by the designated city official until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the defeat of the rezoning request by the mayor and council. However if the request is for a different land use classification than the previous request, an application will be accepted. All applications for a Land Development Code or zoning map amendments must also include the following minimum information: 
(1)  Text amendment. In the case of a text amendment, the application shall set forth the new text to be added and the existing text to be deleted. 
(2)  Map amendment. An application for a map amendment shall include the following information: 
a.  A map or plat of the land in question prepared, signed and sealed by a State of Georgia certified land surveyor, and a description by metes and bounds, bearings, and distances of the land, or if the boundaries conform to the lot boundaries within a subdivision for which a plat is recorded in the land records of Chatham County then the lot, block, and subdivision designations with appropriate plat reference; and 
b.  The area of the land proposed to be reclassified stated in square feet if less than one acre, and in acres if greater than one acre. 
(F)  Additional application requirements for sign permit approval. All applications for sign permit approval must also include the following minimum information: 
(1)  Site plan showing the position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures. Plan shall be to scale; 
(2)  Specifications setting forth the character of the sign in all its structural parts; 
(3)  Electrical permit if required; 
(4)  Wind pressure capacity (lbs./sq. ft. horizontal loads) if applicable. 
(5)  Sketch of sign showing sign dimensions. 
(G)  Additional application requirements for land subdivision approval. Subdivision plan approval is a three-step process. The first step, a conceptual plan, is optional. The next two steps, preliminary and final plan approval, are required before any lot, parcel, or tract of land can be divided into two or more pieces of property and recorded in the Chatham County Clerk of Courts office. If the subdivision of land fits the definition of a minor subdivision, the preliminary and final platting information and procedure process may be combined. The information needed for each step of the land subdivision process is as follows: 
(1)  Conceptual plan. Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary plan, a conceptual plan may be submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. When submitted, this conceptual plan shall show in simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, roads, and other features in relation to existing conditions. The conceptual plan shall include the following information: 
a.  The boundary lines of the property being subdivided; 
b.  Watercourses and marshes found on the tract of land to be subdivided and the limits of habitable area; 
c.  The location, name, and right-of-way width of any existing streets on the land to be subdivided, or on land adjacent to the tract of land being subdivided. 
(2)  Preliminary plan. Before work shall begin to open a subdivision, thirteen prints of a preliminary plan, showing the proposed design of the subdivision, shall first be submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. Until the preliminary plan of a proposed subdivision has been reviewed by the planning commission, and approved by the mayor and council, a developer shall not grade, scrape, or otherwise open or extend a street in the proposed subdivision, nor shall he stake out or lay out lots in such subdivision, nor shall he in any manner cause construction to actually begin on a subdivision. The plan shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch. The preliminary plan shall be signed and sealed by a State of Georgia certified land surveyor and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Existing features. All of the following existing features shall be noted on the preliminary plan: 
1.  The bearings and distances of the boundary lines of the property to be subdivided; 
2.  The location of any streams, natural drainageways, and other waterways which exist on the property; 
3.  The distance and direction to public water lines and sanitary sewer lines; 
4.  The name, location, and right-of-way width of existing streets either on the property or on the land adjoining the property; 
5.  Existing contours of the property in solid lines and at one-foot intervals and based on 1988 North American Vertical Datum (NAVD); 
6.  The name of subdivision or property owners adjoining the property; 
7.  The line delineating the jurisdiction of the Department of Natural Resources (JD line) that is not more than one year old, if applicable; 
8.  The line delineating the landward toe of the landward-most dune as certified by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Coastal Resource Protection Division that is no more than one year old, if applicable; 
9.  The line delineating a 10-foot setback distance from the landward toe of the landward-most dune that is no more than one year old, if applicable; 
10.  All flood zones as shown on the most recently adopted Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), if applicable; 
11.  The location of public or private rights-of-way or easements, and of parks or other public spaces either on the property or adjoining the property; and, 
12.  The location of all trees as defined in Article 2 of this Land Development Code. 
b.  Proposed design features. All proposed improvements or alterations to the property features shall be noted on the preliminary plan: 
1.  The location, purpose, and width of any proposed easements. 
2.  Lot lines and lot line dimensions; proposed lot numbers. 
3.  The location and specifications for proposed streets and lanes, including right-of-way lines, proposed finished grades, proposed parking areas and type of surfacing, profiles and typical cross- sections of streets, and such other information as shall be required to show compliance with the design specifications established by this Land Development Code for streets. 
4.  Proposed street names. 
5.  Proposed final contours in dashed lines at one-foot intervals and based on 1988 North American Vertical Datum (NAVD); 
6.  Proposed building lines. 
7.  Proposed crosswalks. 
8.  The location of proposed monuments. 
9.  The expected limits of the 100-year floodplain where appropriate. 
c.  Other information. In addition to the existing and proposed features listed above, the following information is also required with the preliminary plan: 
1.  Name of proposed subdivision, scale of the plan, north arrow, date, size of the tract being subdivided, key map showing location of the proposed subdivision in the city. 
2.  A statement from the subdivider shall be placed on the preliminary plan which shall describe the method by which storm sewers, sanitary sewers, and water facilities will be provided. If septic tanks or individual waste disposal systems are to be used in a subdivision, then percolation tests shall be made in accordance with Chatham County Health Department requirements and the results of such tests, together with a contour map showing the site of each test hole, shall accompany the preliminary plan. 
3.  Grading and drainage plans shall be submitted with each subdivision application. If the required drainage plans reveal that a request for subdivision approval would overload the capacity of the channel downstream or increase flood stages upstream, the subdivision approval permit shall be denied, unless equivalent flow and storage capacity is replaced and maintained by the owner within the floodplain affected. 
4.  When the preliminary plan includes only a part of the tract on which the subdivider has an interest, the developer shall submit a tentative street plan for all of said tract. 
5.  All exhibits accompanying the preliminary plan shall be prepared by a State of Georgia registered civil engineer and shall contain the seal of such engineer along with a statement that the plan meets the provisions and standards of Flood Damage Prevention, Article 8, for the city. 
d.  Deadline for preliminary plan submission. The preliminary plan shall be filed with the planning commission in accordance with the procedures set by the planning commission. The mayor and council will not act upon a preliminary plan until it has met the approval of the city's consulting engineer or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 1999-25, 8-12-1999; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-10-2002; Ord. No. 2002-22 Application for Permits, amended 2-5-2003; Ord. No. 1999-25, amended 8-12-1999; Ord. No. 1999-15, amended 6-4-1999; Ord. No. 39-2011, 10-13-2011) 
Sec. 5-041. - Lot recombination. 
Recombination of lots in their entirety may be approved by staff so long as there is no creation of a nonconforming lot or structure. 
(Ord. No. 40-2011, 10-13-2011) 
Sec. 5-050. - Public notice. 
After a completed application has been filed, the next step in the approval process for a zoning action or subdivision of land required by this Land Development Code is to set a date for a public hearing on the matter and render proper notice to the public. Proper public hearing notice procedures are as follows: 
(A)  Legal notice . Notice of public hearings before the planning commission and the mayor and council as required by this section shall be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the city in which are carried the legal advertisements of the city and shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing and shall also include the location of property that is the subject of the zoning action, the present zoning district of said property, and the proposed zoning district or proposed zoning action of said property. Such notice for the official public hearing before the mayor and council shall be published at least 15 days; but, not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(B)  Signs posted . Where a zoning action of property is initiated, a designated official of the city shall post a sign at least 15 days prior to the mayor and council public hearing, in a conspicuous place on the property for which an application for a proposed zoning action has been submitted. The sign or signs will contain information as to the current zoning district, the proposed zoning district or zoning action, and the date, time and location of the public hearings before the planning commission and the mayor and council. 
(C)  Notification to adjacent property owners . At least 15 days, but not more than 45 days before the scheduled public hearing, the zoning administrator shall notify all neighboring property owners, either adjacent to the property proposed for rezoning, or directly across a public street/road from that property. The notice shall include the location of the property, its present zoning classification and the proposed zoning classification. Failure of the zoning administrator to send notices or failure of the property owner to receive notification shall not affect the validity of any zoning action. This procedure exists as a supplement to the legally required notification procedures. 
Sec. 5-060. - Public hearing requirements. 
Whenever a zoning action or subdivision procedures take place, a hearing must be held before the public. When an applicant requires more than one zoning action or subdivision procedure for a development project, a separate public hearing must be held for each procedure or action. In Tybee Island there are two public hearings held for each zoning action or subdivision procedure; one before the planning commission and the other before the mayor and council. The public hearing before the mayor and council is by record the official public hearing. The purpose of each public hearing is to discuss information pertinent to the particular action or procedure. During the hearing the following rules and actions shall be followed: 
(A)  General rules of conduct . Whenever a public hearing is required by this Land Development Code or by state law prior to consideration of a zoning action, such public hearing, whether conducted by the mayor and council or the planning commission, shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The public hearing shall be called to order by the presiding officer. 
(2)  The presiding officer shall explain the procedures to be followed in the conduct of the public hearing. 
(3)  If the subject of the hearing is initiated by an applicant other than the mayor and council, the petitioner requesting such zoning decision, or the applicant's agent, shall be recognized first and shall be permitted to present and explain the request for the zoning decision. Thereafter, all individuals who so desire shall be permitted to speak regarding the zoning decision. 
(4)  If the request is initiated by the mayor and council, all members of the council shall be allowed to speak as they are recognized by the mayor or presiding officer. Thereafter, all individuals who so desire shall be permitted to speak regarding the zoning decision. 
(5)  When any person wishes to speak at a public hearing, he shall raise his hand and, after being recognized by the presiding officer, shall stand and give his name, address, and make any comment appropriate to the proposed zoning decision. If within two years immediately preceding the filing of the applicant's application for a zoning action, the speaker has made campaign contributions aggregating to more than $250.00 to any member of the mayor and council or any member of the city planning commission, it shall be the duty of the speaker to disclose the following information five days prior to the official public hearing: 
a.  The name of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution or gift was made; 
b.  The dollar amount of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for zoning action and the date of each contribution; 
c.  An enumeration and description of each gift having a value of $250.00 or more made by the applicant to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the zoning action; 
d.  In the event that no such gift or contribution was made, the application shall affirmatively so state. 
Campaign disclosure forms are available at the Tybee City Hall during normal hours of operation. Also, campaign disclosure forms shall be made available to the public at the planning commission public hearing for use at the official public hearing before the mayor and council. 
(6)  The applicant shall have an opportunity, after all comments in opposition have been made, to make summary remarks concerning the proposed zoning decision. 
(7)  Thereafter, the presiding officer shall announce that the public hearing for the requested zoning decision is closed, and the mayor and council or the planning commission, as the case may be, shall immediately and openly discuss the proposed zoning decision and vote on action which they are authorized to take. 
The above rules of conduct for public hearing shall be the policies and procedures of the city governing the calling and conduct of hearings under the Land Development Code. Copies of these rules of conduct and policies and procedures shall be available for distribution to the general public. In any action on a zoning decision and for each zoning decision there shall be a minimum of ten-minutes time at the hearing for presentation of data, evidence and opinion by proponents of the zoning decision and an equal amount of time for presentation by opponents. 
(B)  Actions specific to the planning commission during a public hearing . In all zoning actions in the city the planning commission is a recommending body and all final decisions must be made by the mayor and council. However, the planning commission has an important role in the public hearing process. This role is as follows: 
(1)  All proposed zoning actions shall be reviewed by the planning commission in a public hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection (A) of this section; 
(2)  The planning commission shall review and consider a recommendation to the mayor and council with respect to the application for a zoning action. The planning commission may decide to make no recommendation or it may make any of the following recommendations with respect to an application for a zoning action; approval, denial, deferral, withdrawal without prejudice, reduction of the land area for which the application is made, change of the zoning district requested, or imposition of zoning conditions; and, 
(3)  The planning commission shall submit its recommendation on a zoning action application to the mayor and council prior to the scheduled public hearing in which the mayor and council will consider the application for a zoning decision. If the planning commission fails to submit a recommendation prior to the public hearing, the planning commission's recommendation shall be deemed one of approval. 
(C)  Actions specific to the mayor and council during a public hearing . 
(1)  Before taking action on a proposed amendment and after receipt of the planning commission recommendations and reports thereon, the mayor and council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment at their next scheduled meeting. 
(2)  So that the purpose of this Land Development Code will be served and so that health, public safety and general welfare will be secured, the mayor and council may in its legislative discretion: 
a.  Approve or deny the proposed zoning action as submitted; 
b.  Reduce the land area for which the application is made; 
c.  Change the zoning district to one other than that requested; or, 
d.  Add or delete zoning conditions as the mayor and council deems appropriate. 
(3)  An action to defer a decision on the proposed amendment shall include a specific meeting date to which the proposed amendment is deferred. The mayor and council may also approve a withdrawal of an application, and if so stipulated by the mayor and council in its decision to approve withdrawal, the 12-month limitation on re-filing of the application for the same property shall not apply. 
(D)  Public hearings records standards . The city clerk or an agent of the city clerk shall mechanically record the proceedings of all zoning public hearings. If requested by any party, verbatim transcripts of the public hearing can be prepared, but only if requested and purchased in advance by the requesting party, who must arrange at his expense for a certified court reporter to record and transcribe the hearing and furnish the original of the transcript to the mayor and council for its records. The record of the public hearing and all evidence (e.g., maps, drawings, traffic studies, etc.) submitted at the public hearing shall be noted as such and shall become a permanent part of the particular zoning action's file. 
(Ord. No. 1999-06, 4-22-1999; Ord. No. 2002-16, 7-11-2002; Eliminated subsection "E"; Ord. No. 2002-16, amended 1-9-2003; Ord. No. 2000-14, amended 6-28-2000; Ord. No. 1999-06, amended 5-24-1999) 
Sec. 5-070. - Standards for special review. 
Land uses listed in Article 4 of this Land Development Code that are permitted after special review must follow an administrative procedure prior to the issuance of any land development permit. 
(A)  Review criteria. The planning commission shall hear and make recommendation upon such uses in a district that are permitted after special review. The application to establish such use shall be approved by the mayor and council on a finding that: 
(1)  The proposed use will not be contrary to the purpose of this Land Development Code; 
(2)  The proposed use will not be contrary to the findings and recommendations of the master plan; 
(3)  The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties or the general neighborhood or adversely affect the health and safety of residents and workers; 
(4)  The proposed use will not constitute a nuisance or hazard because of the number of persons who will attend or use such facility, vehicular movement associated with the use, noise or fumes generated by or as a result of the use, or type of physical activity associated with the land use; 
(5)  The proposed use will not be affected adversely by the existing uses of adjacent properties; 
(6)  The proposed use will be placed on a lot which is of sufficient size to satisfy the space requirements of said use; 
(7)  The parking and all development standards set forth for each particular use for which a permit may be granted will be met. 
(B)  Additional mitigation requirements. The planning commission may suggest and the mayor and council may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards (i.e., increased setbacks, buffer strips, screening, etc.): 
(1)  As may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community; and 
(2)  To protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood. 
(C)  Adherence to requirements. Provided that wherever the mayor and council shall find in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations, noncompliance of any term, condition, or restrictions upon which such permit was granted, the mayor and council shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a public hearing. 
(D)  Permit longevity. If a building permit or other preparations or conditions are required prior to implementing special review approval granted by the mayor and council such permitting or other preparations or conditions must occur within 12 months from the date of special review approval. Such approval is based on information provided in the application. Building permits may only be granted for plans consistent with the approved application. Any deviation from the information submitted will require separate approval by planning commission and mayor and council. In the event of a hardship or other extenuating circumstance the permit holder may apply to the designated city official for a one-time extension of permit approval. Permit extensions may not be approved in extenuating circumstances for a period of no more than 180 days. Should the permit not be exercised in the extension period it will expire. 
(Ord. No. 05-2013, 1-10-2013) 
Sec. 5-080. - Site plan approval. 
The site plan approval process is intended to provide the general public, planning commission, and mayor and council with information pertinent to how a new development will affect the surrounding area and the city as a whole and to ensure compliance with all applicable regulations and considerations as hereinafter stated. Where a variance, special review, or any other land development activity is involved in connection with a site plan, the standards applicable to the variance, special review, and/or land development activity applied for shall apply. 
(A)  Process. Upon submittal of the site plan, the designated city official will review the site plan for noticeable discrepancies and determine if there is a need to apply for other zoning actions. The site plan is then forwarded to the city's consulting engineer. Once the engineer has submitted comments to the designated city official, a public hearing before the planning commission shall be scheduled. The public hearing shall be held regardless of whether the site plan meets the requirements of this Land Development Code. Until the applicant addresses all of the engineer's comments and the site plan is satisfactory, the mayor and council will not consider the plan. 
In addition to all other requirements, any applicant for a site plan must identify all prior site plan applications made by the applicant, any affiliates/relatives, corporate or business entities in which the applicant has had an interest for the property which is the subject matter of the current application. 
The applicant must identify any parking meters proposed to be eliminated from city rights-of-way by the proposed site plan implementation. 
The applicant must demonstrate compliance with all other applicable ordinances including but not limited to stormwater, flood damage prevention, and buffering. 
In considering a site plan, the mayor and council may consider whether the proposed development will be unreasonably detrimental to adjacent or nearby uses and whether the proposed development will adversely impact existing conditions in the overall neighborhood, including but not limited to: 
(1)  The impact or lack thereof on available resources and utilities. 
(2)  Whether the proposed development is of a scale and mass so as to be compatible with the character of the neighborhood. 
(3)  Whether the proposed development is consistent with the character area under the master plan. 
(4)  Density considerations for the neighborhood including demands on infrastructure, traffic, and other relevant factors. 
In considering a site plan, the mayor and council may approve or deny the application as submitted, or add or delete conditions appropriate to protecting the interest of the applicant as well as those of nearby properties. Buffering requirements beyond those expressly identified may also be imposed. If conditions are added or deleted the applicant must subsequently submit a revised plan of the proposed development to the designated city official and all such conditions that had been added or deleted must be accepted by the city's consulting engineer. 
If all of the foregoing requirements have been satisfied and further if the mayor and council find that the benefits of and need for the proposed use and project are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damages to the neighboring properties, the application may be granted. 
(B)  Other zoning actions. Because special review, variances and map amendments require site plans, site plan review may be the first step in the permitting process, however, the site plan should identify any other zoning actions necessary in order for the intended development to be constructed so that a public hearing can be held on all such zoning actions simultaneously with the public hearing on the site plan. Site plan approval should encompass approval of all other zoning actions necessary to accomplish the development, however, if the intended development is to be altered from an approved site plan, additional public hearing and review is necessary if an additional special review, variance or map amendment is necessitated by the proposed alteration. 
(C)  Site plan longevity. After a site plan has been approved by the mayor and council it shall be valid for a period of 18 months from the date of approval. If a building permit has not been obtained and work has not begun, the site plan approval shall be void and a new application must be submitted for site plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 1999-26, 8-12-1999; Ord. No. 2002-15, 7-11-2002; Ord. No. 2002-15, amended 1-9-2003; Ord. No. 1999-26, amended 8-12-1999; Ord. No. 1999-19, amended 6-15-1999; Ord. No. No. 2005-14, § 1, 5-26-2005; Ord. No. 2005-14, § 1, 5-26-2005; Ord. No. 01-2015, § 1, 1-15-2015) 
Sec. 5-090. - Variances. 
(A)  Standards. After an application has been submitted to the designated city official, reviewed by the planning commission, and a public hearing has been held by the mayor and council, the mayor and council may grant a variance from the strict application of the provisions in this Land Development Code only if a physical circumstance, condition, or consideration exists as described in subsection (1). 
(1)  There are unique physical circumstances or conditions or considerations beyond that of surrounding properties, including a substandard lot of record that existed prior to March 24, 1971 (see section 3-040); irregularity; narrowness; or shallowness of the lot shape; or exceptional topographical or other physical circumstances, conditions, or considerations related to the environment, or to safety, or to historical significance, that is peculiar to the particular property; and; 
(2)  Because of such physical circumstances or conditions or considerations, the property cannot be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this Land Development Code, without undue hardship to the property. 
(3)  A nonconforming use or structure does not constitute a unique physical circumstance, condition, or consideration. 
(B)  Height. No part of any structure shall project beyond 35-feet above the average adjacent grade of a property except: 
(1)  Chimneys, flues, stacks, heating units, ventilation ducts, air conditioning units, gas holders, elevators, solar panels and similar appurtenances needed to operate and maintain the building on which they are located. 
(2)  The following items that were existing on the date of the adoption of this ordinance: flag poles, television aerials, water towers and tanks, steeples and bell towers, broadcasting and relay towers, transmission line towers, and electric substation structures. 
(C)  Variance longevity. After a variance has been granted by the mayor and council it shall be valid for a period of 12 months from date of approval. Such approval is based on information provided in the application. Building permits may only be granted for plans consistent with the approved application. Any deviation from the information submitted will require separate approval by the mayor and council. 
(D)  Reviewing variance applications. The designated city official, planning commission, and governing body, shall consider the factors stated herein in reviewing variance applications in taking action on a particular variance. In exercising the powers to grant variances, the mayor and council may attach any conditions to its approval which it finds necessary to accomplish the reasonable application of the requirements of these regulations. 
(E)  Application approval. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code of Ordinances, the designated city official may approve applications for variances without the need of public hearings and without the need of review by the planning commission or the mayor and council as follows: 
(1)  When either of the following circumstances exists: 
a.  The proposed improvement or alteration will not result in an expansion of the existing footprint of the existing structure; or 
b.  No additional encroachment into any setback shall be created by the proposed improvement, construction or addition. 
(2)  When each of the following circumstances also exists: 
a.  No encroachment or construction of habitable space or other prohibited improvements will exist below one foot above the base flood elevation; and 
b.  The requested improvements or construction will not violate existing zoning provisions. 
This subsection shall have specific application to existing nonconforming structures as referred to in section 3-020. 
(F)  Compliance with ordinances. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code of Ordinances, no application for a variance may be accepted nor may any variance be granted with respect to any property that is then not in compliance with the requirements of ordinances for the condition on which the variance is sought, unless the applicant files with the application a detailed written explanation of how, when, and by whom the need for a variance was created. In such a case, the planning commission shall make a recommendation to the mayor and council as to whether the variance should be approved or rejected or modified and the mayor and council, following a public hearing, may approve, reject or modify the variance request. In the event property is constructed in violation of the ordinances, the violation status remains until such time as the condition is rectified and placed in conformity with the ordinances. Violations of the ordinances may be subject to the enforcement provisions of this Code and all penalties permissible by law. A variance that is granted under this section does not excuse prior violations including those that have resulted or may result in enforcement action by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1999-27, 8-12-1999; Ord. No. 2002-08, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 2002-08 Variances, amended 8-29-2002; Ord. of 8-11-2005; Ord. No. 14-2010, 8-26-2010; Ord. No. 57-A-2014, § 1, 12-11-2014 ) 
Sec. 5-100. - Standards for variance from the flood damage control regulations. 
The standards for variances from flood damage prevention ordinances are set out in article 8 of the Land Development Code and those provisions are hereby incorporated herein. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2008(4), § I) 
Sec. 5-110. - Standards for Land Development Code or zoning map amendment approval. 
In order to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city against the unrestricted use of property, the following standards and any other factors relevant to balancing the above stated public interest will be considered, when deemed appropriate, by the mayor and council in making any zoning decision: 
(A)  The existing land use pattern; 
(B)  The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts; 
(C)  The existing population density pattern and the possible increase or overtaxing of the load on public facilities; 
(D)  Whether changed or changing conditions make the passage of the proposed amendment reasonable; 
(E)  Whether the proposed change will adversely influence existing conditions in the neighborhood or the city at large; 
(F)  Potential impact on the environment, including but not limited to drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality, and water quality and quantity; 
(G)  The reasonableness of the costs required of the public in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public utilities, schools, streets and public safety necessities when considering the proposed changes; 
(H)  Whether the proposed change will be detrimental to the value or improvement or development of adjacent or nearby property in accordance with existing requirements; 
(I)  Whether the proposed change is out of scale with the needs of the neighborhood or entire city; 
(J)  Whether the proposed change will constitute a grant of special privilege to the individual owner as contrasted with the adjacent or nearby neighborhood or with the general public; and, 
(K)  The extent to which the zoning decision is consistent with the current city master plan or other local planning efforts, if any, of the city. 
Sec. 5-111. - Conditional zoning. 
In conjunction with the approval of a rezoning of property in accordance with this article, the city council may impose conditions to rezoning approval which shall have the full force and effect of law. A condition to rezoning approval may be imposed regardless of whether it is agreed to by the applicant or property owner. Use or development of the rezoned property shall not be permitted unless the conditions are fully complied with. A property owner may request an amendment to any condition imposed by the city council by application to the city and compliance with the procedures for rezoning of property. 
(Ord. of 9-28-2006) 
Sec. 5-120. - Sign permit approval. 
It is the responsibility of the building inspector to determine whether the information provided by the applicant meets the requirements of the sign regulations in article 6. Once a determination is made the building inspector may grant sign approval. Sign permit approval does not constitute approval of any other zoning action or permit. 
Sec. 5-130. - Major subdivision plat procedure. 
It shall be the duty of the planning commission to inspect preliminary plans and to recommend approval or disapproval of such plans. It shall be the duty of the planning commission to inspect final plats and the information submitted with such final plats, and to recommend approval of such final plats when the requirements of this article have been met and to recommend disapproval of such final plats when the requirements of this article have not been met. When the planning commission acts on a plat, it shall forward it to the mayor and council with its recommendations. 
(A)  Action on preliminary plan . If the planning commission finds that the proposed design of the subdivision shown on the preliminary plan complies with the design requirements of these regulations, it shall recommend approval of such preliminary plan to the mayor and council. If the planning commission finds that the proposed design of the subdivision shown on the preliminary plan does not comply with the design requirements of these regulations, then the planning commission shall either recommend disapproval of such plan or shall recommend approval of such plan on the condition that specified violations are corrected prior to the submittal of the final plat. When the mayor and council disapprove of a preliminary plan, it shall give the developer the reasons for such disapproval in writing. Except where an extension of time is authorized by the applicant, the planning commission shall have up to 30 days from the date of the submission of a preliminary plan to act on such plan. Unless the planning commission makes a recommendation for approval or disapproval on an application within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed that a recommendation of approval has been issued by the planning commission. The mayor and council, following review by the planning commission, shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the procedures applicable thereto. Following the public hearing, the mayor and council may approve, disapprove or require modifications to the subdivision plat. 
(B)  When preliminary plan approved, work may proceed . When a developer receives approval of the preliminary plan showing the design of his proposed subdivision, he may proceed with the construction of the subdivision, such construction shall conform with the design submitted to and approved by the mayor and council. 
(C)  Time limit on preliminary approval . The mayor and council's approval of a preliminary plan shall be valid for one year. If work has not started on a subdivision which has been granted preliminary plan approval on or before the end of this one-year period, then the plan of such subdivision shall be resubmitted for preliminary approval; provided, however, that this time may be extended unless changes have occurred in this article, or in the character of the property surrounding the property of the proposed subdivision which make it necessary to revise the design of the proposed subdivision as determined by the mayor and council. 
(D)  Final plat . Before a plat of a subdivision is recorded with the clerk of the Superior Court of Chatham County and the lots thereon offered for sale, an original and four prints of a final plat showing the final design of the subdivision shall be submitted to the planning commission for review. Until a final plat of a subdivision has been submitted to and reviewed by the planning commission and approved and signed by the zoning administrator, mayor, and clerk of the city, the clerk of the Superior Court of Chatham County shall not record the plat of such subdivision, nor shall the owner or agent of such subdivision be authorized to transfer or sell any of the land within such subdivision by reference to a plat. For large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory to the planning commission. The original copy of the final plat shall be drawn on 18" x 24" sheets of Mylar reproducible material at a scale of not less than 200 feet to the inch. Where necessary, the final plat may be several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. The final plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Primary control points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on the plat shall be referred. 
(2)  Tract boundary lines; right-of-way lines of streets; easements and other rights-of-way; property lines of all lots; and in all such cases with surveyed dimension, bearings or deflection angles, radii, arcs, and central angles of all curves shown. 
(3)  Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way. 
(4)  Location, dimensions, and purpose of any easement. 
(5)  Number to identify each lot or site. 
(6)  Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved. 
(7)  Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites. 
(8)  Location and identification of monuments. 
(9)  Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land. 
(10)  Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record name. 
(11)  Certificate that all survey work was performed by a registered civil engineer or registered surveyor. 
(12)  Statement by owner, on the plat, dedicating streets, rights-of-way, easements, and any sites for public use. This statement shall be signed by the owner, or his attorney as agent, and shall read as follows: 
All streets, rights-of-way, easements, and any sites for public use as noted on this plat are hereby dedicated for the use intended. 
____________ ____________ ____________ 
(owner or attorney as agent) 
Such dedications must be formally and specifically accepted by the mayor and council of the city before such dedications shall be binding on the city. 
(13)  Title, scale, north arrow, and date. 
(14)  Key map showing the location of the subdivision in the city. 
(15)  All plats shall show the expected limits of the 100-year flood where appropriate. 
(16)  Any further requirements as specified by O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67. 
[(E)  Reserved.] 
(F)  Certificate from county health department . If lots are to be served by neither public sewers nor public water, nor both then the final plat shall be accompanied by a certificate from the county health department certifying health department approval of the water supply system and/or waste disposal system to be used and health department approval of lot sizes and lot widths established in such subdivision. 
(G)  Certificate from engineer . At the time the final plat is submitted, it shall be accompanied by a certificate from the developer's engineer certifying that the subdivider has complied with either of the following conditions: 
(1)  All improvements have been installed in accord with the requirements of this article and the flood damage prevention provisions for the city (article 8 of this Land Development Code) and in accord with the design approved by the mayor and council on the preliminary plan; and 
(2)  A bond, escrow account or certified check has been posted, which is available to the city, and in sufficient amount to assure the completion of all required improvements, as well as to assure the maintenance thereof for a period of not more than 12 months after completion. The mayor and council may reduce the bond or escrow account 50 percent at the end of six months. At the end of the second six months, the developer shall request an inspection, and if no faults or failures have developed, the mayor and council shall release the bond or escrow. Such bond or escrow shall remain in force until released by the mayor and council after due inspection of said improvements and shall not automatically expire at the end of 12 months. 
(H)  Filing the final plat . The final plat shall be filed with the planning commission not less than 20 days prior to a regular meeting of the planning commission. 
(I)  Action on final plat . If the planning commission finds that all the requirements of this section have been met, it shall recommend approval of the final plat and submit such plat to the mayor and council. If the planning commission finds that all the requirements of this section have not been met, and after deficiencies have been discussed and reviewed with the sponsor, and the sponsor given a period of time which shall not exceed 90 days to take corrective action, then the planning commission shall recommend disapproval of the final plat to the mayor and council and shall set forth its reasons for such recommendations in writing. Except where an extension of time is authorized [stipulated] by the applicant for final plat review, the planning commission shall have 30 days from the date of the submission of a final plat to submit its recommendations on such plat to the mayor and council. Unless such action is taken within such 30-day period, then such plat shall be deemed to have received a recommendation for approval from the planning commission, and the mayor and council may take final action on such plat without waiting further for the recommendations of the planning commission. 
(1)  When the final plat has been approved, the city shall present the final plat to the clerk of the Superior Court of Chatham County to be recorded. The zoning administrator shall provide the subdivider with the subdivision map book number and page number in which the subdivision has been recorded by the clerk of the superior court. The cost of such recording shall be paid by the subdivider and shall be deposited with the city clerk prior to such recording. 
(2)  After the final plat of the subdivision has been recorded, then all lots shown on such subdivision may be made available for sale and such subdivision shall be entitled to all privileges and services available to other subdivisions within the city. 
(J)  Revisions to recorded plat . If during the development process revisions must be made to either the preliminary or final plat as approved by the health department, engineer, planning commission or mayor and council, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Major revisions . The subdivider shall file with the planning commission copies of the proposed revision to a recorded plat together with all supporting information as required by these regulations. Proposed revisions to a recorded plat which alter or change in any way the street and/or utility layout of said plat shall be submitted as a preliminary plan in accordance with subsection (A) of this section. 
(2)  Minor revisions . Proposed revisions to a recorded plat which do not alter or change in any way the street and/or utility layout of said plat shall be submitted as follows: the subdivider shall file with the planning commission four copies of the original plat with all minor revisions shown in red. The plats shall be accompanied by a statement signed by all affected property owners acknowledging their awareness of and approval of the revisions. Proposed revisions shall be reviewed by the planning commission. Upon a finding that the revisions comply with all applicable regulations, the revised plats shall be submitted to the mayor and council for approval. One copy of the approved plat shall be recorded and one copy shall be attached to the originally recorded plat as part of the public record. 
(Ord. No. 1999-28, 8-12-1999) 
Sec. 5-140. - Minor subdivision plat approval procedure. 
Minor subdivisions may be submitted as final plats, and shall comply with the requirements of these regulations, including minimum finished floor elevation requirements, with the following exceptions: 
(A)  Setback and dead-end street regulations established in article 10 will not apply unless the streets' original development and the lots' original establishment was governed by this Land Development Code. Setback shall not be less than the average setback existing in the blocks on each end of the affected city block, in the street affected. 
(B)  Topographic information shall be required. (Ord. No. 2003-21, 10-9-2003) 
(C)  Only one benchmark shall be required. An existing accessible benchmark within 200 feet of petitioner's property, if shown on the plat, shall satisfy this requirement. 
(D)  A drainage plan with supporting calculations is required. The plan and calculations shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the state to provide such services. 
(E)  Provided that where a series of minor subdivisions are developed or proposed immediately adjacent to one another, the planning commission or mayor and council may require the developer to comply with the procedures for major subdivisions. 
(F)  Residential lots having peculiar shape or topography may be approved utilizing private driveway access easements, provided the purpose and intent of these regulations are met. Such easements shall have a minimum width of 20 feet. The following notation shall be placed on the subdivision plat: "The private driveway access easement is hereby dedicated perpetually for use by the owners and residents of all lots within this subdivision and will not be maintained by the city." This provision will only be applicable to minor subdivisions. 
(G)  Duplexes separated by a firewall that extends at least three feet above the roofline. 
(H)  In the event the applicant has no present plans to construct on the property, an appropriate statement shall appear upon the plat to the effect that all drainage requirements must be met prior to the issuance of a building permit on any lot in the subdivision and that there will be compliance with article V, chapter 22 of the City Code except to the extent the requirements of that article may be inconsistent with this section. 
(I)  Time limit on minor subdivision plat approval. The mayor and council's approval of a minor subdivision plat shall be valid for 60 calendar days from the date of approval. If the plat has not been recorded with the county superior court on or before the end of the 60-calendar-day period, then the plat shall be resubmitted for reconsideration. 
(Ord. No. 2003-21, 10-9-2003; Ord. No. 2004-17, 8- -2004; Ord. No. 2004-17, 8- -2004; Ord. No. 2004-17, amended 1-12-2005; Ord. No. 2003-21 Minor Subdivision, amended 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 37-A-2014, § 1, 8-14-2014) 
Sec. 5-150. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(A)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(B)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(C)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(D)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development. 
Sec. 5-151. - Subdivision of duplex. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Code of Ordinances, the building official of the city is authorized to approve minor subdivisions of duplexes which have been completed and which have passed the requisite fire inspections without the need for review by the planning commission or mayor and council and without the need for any public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2000-15, 4-13-2000; Ord. No. 2000-15, add 6-28-2000) 
Sec. 5-155. - Design standards for maritime district. 
The development plan for the maritime district shall comply with the following standards: 
(A)  Access shall be located, designed and improved for safety, convenience, efficient circulation on the property, and a minimum of interference with normal traffic flow. 
(B)  Driveways and curb cuts intersecting with public rights-of-way shall be marked and shall not exceed a maximum width of 30 feet. 
(C)  Pedestrian ways shall be separated from vehicular traffic ways. 
(D)  A natural or manmade buffer shall be required where residential use abuts commercial use in this district, 25 feet will be required. 
(Ord. No. 1995-17, 12-7-1995; Ord. 1995-17, add 11-10-1999) 
Sec. 5-156. - Survey requirements. 
(A)  Foundation survey. Any person erecting, moving, enlarging, or reconstructing any principal or any accessory structure by 250 square feet or greater, which, under this ordinance, requires a building permit shall upon completion of the construction of the footings, concrete slab, piers, or other foundations, submit to the community development department a letter from the architect or the owner's agent certifying that the required setbacks have been met along with a survey prepared by a Georgia registered land surveyor showing the locations, boundaries, dimensions, elevations, and sizes of the following: the boundaries of the lot, all existing structures including foundations and their relationship to the lot(s) lines. The designated city official shall compare the location of all new or extended footing, concrete slabs, piers, or other foundations with the location of all proposed construction activity reported on the building permit application. No further inspections such as electrical, plumbing, or HVAC may occur after the foundation inspection unless the designated city official shall find that the foundation location is consistent with the permit as issued. A determination that the foundation location is consistent with the building permit as issued shall not be construed as a warranty or guarantee that the as-built drawing will be approved [see Section 5-156(B)]. In all circumstances it is the responsibility of the owner, contractor or applicant to satisfy all setback requirements. A foundation survey is not required when an approved building plan shows all the setbacks to be double those required. 
(B)  As-built drawing requirements. On a project which site plan approval, special review, engineering, a drainage plan, or plan review is required, the owner, contractor or applicant shall file an as-built plan certified by a State of Georgia certified engineer, surveyor or architect demonstrating compliance with the previously approved plans and identifying any deviations therefrom. If there are deviations identified, the engineer or architect must certify that the deviations will not materially adversely alter the stormwater controls or drainage characteristics of the original plan or that the deviations are within acceptable levels of tolerance recognized by the profession. Until such certified as-built plans are accepted by the city and approved, no certificates of occupancy may be issued. 
(C)  Height certification. The city shall have the right to request that the contractor have a State of Georgia certified engineer or surveyor certify the height of any structure. 
(Ord. No. 2000-23, 9-14-2000; Ord. No. 2000-23, add 10-4-2000; Ord. of 1-26-2006(3); Ord. No. 38-2011, 9-22-11) 
Sec. 5-160. - Enforcement. 
(A)  Zoning enforcement officer . The mayor and council shall provide for the enforcement of this Land Development Code by appointing a zoning administrator, who shall, jointly with the city marshal and other inspections personnel, have the right to withhold building permits. The zoning administrator shall not have the authority to grant approval to any building permit that does not meet the requirements of this Land Development Code. 
(B)  Violations . Any building or structure that is erected, altered, converted, or maintained in violation of this Land Development Code shall be subject to a minimum penalty of $500.00. Continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense for every day the violation is continued. 
(C)  Enforcement of violations . When the zoning officer finds that any provision of this Land Development Code is being violated, the zoning officer or agent thereof shall execute the following procedures: 
(1)  Thirty days prior to legal action by the city, send a written notice to the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Additional notices may be sent at the zoning officer's discretion. 
(2)  Fifteen days prior to legal action by the city, send a final notice by certified mail stating the action the zoning officer intends to pursue if the violation is not corrected and shall advise that the zoning officer's decision may be appealed to the mayor and council at the next scheduled meeting. 
(3)  The zoning officer shall request a summons, accusation, or complaint from the clerk of the municipal court of Tybee Island. "Complaint" shall mean summons, citation, accusation or statement of violation. 
a.  Upon receipt of the complaint, the clerk of the municipal court shall cause the complaint and a hearing notice to be issued and served upon the owner of and any parties in interest in the property or sign which is involved in or is the subject of the complaint. Such hearing shall be held before the judge of the municipal court not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after service of the complaint, unless continued as provided by law. 
b.  Complaints or orders issued by the municipal court pursuant to the provisions of this Land Development Code shall, in all cases, be served upon each person in possession of said property, each owner, and each party in interest; and the return of service signed by the public officer or his agent and the return of such public officer that such party or parties were served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or order at the residence shall be conclusive as to such service, to the extent permitted by law. 
c.  If any of the owners and parties in interest reside out of the city, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such complaint or orders to be served upon such party or parties by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residence of such party or parties and the return of services signed by the public officer or his agent other than the resident initiating the complaint; and the return of such public officer that such party or parties were served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or order at the residence shall be conclusive as to such service, to the extent permitted by law. 
d.  Nonresidents of this state shall be served by posting a copy of such complaint or orders in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or orders. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail. 
e.  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or municipality or is a nonresident he shall be served as provided for in subsection (C)(3)d. of this section. If such guardian or personal representative or in the event such minor or insane person lives outside the city or is a nonresident, service by leaving a copy at the place of his residence which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person or persons; in the case of other person who live outside of the city or are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
f.  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the zoning officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence the zoning officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint or order upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided in subsection (C)(3)d. of this section or service may be perfected upon any person, firm, or corporation holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(D)  Complaints regarding violations . Whenever the zoning enforcement officer receives a written, signed complaint alleging a violation of this Land Development Code, he or she shall investigate the complaint, take whatever action is warranted, and inform the complainant in writing what actions have been or will be taken. 
(E)  Persons liable for violations . The owner, tenant, or occupant of any building or land or part thereof and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation that is contrary to the requirements of this Land Development Code may be held responsible for the violation and suffer the penalties and be subject to the remedies herein provided. 
Sec. 5-170. - Other city actions affected by this Land Development Code. 
(A)  Alcohol beverage license . The mayor and council shall not approve an alcohol beverage license to any establishment that is not in compliance with this Land Development Code. 
(B)  Occupational taxes . No business shall receive an occupational tax certificate unless such business is in compliance with this Land Development Code. 
(C)  Chatham County tax assessment . Zoning actions conducted by the mayor and council may affect the tax-assessed value of a lot or parcel on Tybee Island. It is the responsibility of the landowner to notify the assessor of such changes. 
ARTICLE 6. - SIGN REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— Ord. No. 06-2010, adopted May 13, 2010, repealed former Art. 6, §§ 6-009—6-120, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1995-17, 12-7-1995; Ord. No. 1996-15, 8-8-1996; Ord. No. 1996-29, 11-14-96; Ord. No. 2005-15A, § 1, 5-26-2005; Ord. No. 2005-15B, §§ 1—15, 5-26-2005; Ord. of 9-28-2006(2); 

Sec. 6-009. - Editor's note to article 6. 
No sign structure shall be placed or maintained within the city except in conformity with this sign ordinance. Violations of this article may be punished in the same manner as other violations of the Land Development Code. The city reserves the right to take legal action to remove signs erected in violation of this article, or to otherwise enforce the provisions of this article. 
If any provisions or requirements of this ordinance are found to be in conflict with any other provision, requirement of this ordinance or any other applicable governmental law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or other governmental regulation of any kind, the more restrictive rule or standard shall take precedence. 
In adopting these sign regulations, it is the intent and purpose of the mayor and city council of the City of Tybee Island not to impose an outright ban on signs, but instead to: 
(A)  Balance the right of the individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; and 
(B)  Further the objectives of the City's Master Plan; and 
(C)  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare; and 
(D)  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; and 
(E)  Maintain the historical and cultural heritage and the image of the city; and 
(F)  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; and 
(G)  Avoid the harmful aspects of the unrestricted proliferation of signs; and 
(H)  Promote economic development and tourism; and 
(I)  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 06-2010, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 6-010. - State code adopted. 
(A)  All signs that are visible from a state highway that is part of the interstate and primary highway system must also conform with Georgia Outdoor Advertising Law (O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq.) and the rules and regulations of the state department of transportation. Where incidents of conflict between the state code and this Land Development Code exist the more stringent regulation shall apply. 
(B)  Notwithstanding any other restrictions in this article, any sign, device, or display allowed under this article may contain any commercial or non-commercial message, or any political or non-political message; except where such a message depicts obscenity, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, nor can they depict sexual conduct or activity or sexually explicit nudity, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3, nor advertise any activity illegal under the laws of Georgia or the United States. 
(Ord. No. 06-2010, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 6-020. - Permit required. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person or firm to, or cause to erect, enlarge, move, convert, or replace any sign in the city without first obtaining a sign permit from the designated city department. This section shall not require a sign permit for the repair or maintenance of a conforming sign for which a permit has already been issued, so long as the sign is not modified in any way different from its original condition, including changes to the permanent copy of the sign. A permit shall be required for any new business making any changes on an existing sign. 
(Ord. No. 06-2010, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 6-030. - Traffic safety. 
No sign as regulated by this article shall be erected or continued to be displayed at the intersection of any street or any public right-of-way in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location, by reason of the position, shape, color it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device; or which makes use of the words, "stop," "look," "drive-in," "danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. 
(Ord. No. 06-2010, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 6-040. - Exemptions; signs not requiring a permit. 
Except as otherwise provided, the following on-premises signs may be erected without securing a permit; provided that each is in accordance with the prescribed conditions and all other applicable codes and regulations. 
(A)  One building identification marker for each business or residence not to exceed four square feet to include information such as name, address, suite, unit number, or occupant. 
(B)  Legal notices and official instruments. 
(C)  Flags, cumulatively subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Limited to singular official flags of each of the following: the United States or other recognized sovereign nation, Georgia, Chatham County, City of Tybee Island, flags which depict affiliation or membership in an off-site non-profit organization (such as FDIC) and do not convey a commercial message, or any other sanctioned and approved flag by the city. 
(2)  Flag poles shall not exceed 35 feet in height (total length) and flags must be flown in accordance with standard protocol. 
(3)  Government-owned parcels are exempt from total flag area limitations. 
(4)  In residential districts, flags which do not convey a commercial message and are attached to a habitable building. 
(D)  Decorative flags, banners, and bunting for city-wide celebrations, conventions, public service announcements or events, yard of the month, and commemorations when specifically authorized by the community development director for a prescribed period of time not to exceed 30 days. 
(E)  Holiday lights and decorations. 
(F)  One "building marker" per building. 
(G)  Non-advertising directional signs or symbols (e.g., entrance, exit, caution, slow, or no trespassing) located on and pertaining to a parcel of private property not to exceed two square feet in area. 
(H)  One non-illuminated real estate sign per street frontage, each containing a maximum of two sign faces back to back, and provided as follows: 
(1)  Maximum sign area (per face) shall be limited to six square feet in all residential districts, and 32 square feet in all non-residential districts. For areas containing two) or more residential lots that are contiguous a total of six square feet per lot shall be allowed to be combined on to one sign not to 50 square feet. 
(2)  Multiple listing strips, sale pending, and sold signs may be allowed when attached to a real estate sign and are subject to the same maximum area requirements. 
(3)  One on-premises open house or open for inspection sign, not exceeding two square feet in area may be allowed in addition to the above area requirements. Similar off-premises signs for directional purposes may be allowed at street intersections on other private properties with the consent of the property owner. The sign shall be located at a minimum of five (5) feet off of the unimproved portion of the public right of way and shall not be attached or placed on any sign, utility pole, bench, rock, or any form of vegetation. They must be removed when the premises are no longer open for inspection. 
(4)  All real estate signs shall be removed when ownership or occupancy has changed and the property is no longer for sale, rent, or lease. 
(I)  Signs for temporary yard sales, garage sales, permitted private parking lots, and the like, located in residential districts and subject to the following provisions. 
(1)  On-premises signs shall be limited to one per parcel and a maximum area of four square feet. 
(2)  Similar off-premises signs for directional purposes, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, may be allowed at street intersections on other private properties with the consent of the property owner. The sign shall be located at a minimum of five (5) feet off of the unimproved portion of the public right of way and shall not be attached or placed on any sign, utility pole, bench, rock, or any form of vegetation. 
(J)  One single-sided construction sign per street frontage located on property where building is actually in progress under a current building permit. This shall be a freestanding sign not to exceed ten (10) feet in height, 12 square feet in a residential district, 32 square feet in a commercial district, and shall be set back from the property lines at least five feet. Such sign shall be removed before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the building or structure. 
(K)  Political signs as follows: 
(1)  The sign shall be located at a minimum of five feet off of the unimproved portion of the public right-of-way and shall not be attached or placed on any sign, utility pole, bench, rock, or any form of vegetation. 
(2)  Except for signs otherwise used for off-premises advertising, signs shall not exceed six square feet in residential districts and 16 square feet in all non-residential districts. 
(3)  The city marshal or designated representative shall, without notice, immediately remove or cause to be removed any and all political signs in violation of this section. The removal will be at the expense of the candidate and the owner of the property on which the sign was located. 
(4)  All political signs must also meet corresponding sign type regulations for the zoning district in which the sign is located. Freestanding political signs are not subject to any maximums that exist for on-premises signage. 
(L)  Signs incorporated on machinery and equipment at the manufacturer's or distributor's level, and which only identify or advertise. 
(M)  Historic signs 
(N)  Municipal and other government agency signs. 
(O)  Signs painted or otherwise attached to motor vehicles which are not conspicuously parked in proximity to a right-of-way and obviously not parked in such a way as to advertise any business or service to motorists or pedestrians. This may include signs for realtors, delivery trucks, lawn, service, etc. 
(P)  Window signs whereas only 50% or less of the window space is used for signage. 
(Q)  Canopy/Awning signs are exempted as such signs must be a part of the canopy/awning itself and cannot be attached or affixed to the materials of the structure. 
(R)  Sandwich board signs, otherwise known as "A-frame signs," are exempted only where they are located in connection with a business location and do not encroach on to city rights-of-way unless where specifically allowed. 
(Ord. No. 06-2010, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 6-050. - Obsolete/abandoned signs. 
In the event a business does not renew its business license, the sign owner shall immediately remove any sign, identification or advertising of said business, or any product sold thereby; provided, however this requirement shall not apply where under the provisions of this article, an existing conforming sign may be altered to advertise a new business or product sold thereby, and there is evidence that a new business will be in operation on the premises within six months. For instance, the sign frame may be kept in good condition if the sign face is replaced with blank white area to show that there is no business operating at that location. 
(Ord. No. 06-2010, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 6-060. - Unsafe signs. 
Any blighted/hazardous sign (s) and/or sign structure (s) shall be removed by the property owner or sign owner no later than 30 days after written notification from the city. This applies to those single use buildings where the entire use of the building is also abandoned or vacant. This does not apply to a parcel in a joined shopping center, where other uses are still maintained, unless the sign is deemed to be a safety hazard and that the sign will be subject to the removal requirements. If the property owner or sign owner fails to comply within 30 days after written notification, the city may cause the removal of the sign at the property or sign owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 06-2010, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 6-070. - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs and advertising devices are prohibited within the city limits: 
(A)  Signs displaying any words, characters, or illustrations of an obscene, indecent, or immoral nature as defined by the City Code of the City of Tybee Island. 
(B)  Signs which advertise or encourage an illegal activity as defined by local, state, or federal laws. 
(C)  Animated signs; including those that flash, blink, change image, or show any form of movement, excluding historic signs and those officially designated for public service. 
(D)  Signs that resemble any official traffic control device or emergency vehicle markings. 
(E)  Signs which make use of the words "stop," "look," "danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse vehicular traffic. 
(F)  Unshielded illuminated devices that produce glare or create a hazard or nuisance to motorists or occupants of adjacent properties. 
(G)  Signs or advertising devices attached to any vehicle or trailer parked so as to be visible from a public right-of-way for the purpose of providing advertisements of products, services, or events or directing people to a business or activity, except for a common carrier or other vehicle which is used for daily transportation of merchandise with a valid license plate. Any allowable vehicle or common carrier having a sign attached thereto as a part of the operational structure, such as a company logo or branding image, of the vehicle is to be parked in a legal parking space belonging to the business or on the property to which the sign makes reference. No signs on trailers or other non-motorized vehicles will be allowed under this subsection other than those vehicles used specifically for a service business (landscaping, construction, delivery, etc.), which does not include an advertising business. 
(H)  Snipe signs, which are off-premises signs that are tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, or to other objects. 
(I)  Temporary signs, excluding real estate, political campaign signs, and signs allowed under subsection 6-040(D). 
(J)  Roof signs or any non-freestanding sign which extends above the roof line of a building. 
(K)  Signs which emit visible smoke, vapor, particles, or odor. 
(L)  Signs with lighting or control mechanisms which cause radio, television, or other communications interference. 
(M)  Motion picture mechanisms used in such a manner as to permit or allow images to be visible from a public right-of-way or sidewalk. 
(N)  Signs located on benches or other forms of street furniture. 
(O)  Handbills. 
(Ord. No. 06-2010, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 6-080. - Design standards. 
(A)  Illumination. If a sign is to be illuminated, it should be done so as to prevent harmful lighting to motorists, residents, and wildlife and be downlit wherever possible. All electrically wired signs shall require an inspection upon installation and will be monitored periodically by the city and are subject to the requirements of the adopted building codes of the city. 
(B)  Wind pressure. Signs shall be compliant with the International Building Code. 
(C)  Area and height size computations. The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height for sign restrictions in all zoning districts. 
(1)  Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face, of which normal length times width (l × h) will be used for calculating the total area of the sign will be calculated to determine total sign area. This does not include any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets these or other ordinances or regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself. 
(2)  Computation of area of multi-faced signs. The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than 42 inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces. 
(3)  Computation of height. The height of the sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at average adjacent grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of: (1) existing grade prior to construction, or (2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive on any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zone lot, whichever is lower. 
(D)  Residential signs. For all residential uses, only the following signs are hereby allowed. 
(1)  All signs exempted from this article as described in section 6-040. 
(2)  Permanent subdivision signs at residential subdivision entrances: 
a.  Shall not exceed 24 square feet in area. 
b.  Shall not exceed one sign per roadway entrance to the subdivision. 
c.  Shall be limited to the name of the subdivision address and developer name or logo. 
d.  May be externally illuminated with a maximum of one (1) light. 
e.  Must be shown on preliminary plat during subdivision review. 
(E)  Commercial signs. For all commercial uses, only the following signs are hereby permitted. 
(1)  Wall sign. 
a.  Number. There shall be not more than one wall sign for each principal building except where the building abuts two or more streets, one wall sign oriented to each abutting street shall be permitted. 
b.  Area. The gross surface of a wall sign shall not exceed ten percent of the area of the building wall, including doors and windows, to which the sign is to be affixed or 200 square feet, whichever is smaller. 
c.  Height. A wall sign shall not project higher than the wall to which the sign is to be affixed or 20 feet, as measured from the base of the building wall to which the sign is to be affixed, whichever is lower. 
d.  Special conditions. Where a principal building is devoted to two or more permitted uses, the operator of each such use may install a wall sign upon his/her proportionate share of the building wall to which the sign is to be affixed. The maximum gross surface area of each such wall sign shall be determined by calculating the proportionate share of the area of the building wall, including doors and windows, to which the sign is to be affixed and applying such proportion to the total permitted wall sign aggregate gross surface area for the building. 
(2)  Freestanding signs. 
a.  Number. There shall not be more than one freestanding sign for each principal building. 
(i)  Exception. Notwithstanding the limitation on one freestanding sign for each principal building, where the principal building is occupied by a "destination marketing organization" as defined in O.C.G.A. tit. 48 or a non-profit promotion and marketing organization funded by or through a destination marketing organization, there may be permitted an additional freestanding sign, provided that the additional sign, viewed as a single freestanding sign, is in accordance with the prescribed conditions and all other applicable codes and regulations, and after special review and approval by mayor and council. 
b.  More than one principal use. In the event that there is more than one principal use, the sum total for each sign shall not exceed the maximum size allowed per building. Where the exception in subsection (2)(a) is applicable, regarding the limitation on one freestanding sign for each principal building, the sum total of the two freestanding signs shall be evaluated independently, and the maximum size allowed per building shall be applicable to each sign independently, so that the total sum will be double what it would otherwise be if only one sign were permitted. 
c.  Off-premises signs not permitted. 

 
(3)  Projecting signs. 
a.  Number. For all principal uses occupying 125 or less linear feet of street frontage, "projecting" signs shall be permitted one square foot of display area per sign face per linear foot of frontage occupied by each principal use; up to a maximum sign area of 45 square feet per sign face for each projecting principal use sign allowed. For all principal uses with building frontage exceeding 125 linear feet, one additional foot of sign area shall be allowed for each additional foot of building frontage occupied over 125 feet; provided, such sign shall not exceed 100 square feet in area. 
b.  Projection. The outer edge of a projecting sign shall not extend more than six feet from the building to which it is attached. 
c.  Height. The height of a projecting sign shall not be higher than wall of the building to which it is attached, and the lowest point of the projecting sign shall not be less than ten feet above the established grade. 
(4)  Roof mounted sign. Roof mounted signs shall not extend above the peak of the roof or four feet above a flat roof. 
(5)  Service island identification signs. Service island identification signs indicating the type of service offered, the price of gasoline, and other relevant information or direction to persons using the facility but containing no advertising material of any kind shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Type. Service island identification signs may be either wall or freestanding signs. 
b.  Number. There shall not be more than one service island identification sign for each service or pump island located on the premises. 
c.  Area. The sign area of a service island identification sign shall not exceed 12 square feet. 
d.  Height. A service island identification sign shall not project higher than 15 feet. 
(6)  Directory sign. A directory sign may be used for places with more than one business. 
a.  Number. One sign shall be permitted for shopping center or office complex. No other freestanding sign shall be permitted. 
b.  Size. The sign shall be permitted one-half square foot of sign area for each foot of lot frontage provided such sign shall not exceed 150 square feet or 12 square feet per use, whichever is greater. 
(F)  Signs on vacant property in commercial zoning districts. Signs shall not be permitted on lots in commercial zoning districts with no primary structure. 
(G)  Signs in neighborhood marina districts (NM). Only one principal use sign shall be visible from the adjacent public street. That sign shall not exceed a maximum size of 32 square feet in area nor eight feet in any outer dimension. Any sign if illuminated shall be externally lit, non-flashing, and containing no neon illumination. The maximum height of the sign shall not exceed 15 feet above the average ground elevation of the base of the sign or from the structure foundation to which it is attached. No sign shall be located closer than five feet to the property line or street right-of-way. 
(H)  Signs in parks-conservation district. There is no limit to the number or design of signs in this district. However, before a permanent sign is placed on a lot or parcel in this district, the applicant shall appear before mayor and council at a regularly scheduled meeting. If the request is approved, prior to any work a sign permit must be issued by the designated city department. 
The city has identified an area located near the intersection of Highway 80 and Old Highway 80 and between the Library and Fifth Street in Memorial Park along Butler Avenue where banners may be located that are advertising city approved special events and/or events sponsored by a city non-profit organization that has qualified for a city community service award and/or events to be held within the city which are sponsored by a non-profit organization. Banners promoting a political candidate and/or an election are not allowed at these locations. An application and approval by the facilities coordinator or his/her designee is required. Such events must be open to the general public. These banners shall not exceed 32 square feet. All banners are required to have half-moon cuts to allow air movement. An application will be accepted within 90 days of the event date. Such banners cannot be erected earlier than eight days before an event and must be removed within 24 hours of completion of the event. A banner permit will be issued on a first come, first served basis. 
(I)  Signs in environmental-conservation districts (EC). All signs in any size, shape or form are strictly prohibited in the environmental-conservation districts. 
(J)  Banners. 
(a)  A banner may be allowed on a temporary basis for a maximum of 90 days per calendar year upon obtaining a special banner permit. A permit shall be for a 30-day period. An applicant, at the time of making an application, shall select one of the following options per calendar year: 
(1)  Banner displayed 30 days; banner removed 60 days. 
(2)  Banner displayed 30 days; banner removed 30 days. 
(3)  Banner displayed concurrently, without removal, not exceeding 90 consecutive days. 
(4)  A special banner permit of $15.00 must be obtained from the designated city department each 30-day period with no more than three permits allowed per location during any calendar year. All banners under any of the above stated options must comply with the following limitations: 
a.  Each business location shall be limited to three permits per calendar year and banner display shall not exceed the total of 90 days in one calendar year. 
b.  Banners must be physically attached to a building or some other permanent structure which requires a building permit for construction excluding a freestanding sign. 
c.  With a special banner permit, banners will be allowed over and above the wall signage maximum of the business; banner area shall not cumulatively exceed 32 square feet. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, a museum, as defined in section 2-010(B), and/or an educational facility, may erect a banner(s) that exceeds the maximum allowable days permitted under subsection (J)(a) and exceeds the cumulative maximum of 32 square feet, upon approval of a banner plan by the mayor and council. The banner plan must be reviewed and approved by the mayor and council on an annual basis. 
(K)  Murals of appropriate scenes. Commercial establishments located within the C-2 district, the neighborhood grocery store district, and the south end overlay district may produce and display murals with depictions of appropriate scenes on commercial buildings, structures, fences, or walls. The use of such murals and scenes and their display is to be promoted and, in the absence of vulgar, obscene, or lewd displays, should presumptively be permissible. The standards of section 6-070 are applicable. If illuminated, it shall be as required by section 6-080(A). The murals must be hand-designed and must be painted by hand when installed. The applicant and/or the property owner may not receive compensation for the mural or scene. The Main Street design committee shall review requests and provide recommendation to the Main Street board of directors. Following review by the main street board of directors, all requests are subject to review and approval by the planning and zoning department. A permit is required prior to installation. The permit fee is $75.00. 
(Ord. No. 06-2010, 5-13-2010; Ord. No. 15-2012, 7-12-2012; Ord. No. 04-2014-A, § 1, 1-9-2014; Ord. No. 34-A-2014, § 1, 8-14-2014; Ord. No. 09-2015, § 1, 4-23-2015 ; Ord. No. 17-C-2015, § 1, 8-13-2015 ) 
Sec. 6-090. - Nonconforming signs. 
(A)  General. Any sign which by its height, area, and location does not conform to the requirements of this article shall be termed nonconforming. 
(B)  Alterations to nonconforming signs. No nonconforming sign shall be structurally altered or moved, unless brought into conformity with the requirements of this article, except that such signs may have normal maintenance including repainting or changes in copy. 
(C)  Continuation and removal. All nonconforming signs existing before the effective date of the ordinance, and all nonconforming signs properly permitted and existing before the effective date of amendments thereto, may continue in use in accordance with the other provisions of this article. 
(D)  Damage. Any legal nonconforming sign may be repaired or restored to its original condition subject to the conditions that repairs do not exceed 50 percent of its total value and that repairs do not alter the original permanent copy. 
(E)  Off-premises signs. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section in conflict, as pertains to nonconforming off-premises free-standing signs on commercial use lots, subsection 06-080(E)(2), and signs on vacant lots in commercial zoning districts, subsection 06-080(F), whether nonconforming at the adoption of this ordinance or which were made nonconforming by the amendment of July 12, 2012, whenever one of these signs is damaged by fire, flood, hurricane, explosion, earthquake, war, riot, or any act of God, it may be restored, reconstructed and continued as the same nonconforming sign as existed before such damage, provided however, that the sign be located in the same location, that the sign not exceed the pre-damage size, height and area dimensions, and that any permit(s) required to initiate restoration be obtained within six months of the occurrence of damage. If not obtained within six months, then only a conforming use or structure will be allowed upon the property. Provided further, however, that the mayor and council may grant an extension of this six-month period in their discretion. 
(F)  Other sections. Pertaining to signs, this section supersedes any other sections of the Land Development Code which pertain to nonconforming uses. 
(Ord. No. 06-2010, 5-13-2010; Ord. No. 15-2012, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 6-100. - Relief from sign design requirements. 
A sign may be granted relief from the strict application of the design standards for height and area by adhering to the following requirements: 
(A)  Sign height. The maximum sign height may be increased by one foot for every two feet that the entire sign is placed back from all property lines including side and rear lines, not to exceed a maximum of 25' in height, not including flagpoles which are subject to the standards of subsection 6-040(D) and are allowed to a maximum height of 35 feet. 
(B)  Sign area. The maximum sign area may be increased by two square feet for every one foot that the entire sign is placed back from all property lines including side and rear lines. This does not apply to wall or roof mounted signs, not to exceed a maximum of 100 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 06-2010, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 6-110. - Other permissible signs. 
Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, any sign or signs which meet requirements as to design standards, size, illumination, and location for the premises where a sign is sought to be permitted, shall be allowable for the purpose of displaying a message. 
(Ord. No. 06-2010, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 6-115. - Maritime district. 
The following signs are not allowed in the maritime district under the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Flashing and/or animated signs; 
(2)  Signs erected on or located on any street, or public right-of-way, curb, curb stone, hydrant, lamppost, trees, barricade, temporary walk, utility pole, or public fence; 
(3)  Signs with revolving or rotating beams of light; and 
(4)  Handbills. 
Commercial signs: see sign regulations for wall signs, freestanding signs, projecting signs, roof mounted signs, directory signs and temporary signs. 
(Ord. No. 06-2010, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 6-120. - Enforcement. 
Violations of this sign ordinance shall be treated as a direct violation of the City of Tybee Island Land Development Code. Any sign found to be violation of this articled shall be subject to the applicable enforceable actions of Section 5-160, Enforcement of this Land Development Code by the city marshal and in conjunction with the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 06-2010, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 6-130. - Severability and conflict. 
If any section, subsection, clause or provision of this article shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, subsection, clause, provision or portion of this article which is not invalid or unconstitutional. Where the provisions of this article are in conflict with other ordinances, the most restrictive provision shall be enforced. The enactment of this severability and conflict clause in this article shall not be construed as expressing an intent that the severability and conflict clause contained in the overall land use plan, section 1-050, should not be applicable to this and all other articles. The purpose of the inclusion of this particular severability clause is to emphasize the intention of the mayor and council that in the event any particular provision of this article is held to be invalid, then all other provisions of this article to the fullest extent possible, remain valid and enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 06-2010, 5-13-2010) 
ARTICLE 7. - TREE REMOVAL REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-2012, adopted April 26, 2012, amended and restated former Art. 7, s;§ 7-010—7-100, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. 7 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1996-14, 7-11-1996; Ord. No. 1999-20, 6-10-1999; Ord. No. 1999-21, 6-10-1999; Ord. No. 2002-20, 9-12-2002; Ord. No. 2003-22, 11-13-2003; Ord. of 12-15-2003; Ord. of 9-22-2005. 

Sec. 7-010. - Findings of fact. 
(A)  Natural vegetative growth and trees add physical, aesthetic, and economic value to the island and should be preserved where possible. 
(B)  Trees help stabilize the soil with their root systems and control soil erosion caused by storm damage as well as moderate surface runoff of rainwater. 
(C)  Trees make life more comfortable on the island by providing shade, cooling both land and air, reducing noise and air pollution, providing scenic amenities, and provide habitat of desirable wildlife. 
(D)  Trees are essential to the present and future health and welfare of residents and visitors to Tybee Island. 
(Ord. No. 12-2012, 4-26-2012) 
Sec. 7-020. - Purpose. 
The various sections of this article are adopted for the following purposes: 
(A)  To help control the effects of accelerated water run-off and soil erosion due to clearing, and assist in dune stabilization and mitigation of storm drainage. 
(B)  To preserve and protect trees for buffers where land use and zoning requirements dictate such buffers. 
(C)  To maximize the positive benefits of sitting buildings and parking on land in relationship to mature trees. 
(D)  To ensure that responsible public agencies are made aware in timely fashion of proposed tree removal activities. 
(E)  To help protect the investments of property owners and buyers, and provide mature native island trees for the enjoyment of future generations. 
(F)  To help protect the health and well-being of Tybee Island residents and guests by providing shade and otherwise moderating potential dangerous summer temperatures. 
(Ord. No. 12-2012, 4-26-2012) 
Sec. 7-030. - Applications and exceptions. 
The requirements of this article shall apply to all parcels and public rights-of-way within the city. No trees shall be removed within the City of Tybee Island except in compliance with this article, with the following exceptions: 
(A)  No permit shall be required for the removal of trees which endanger or obstruct public safety and welfare as determined by the zoning administrator or designated city representative. 
(B)  No permit shall be required for the trimming or pruning of trees, provided that such maintenance activity shall not be so extensive as to constitute tree removal as defined above. 
(C)  This article shall not apply to utility rights-of-way. 
(D)  No permit or mitigation shall be required in the event the zoning administrator or designated city representative determines that a tree is or imminently will cause damage to a structure or to appurtenances such as decks, patios, porches and the like. This subsection shall not have application to potential damage to sidewalks or driveways from tree roots. 
(Ord. No. 12-2012, 4-26-2012) 
Sec. 7-035. - Tree protection during plat and plan approval. 
During the subdivision plat approval process and also during the site plan approval process, the existing location of all significant trees shall be considered so as to preserve such trees unless no feasible alternative exists in order to make reasonable, beneficial economic use of the property. To be considered are the locations and the anticipated locations of drainage and utility structures, water and sewer lines, streets, sidewalks, driveways, final site contours, building footprints, and other impacts on existing significant trees. When no feasible alternative exists except to remove existing significant trees, their planned removal shall be noted on the plans, as well as the location, size and types of the trees planned to meet mitigation requirements as outlined in section 7-080. 
(Ord. No. 12-2012, 4-26-2012) 
Sec. 7-040. - Building permit required. 
Any person desiring to clear land or remove trees to a density below that required in section 7-050 or remove a significant tree pursuant to this article shall apply for a building permit from the city. See section 9-030 of this Land Development Code for requirements and application procedure. A tree survey must be submitted before a permit can be issued. 
(Ord. No. 12-2012, 4-26-2012) 
Sec. 7-050. - Tree removal requirements. 
(A)  Under the limits and conditions set forth below, trees may be removed from a lot or parcel provided that a minimum density of three trees per each 4,500 square feet of area is maintained. 
(B)  Except as provided in section 7-060 no significant tree shall be removed from any vacant lot, undeveloped parcel, or public right-of-way within the city. 
(C)  If the siting of a building footprint, the associated driveway, and parking areas require the removal of trees to a density less than that stated in subsection (A) [of this section], the city manager or designated city representative may issue a permit to remove trees to a density below this standard under the following conditions: 
1.  The applicant must show that, within the applicable setback limitations, no locations for building footprints and driveway/parking exist that comply with the density requirement above. 
2.  Removal of trees shall be limited to either the fewest number or the least total DBH necessary for siting of the building and the least destructive configuration of driveway/parking. 
3.  Following construction, trees shall be re-planted on the lot/parcel to establish the minimum density as stated in subsection (A) [of this section]. Such planting shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in section 7-090. 
(D)  No trees shall be removed from the DNR marsh setback line. Trees in the marsh setback may not be counted as "remaining trees" for mitigation purposes. 
(Ord. No. 12-2012, 4-26-2012) 
Sec. 7-060. - Removal of significant trees. 
(A)  Significant trees may be removed only under the following situations or conditions: 
1.  Upon showing by the applicant that removal of a significant tree is necessary to make reasonable beneficial, economic use of the property; such showing must demonstrate that there is no feasible alternative that would preserve the tree, and must be made for each significant tree the applicant proposes to remove; 
2.  For improvements, expansion and/or new construction of infrastructure services, including water/sewer systems and streets, but only if no alternatives are available; and 
3.  Prior to the issuance of a permit allowing the removal of a significant tree, the zoning administrator shall confirm in writing that one or more of the situations enumerated herein exists. 
(B)  The tree removal permit allowing the removal of significant trees shall require the landowner/permittee to comply with the requirements set forth in sections 7-070 and 7-080 and the additional following conditions: 
1.  Each removed significant tree shall be replaced with one or more trees of like species having an aggregate DBH at least equal to the DBH of the removed tree, and meeting the requirements of section 7-080; such replacement tree(s) shall be considered to be one tree for the purpose of meeting density requirements established in section 7-050(A); the exception to this provision is a dead tree, or a diseased tree that is a danger to or obstructs public safety and welfare or that might infect otherwise healthy trees. 
2.  Native trees left remaining on the site may be counted as replacement trees according to the mitigation schedule. These trees must be noted on the plat and shall be protected as a tree as defined by section 2-010. 
(Ord. No. 12-2012, 4-26-2012) 
Sec. 7-070. - Tree protection during development. 
On each lot or tract where construction is ongoing pursuant to a validly issued building permit, protective barricades shall be placed around trees at the tree drip line which are to be retained, and shall remain in place throughout construction. The areas within the protective barricades shall remain free of all building materials, construction debris, vehicles, and development activities. Penalties for violation of this section shall be the same as found in section 7-090. 
(Ord. No. 12-2012, 4-26-2012) 
Sec. 7-080. - Standards for tree planting and replacement. 
(A)  Pursuant to building permit . Trees planted or replaced, or left remaining on the site pursuant to a validly issued building permit in accordance with this article shall be botanically compatible with local conditions, healthy, disease and pest free, and may have a minimum size of two inches, caliper measure. The permittee/landowner shall choose the species of replacement trees from the native species list for Tybee Island. At least one replacement tree or remaining tree shall be of the same species as the tree(s) that are planned to be removed. Ideally, planting should be done immediately following construction or in the earliest growing season thereafter. 
(B)  Pursuant to citation of violation . Replacement trees planted pursuant to citation of violation shall be of the same type (species) as the tree being removed and shall be the maximum DBH that is commercially available. The aggregate DBH of trees planted as replacement shall equal the DBH of the tree that was removed in violation of this article. 
(C)  [Survival of replacement trees.] All replanted or replacement trees must survive at least two full calendar years for the permittee/landowner to be considered to be in full compliance with this article. If the replanted tree becomes unhealthy or dies, it must be removed from the site and replaced as soon as conditions permit. This duration is not to exceed one calendar year. 
(D)  Off-site tree planting option . If it is not possible to replant trees to the specifications required in these regulations, the applicant may choose to plant the required trees on city property in a location specified by the zoning administrator. A donation may be made to the trees for Tybee fund. All significant trees may be mitigated at a cost of $50.00 per inch. 
(E)  [Definition of replanted, remaining, and replacement trees.] All replanted, remaining, or replacement trees shall be considered a "tree" as defined in section 2-010. 
(Ord. No. 12-2012, 4-26-2012) 
Sec. 7-090. - Penalties for unlawful tree removal. 
Violation of this article shall be subject to the following fines and restrictions: 
(A)  Any person who violates any provision of this article or fails to comply with any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, upon being found guilty of violation, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each unlawfully removed tree. 
(B)  In addition to the penalties imposed in subsection (A) herein above, the party or parties found to be in violation of this article shall be required to plant or replace trees, pursuant to the requirements of section 7-080. The requirements of this subsection are mandatory, and shall apply regardless of any other penalties imposed for violations of this article. 
(C)  Where violation of this article is associated with construction, pursuant to a city building permit, a certificate of occupancy may not be issued until such violation has been remedied and trees are planted or replaced, pursuant to the requirements of section 7-080, as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. The requirements of this subsection are mandatory, and shall apply regardless of any other penalties imposed for violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-2012, 4-26-2012) 
Sec. 7-100. - Appeals of actions. 
Appeals of decisions of the city administrator, city marshal, or his designee, pursuant to this article shall be made to the mayor and council pursuant to city council meeting procedures. 

 
(Ord. No. 12-2012, 4-26-2012) 
ARTICLE 8. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept, 26, 2008, repealed the former Art. 8, §§ 8-010—8-170, and enacted a new Art. 8 as set out herein. The former Art. 8 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the original codification. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-010. - Statutory authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and council of the City of Tybee Island, Georgia does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 8-020. - Findings of fact. 
(A)  The flood hazard areas of Tybee Island, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 8-030. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article are to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 8-040. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions, and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 8-050. - Variance procedures. 
(A)  The planning commission as established by the mayor and council of Tybee Island, Georgia shall hear and make recommendations to the Mayor and Council for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(B)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Chatham County, Georgia as provided in state law. 
(C)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of Historic Structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(D)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(E)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if ANY increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(F)  In reviewing such requests, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(G)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause, 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  Every applicant to whom a variance is granted from the elevation requirements for the lowest floor elevation is required to have such variance noted on the deed and the plat to the deed for the property on which the structure is, or is to be, located. Such notation shall read as follows: 
A lowest floor elevation variance of ______ feet has been approved by the City of Tybee Island for a structure located on this property. The structure is identified as a (Note: SELECT ONE) single-family, duplex of multi-family dwelling, or commercial building) located at ____________. It should be noted that such variance may significantly increase the flood insurance premiums for this property, as well as increase the likelihood of flood damage to the structure and its contents. Said variance was issued upon petition of the property owner and was issued with the owner's full knowledge of the consequences to the present and future owners which may result therefrom. 
A copy of the deed shall be filed by the owner with the building and zoning department of the City of Tybee Island within two weeks of receipt of formal notification of approval of a variance by the City of Tybee Island. 
(5)  The Building and Zoning Department Tybee Island, Georgia shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(I)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the planning commission and/or mayor and council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 5) 
Sec. 8-060. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction." 
Appeal means a request for a review of the planning commission and/or mayor and council of Tybee Island, Georgia interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 8-080 herein. 
"Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1—A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1—A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1—V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structure support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Building, means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before November 22, 1972. [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)]. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before November 22, 1972. [i.e., the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Flood proofing, means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. 
Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Functionally dependent use means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to the water. The term includes docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or rented manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register: 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD88), to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after January 14, 1972 [the effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after November 22, 1972 [the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after November 22, 1972. [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA floods modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure, taking place during a one-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 6; Ord. No. 24-2015 , § 1, 10-22-2015) 
Sec. 8-070. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood Hazard within the jurisdiction of Tybee Island, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 8-080. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated September 26, 2008, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS, supporting data and any revision thereto, for Chatham County, Georgia, dated September 26, 2008 are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Building and Zoning Department, 403 Butler Avenue, Tybee Island, Georgia 31328. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 8-090. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 8-100. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 8-110. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 8-120. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 8-130. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood Hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Tybee Island, Georgia or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 8-140. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1000.00, or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Tybee Island, Georgia from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 2, § H) 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 8-150. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The designated representative of the Building and Zoning Department, Tybee Island, Georgia is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 8-160. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a building permit shall be made to the Building and Zoning Department Tybee Island, Georgia on forms furnished by the community PRIOR to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of subsections 8-190(2) and 8-210(2); 
d.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any new construction or substantial improvement placed in a Coastal high hazard area will meet the criteria of subsection 8-230(5); 
e.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the Building and Zoning Department Tybee Island, Georgia an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Where a structure is subject to the provisions applicable to coastal high hazards areas, after placement of the lowest horizontal structural members. Any regulatory floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The city building and zoning department shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 8-170. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the Building and Zoning Department Tybee Island, Georgia shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 8-080, then the building and zoning department shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 3. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 8-160(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with subsections 8-190(2) and 8-210(2). 
(7)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the building and zoning department shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 8-160(1)c. and subsections 8-190(2) and 8-210(2). 
(8)  Obtain design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any new construction or substantial improvement placed in a coastal high hazard area will meet the criteria of subsection 8-230(5). 
(9)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(10)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(11)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the Letter of Map Revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(12)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city building and zoning department shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(13)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the Building and Zoning Department 403 Butler Ave. Tybee Island, Georgia, and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 3, § C) 
DIVISION 3. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 8-180. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated Buildings. All New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include ANY fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. (not applicable in coastal high hazard areas). 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing fixtures, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding, and; 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 8-190. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard designated as A1—30, AE, AH, A (with estimated BFE), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 8-180(4), "Elevated Buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing fixtures and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1—30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 8-170(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles—Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an either existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (ref. subsection 8-180(6) above) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "New Construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)a. and c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood Hazard established in section 8-080 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 8-200. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-080, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a Floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 8-080), then the building and zoning department shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this division. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (subsections (2) and (3)) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 25 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 8-180(4), "Elevated buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing fixtures, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The Building and Zoning Department shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 8-210. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-080, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (Zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with section 8-190. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 8-220. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in Section 8-080, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 8-180(4), "Elevated buildings". 
The surveyor, architect, or engineer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 8-160(1)c. and (2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 8-230. - Coastal high hazard areas (V-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 8-080, are areas designated as coastal high hazard areas (V-zones). These areas have special flood hazards associated with wave action and storm surge, therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide; 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be elevated on piles, columns, or shear walls parallel to the flow of water so that the bottom of the lowest supporting horizontal structural member (excluding pilings or columns) is located no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation level. All space below the lowest supporting member shall remain free of obstruction or constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls. Open wood lattice work or decorative screening may be permitted for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action and in accordance with subsection below; 
(3)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be securely anchored on pilings, columns, or shear walls; and 
(4)  All pile and column foundations and the structures attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the combined effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on ALL building components, both (non-structural and structural). Water loading values shall equal or exceed those of the base flood. Wind loading values shall be in accordance with the most current edition of the (ICC) International Building Codes. 
(5)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the provisions contained in subsection (2) through (4) herein. 
(6)  All space below the lowest horizontal supporting member must remain free of obstruction. Open wood lattice work or decorative screening may be permitted for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action without causing structural damage to the supporting foundation or elevated portion of the structure. The following design specifications are allowed: 
a.  No solid walls shall be allowed; and 
b.  Material shall consist of open wood lattice or mesh screening only. 
c.  If aesthetic open wood lattice work or screening is utilized, any enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation, but shall be designed to be used only for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. 
(7)  Prior to construction, plans for any structures having open wood latticework or decorative screening must be shown on the plans submitted to the city building and zoning department for review and approval; 
(8)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to any structure shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor except with open wood latticework or decorative screening, as provided in this section. 
(9)  There shall be no fill used as structural support. Non-compacted fill may be used around the perimeter of a building for landscaping/aesthetic purposes provided the fill will wash out from storm surge, (thereby rendering the building free of obstruction) prior to generating excessive loading forces, ramping effects, or wave deflection. The building and zoning department shall approve design plans for landscaping/aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided an analysis by an engineer, architect, and/or soil scientist, which demonstrates that the following factors have been fully considered: 
a.  Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency for excessive natural compaction; 
b.  Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave defection to adjacent properties; and 
c.  Slope of fill will not cause wave run-up or ramping. 
(10)  There shall be no alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, which would increase potential flood damage; 
(11)  Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an existing manufactured homes park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of subsection 8-190(3) are met. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 4, § F) 
Sec. 8-240. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(A)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(B)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(C)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
(D)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 4, § G) 
Sec. 8-250. - Standard for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall be elevated to or above the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(B)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 4, § H) 
ARTICLE 9. - BUILDING REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 27-2010, adopted Oct. 28, 2010, amended former Art. 9, §§ 9-010—9-050, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. 9 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a listing of ordinances which have amended former Art. 9. 

Sec. 9-010. - Appointment of building inspector. 
The inspections conducted by the community development department shall be headed by the Building Official who shall have the power to enforce his/her duties as stated in section 9-020. The actual inspection of a building as it pertains to this article shall be conducted by the building official, or his/her qualified and certified designee, as promulgated by a contract between the mayor and council and the appropriate agency of Chatham County. 
(Ord. No. 27-2010, 10-28-2010) 
Sec. 9-020. - Community development department staff. 
The community development department staff shall act as the city's representative while conducting the following duties: 
(A)  To enforce the city's adopted technical codes as referenced in section 9-050. 
(B)  To approve or disapprove within a reasonable time the building permit applications, and plans, specifications, etc., filed with the office. 
(C)  To answer questions relative to this article. 
(D)  To issue permits and collect fees. 
(Ord. No. 27-2010, 10-28-2010) 
Sec. 9-030. - Building permits. 
(A)  Application for a building permit must be made by the owner, or his agent, accompanied by two sets of plans, together with specifications of the work to be done. An application for a building permit for construction of a new building or an addition must be accompanied by a plan showing size of lot and portion of lot to be built on and shall show that the lot has been surveyed by a licensed surveyor, or that lot stakes have been placed in position in accordance with such a survey. No work of any nature shall be started until a building permit has been issued. A permit must be secured for all new construction, all interior and exterior property alterations and all interior and exterior property repairs. Cosmetic items such as painting, carpet replacement and similar work shall not require a permit. No permit shall be issued until the prescribed fees for same have been paid in accordance with the fee schedule on file with the clerk of council. 
(B)  Prior to any land-disturbing activity or structure modifications, the landowner or building permittee shall show the diameter and location of all trees of six inches or more in diameter at breast height (4½ feet above existing grade) on a sketch of the site, together with the location of existing or planned improvements on the site. A tree removal permit shall be obtained prior to the removal of any living, damaged, or dead tree. 
(C)  All construction sites are required to have restroom facilities as well as sufficient containers for collecting all waste and debris created from the construction activities. No inspection shall be conducted until the applicant has provided proof of compliance with these requirements. If during construction such facilities are not provided on site, the building inspector will issue a stop work order until such compliance is achieved. Owners of property while under construction shall ensure there is sufficient space on their property for all construction vehicles, materials, and other related items so as not to interfere with adjacent property owners access or parking on their property. 
(D)  Any applicant for a building permit shall have the right to appeal to the mayor and council should the building official refuse to approve the issuance of a permit. 
(E)  Construction must begin within 180 days from the date of permit issuance. An issued permit shall become invalid if the construction authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. 
(F)  A placard issued with a permit shall be posted on the premises and not more than five feet from the front property line. A replacement placard must be obtained from city hall and posted immediately when a placard becomes illegible or lost. It is unlawful to post a placard for a private project on public property. It is unlawful to attach a placard to a tree or utility pole. A placard shall be removed as soon as practicable after a project has passed final inspection. 
(Ord. No. 27-2010, 10-28-2010; Ord. No. 41-2011, 9-22-2011; Ord. No. 33-A-2014, § 1, 7-10-2014) 
Sec. 9-040. - Right of entry. 
All the officers designated under this article or any future amendments to the same shall, as far as may be necessary for the performance of their respective duties, have the right to enter any building or premises in the city at any time. 
(Ord. No. 27-2010, 10-28-2010) 
Sec. 9-050. - Technical codes adopted. 
(A)  The following codes as currently amended by the state department of community affairs are adopted: 
(1)  International Building Code (ICC); 
(2)  National Electrical Code (NFPA); 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code (ICC); 
(4)  International Mechanical Code (ICC); 
(5)  International Plumbing Code (ICC); 
(6)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC); 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code (ICC); 
(8)  International Fire Code (ICC); 
(9)  Life Safety Code (NFPA); 
(10)  International Existing Building Code (ICC); 
(11)  International Property Maintenance Code (ICC); 
(12)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ICC). 
(B)  [Reserved] 
(C)  Adopted in addition to the technical codes of subsection (A) is a local requirement that a minimum of two means of egress shall be provided in every building or structure and/or section, and area, including one- and two-family dwellings, where size and/or occupancy, and arrangement endanger occupants attempting to use a single means of egress that is blocked by fire or smoke. The two means of egress shall be arranged to minimize the possibility that both might be rendered impassable by the same emergency condition. 
(D)  Adopted in addition to the technical codes of subsection (A) is a local requirement that all pier footings shall be a minimum of 36 inches wide by 36 inches wide by 36 inches deep with concrete being a minimum of 20 inches thick. The bottom of the concrete is to be a minimum of 36 inches below natural grade. All stemwall footings and monolithic slab footings shall be a minimum of 20 inches wide by 24 inches thick. The bottom of the concrete is to be a minimum of 24 inches below natural grade. All footings shall have reinforcing steel as required. 
(Ord. No. 27-2010, 10-28-2010; Ord. No. 17-2013, § 1, 5-23-2013; Ord. No. 28-2013, § 1, 8-22-2013; Ord. No. 02-2014, § 1, 1-23-2014; Ord. No. 16-2014, § 1, 2-27-2014; Ord. No. 27A-2014, § 1, 4-28-2014) 
ARTICLE 10. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-020. - Authority. 
The mayor and council of the city, pursuant to the authority conferred by the provisions of the Georgia Code, annotated, do ordain and enact into law the following articles and sections. 
Sec. 10-030. - Area embraced. 
The jurisdiction of this article shall be all that area within the corporate limits of the city. 
Sec. 10-040. - Purpose. 
The various sections of this article are adopted for the following purposes, among others: 
(A)  To help conserve and protect the natural, economic, and scenic resources of the city. 
(B)  To help prevent and reduce the traffic congestion and traffic hazards which result from narrow or poorly aligned streets, and which result from excessive entrance and exit points along major traffic arteries. 
(C)  To help eliminate the costly maintenance problems which develop when streets and lots are laid out without proper consideration being given to the drainage characteristics of the tract of land at the time the land is being subdivided into streets and lots. 
(D)  To help prevent the spread of urban blight and slums. 
(E)  To help ensure that residential lots will be of such design, area, and width as will prevent health and sanitation problems from developing in those subdivisions with lots to be served by individual water supply and waste disposal systems. 
(F)  To help ensure that all building lots will be accessible to firefighting equipment, and other emergency and service vehicles. 
(G)  To help protect the investments of the buyers of subdivision lots. 
(H)  To help promote and protect the health, safety, prosperity, and welfare of the citizens of the city, and for other purposes. 
Sec. 10-050. - Minor subdivisions. 
In the case of a minor subdivision which shall have lots fronting only on an existing, open, and public street and which does not require a new street and each new lot meets the minimum lot size requirements of section 3-090 for the current zoning district, the developer of such subdivision shall only be required to submit a final plat. 
Sec. 10-060. - Variance. 
When a peculiar shape, or the topography of a tract of land, or other unusual condition, makes it impractical for a developer to comply with the literal interpretations of the design requirements of this article, the mayor and council, following a recommendation of the planning commission may approve variances to these regulations; provided, however, that in so doing, the intents and purposes of this article are not violated. For such a variance to be considered, the applicant must follow the variance requirements in section 5-090 as well as the subdivision approval procedures. 
Sec. 10-070. - Illegal land subdivision. 
Unless a subdivision hereafter established shall be designed, developed, and recorded in accordance with the provisions of this article, then: 
(A)  The city shall not accept the dedication of any street within such subdivision, nor shall the city improve, maintain, grade, pave, or light any street within such subdivision unless such street or streets shall have received the status of public streets prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(B)  The city shall not assume any responsibility for drainage problems within such subdivision unless city-owned and maintained drainage structures already exist in such subdivisions. 
(C)  The city shall not issue a building permit within such subdivision. 
(D)  No unit of local government shall be authorized to extend any publicly operated service or utility into such subdivision. 
Sec. 10-080. - Design standards. 
(A)  Minimum design standards and improvements . In order that various purposes of this article may be accomplished, all subdivisions hereafter established shall be developed and improved in accordance with the minimum design standards set forth in this article. Provided, those parcels recorded prior to the effective date of these regulations which abut an unopened road shall not be developed until such road or portion thereof has been opened and paved according to city specifications or as certified to be paved in accordance with subsection (E) of these regulations. Final approval shall not be given a subdivision until all appropriate design standards have been met and until all appropriate required improvements have either been installed or an appropriate bond or certified check has been posted to secure the installation of such improvements. 
(B)  Benchmarks . At least two benchmarks shall be established within a subdivision. Such benchmarks shall be at opposite corners of the property being subdivided. 
(C)  Monuments . The subdivider shall provide stone or concrete monuments four inches in diameter or square, 30 inches long, with a flat top, which shall be set at each street corner, and at all points of curvature in each street. The top of the monument shall contain a metal pin or be scored with an indented cross to properly identify the location. The subdivider shall also provide all interior lot corners of subdivisions with concrete monuments, iron pins, or iron pipes. Iron pipes shall be at least one-half inch in diameter and 24 inches in length. 
(D)  Streets . Except as hereinafter provided, all streets established in any subdivision shall comply with the following general provisions: 
(1)  Continuation of existing street pattern . The arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall provide for the alignment with, or the continuation of the appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas. 
(2)  Street jogs . Street jogs or centerline offsets in the horizontal alignment of streets across intersection of less than 150 feet shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Intersections . The centerline of no more than two streets shall intersect at any one point. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no streets shall intersect any other street at less than 60 degrees. Curved streets shall have a minimum tangent of 100 feet at intersection. 
(4)  Streets intersecting with major arterials and secondary arterials . New street entrances on roads designated or classified as arterials shall be not less than 500 feet apart. However, the mayor and council may reduce these requirements whenever they determine that such action will not be contrary to the purpose of this article. 
(5)  Subdivisions on arterial streets . Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the mayor and council may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service lanes, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(6)  Minimum curb and street radius . The lot line radius at intersecting streets shall be not less than 20 feet. The centerline radius of all curvilinear streets shall be not less than 75 feet. 
(7)  Permanent dead-end streets . Dead-end streets, designed to be such permanently, shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of not less than 80 feet, and a right-of-way diameter of not less than 100 feet. 
(8)  Temporary dead-end streets . Temporary dead-end streets shall be provided with a temporary turnaround area which shall meet the requirements for design, maintenance, and removal as approved by the mayor and council. 
(9)  Half streets . Half streets shall not be permitted within a subdivision. 
(10)  Interior streets . Interior streets within subdivisions shall be so laid out and designed that their use by through traffic and speeding traffic will be discouraged. 
(11)  Street names . All streets within a subdivision hereafter established shall be named. No name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with existing street names. 
(12)  Additional right-of-way . A proposed subdivision that includes a platted street that does not conform to the minimum right-of-way requirements of this article shall provide for the dedication of additional right-of-way required by ordinance. If the proposed subdivision abuts only one side of said street then a minimum of one-half of the required extra right-of-way shall be dedicated by such subdivision. 
(13)  Street access to adjoining property . Whenever the mayor and council find that street access to adjoining property is needed, a street right-of-way shall be extended to the boundary of such property and such right-of-way shall be dedicated to the public as an unopened street. When such unopened street is required for access to property, then the developer of the property for which access is required shall be responsible for opening and improving the unopened street. 
(14)  Street name markers . Street name markers which shall be constructed to city specifications shall be installed at all street intersections. 
(15)  Major thoroughfare plan . When the major thoroughfare plan of the community shows proposed arterial streets and collector streets within a proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall design the street system within such subdivision to conform with the location and arrangement of such arterial streets and collector streets. 
(16)  Sidewalks . Sidewalks may be installed on all major arterials for single-family and multi-family residential, and on major and secondary arterials for commercial. 
(E)  Street design and construction specifications . Except as hereinafter provided, all streets established in any subdivision shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following specifications: 

 
*Field density check tests shall be taken at the rate of one test per 1,500 square yards of paving. 
**Proctor tests shall be made from representative soil sands taken from the area to be paved. 
(11)  Drainage. Developer's engineer shall certify that the subdivision will drain adequately. 
Additional right-of-way for roadside ditches may be required when needed. In addition, all subdivisions and all expansions of old subdivisions shall be provided with drainage structures sufficient to accommodate a ten-year storm with immediate runoff; with outfall drainage and structures sufficient to accommodate a 50-year storm flood. 
(12)  Storm drainage structures. No storm drainage system shall be allowed to discharge on the beach. 
(13)  Sidewalks. All sidewalks are to be made of Portland cement concrete and meet or exceed the following lengths: 
a.  Single-family. four feet, four inches (not required on minor or private streets). 
b.  Multi family. six feet, four inches. 
c.  Commercial. eight feet, four inches. 
Notwithstanding any other specifications for streets contained in this subsection, any minor subdivisions which propose to have a private drive shall require a private drive of at least 20 feet in width. Major subdivisions which have marginal city streets must have a minimum right-of-way of 40 feet and an 80-foot cul-de-sac shall be required except on through streets. On subdivisions of nine or more lots there shall be a minor city street required of a 60-foot right-of-way with an 80-foot cul-de-sac on non-through streets. Subdivisions may not be staggered or developed in such a way so as to avoid or reduce the requirements of this provision. 
(F)  Lots . All lots which shall hereafter be established within a subdivision shall comply with the following design standards: 
(1)  Street access . Each lot shall abut on a public street or a private street which shall be dedicated as a public street that conforms to the design requirements of this article. However, a single-family lot which does not abut a public street may be served by a perpetual privately maintained drive. 
(2)  Lot lines . Side lot lines shall be as nearly as practical at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines. 
(3)  Corner lots . Corner lots for residential use shall be provided with sufficient width and depth to permit the establishment of front yard building setback lines from both streets. 
(4)  Double frontage lots . Double frontage lots shall only be permitted where it shall be found necessary to separate a development from major arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(5)  Residential lots in floodplain . Residential subdivision lots shall be prohibited within floodplain areas where the cost of providing governmental services in the area would pose an unreasonable economic burden. 
(6)  Width and area requirements . Lots hereafter established within subdivisions shall conform to the lot area as set forth in the general provisions for each zoning district and the lot width shall be a minimum of 60 feet at the building line. 
(G)  Blocks . All blocks hereafter established within a subdivision shall conform to the following design standards. In order that there may be convenient access between various parts of a subdivision and between the subdivision and surrounding areas and in order to help prevent traffic congestion and traffic hazards, the length of blocks hereafter established shall not exceed 1,800 feet. 
(H)  Easement . The following kinds of easements shall be required within subdivisions: 
(1)  Utility easements . Public utility easements shall be provided where necessary. Such easements shall be not less than 15 feet in width and shall be centered on side or rear property lines when possible. The location, elevation and construction of all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets, shall be in such a manner as to minimize or eliminate damage by flooding. 
(2)  Drainage . Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way which shall conform substantially with the lines of such watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream or shall be of such additional width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose. 
(3)  Maintenance easement . Where a drainage canal is such size that it requires mechanical means for cleaning, such as a dragline, there shall be a 12-foot access easement on either side of such canal for access purposes. 
(I)  Water supply and sanitary sewage . Water and sewage facilities shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Public water and public sewer . When feasible every portion of a subdivision shall be served by public water; when feasible, as determined by the mayor and council, every portion of a subdivision shall be served by a sanitary sewer system. All such systems shall be designed to preclude infiltration of floodwater into the system and discharges from the system into floodwater. 
(2)  Private water and private sewerage . Where either public water or public sewers or both are not available to a subdivision as determined by the mayor and council and a subdivider shall decide to establish a private water supply system and a private sewer system, then the plans and specifications for such private water system and sewer shall be so located as to avoid impairment of them, or contamination from them, during times of flooding. 
(3)  Publicly owned water and sewer systems . Water and sewer systems must be constructed in accordance with Chatham County Health Department specifications; sewer systems must connect to an existing publicly owned treatment plant, where practical, and both water and sewer systems and trunk lines shall be conveyed to the city. 
(J)  Preservation of noteworthy features . 
(1)  In all subdivisions, to the maximum degree reasonably practicable, efforts shall be made to preserve historic sites, scenic points, large trees and other desirable natural growths, watercourses and other water areas, and other features worthy of preservation, either as portions of public sites and open spaces, or in such other forms as to provide amenity to the neighborhood. 
(2)  Large trees or other desirable natural growths located in public or private street rights-of-way or public or private easements shall not be removed unless such removal is necessary for the installation of utilities or drainage structures or for other purposes in the public interest and approved by the mayor and council. 
(3)  Such removal may be prohibited if the amenity of adjacent property or the amenity of the general neighborhood is adversely affected. 
(Ord. No. 2004-22, amended 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 2005-16, § 1, 5-26-2005) 
ARTICLE 11. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 11-010. - Creation and purposes. 
There is created a planning commission for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare, and to provide for the orderly development of the city. 
Sec. 11-020. - Name. 
The name of the planning commission shall be "The Tybee Island Municipal Planning Commission" herein referred to as the "planning commission". 
Sec. 11-030. - Membership. 
The planning commission shall consist of seven members who shall be residents within the city limits of Tybee Island, appointed by the governing body, with a chair voting only in the event of a tie. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2008) 
Sec. 11-040. - Terms of office. 
Members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the mayor and council for two year staggered terms of office. 
Sec. 11-050. - Filling vacancies. 
In order to reduce the number of members from nine to seven, upon the expiration of the terms of office of members serving as of the effective date of this amendment, such positions shall no longer exist for the two positions whose terms expire soonest and any vacancies created in existing positions shall not be filled or new appointments made until there are no more than seven positions filled, in whichever manner shall first occur. In the event more than two vacancies are created, council shall only make a sufficient number of appointments or reappointments so as result in no more than seven members serving. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2008) 
Sec. 11-060. - Removal of members. 
The mayor and council may remove any member of the planning commission for cause after written notice at any regularly scheduled city council meeting. A recommendation for removal from office can be requested by a concurrence of four members of planning commission and the chair of the planning commission for violation of the attendance requirements as set forth in the rules of procedure as adopted by the Tybee Island Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1999-31, 9-23-1999; Ord. No. 1999-31, amended 11-10-1999) 
Sec. 11-070. - Compensation. 
Compensation, if any, to any member of the planning commission shall be determined by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 11-080. - Chair and vice-chair. 
The planning commission shall elect one of its appointed members to serve as chair, and another as vice-chair. They shall serve for a period of one year, or until successors are elected. 
Sec. 11-090. - Secretary. 
The secretary to the planning commission shall be the zoning administrator. In his or her absence, the planning commission may appoint an employee of the city or a member of the planning commission. 
Sec. 11-100. - Meetings. 
(A)  The planning commission shall meet in a regular session each month no later than 16 days prior to the first scheduled city council meeting of the following month at city hall at 7:00 p.m. Special meetings may be held as deemed necessary by the chair or a majority of the members or at the request of the mayor or council with 48-hours-notice to said members. 
(B)  The planning commission shall conduct its business under rules approved by the mayor and council. It shall keep a record of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 1999-30, 9-23-1999; Ord. No. 1999-30, amended 11-10-1999; Manual, amended 11-10-1999; Ord. of 6-26-2008(4)) 
Sec. 11-110. - Duties. 
The planning commission shall perform all of the following duties: 
(A)  Duties and responsibilities assigned by the mayor and council. 
(B)  Make formal recommendations to the city council on all petitions for variances from the city's technical codes. 
(C)  Make formal recommendations to the city council on all petitions and the meeting of ordinance requirements for zoning map amendments, subdivisions, and/or amendments to the text of this Land Development Code, specifically including but not limited to special assignments requested by the governing body, the city code enforcement department, city engineers. 
(D)  Land use planning. The planning commission shall make careful surveys and studies periodically in order to update the city's master plan and Land Development Codes. Consideration shall be given to existing conditions, probable future development, and the promotion of public health, safety, prosperity, economics development, efficiency and the general welfare as evidenced by the quality of life in the community. 
(Ord. No. 1999-32, 9-23-1999; Ord. No. 1999-32, amended 11-10-1999) 
ARTICLE 13. - ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— The zoning map amendments of the city also includes the conditional zoning of property known as 20 Fourteenth St., parcel No. 4-0007-06-001 to C-1 for use of the property as a special event facility in an agreement of May 22, 2008. 

Sec. 13-001. - Zoning map amendment [(Rosewood Avenue and Oceanview Court)]. 
The zoning map of the City of Tybee Island is amended so that the northernmost portion of subdivided No. 9 Rosewood Avenue, PIN 4-3-10-2 is zoned R-1. 
The southernmost portion of subdivided No. 9 Rosewood Avenue, PIN 4-3-10-2 is zoned R-2. 
No. 10 Oceanview Court PIN 4-3-10-3 is zoned R-2. 
The zoning map is to be marked so as to reflect this change in due course. 
(Ord. No. 1999-22, 8-12-1999; Ord. No. 1999-23, 8-12-1999; Ord. No. 1999-22 & 23, amended 10-7-1999) 
Sec. 13-002. - Zoning map amendments. 
Rezoning of Lewis Avenue from R-2 to R-1-B [(Lewis Avenue from R-2 to R-1-B)]. 
1.  107 Lewis Avenue, 4-3-5-10 
2.  109 Lewis Avenue, 4-3-5-9 
3.  111 Lewis Avenue, 4-3-5-8 
4.  113 Lewis Avenue, 4-3-5-7 
5.  115 Lewis Avenue, 4-3-5-6 
6.  117 Lewis Avenue, 4-3-5-5 
7.  119 Lewis Avenue, 4-3-5-4 
8.  121 Lewis Avenue, 4-3-5-3 
9.  123 Lewis Avenue, 4-3-5-3A 
10.  127 Lewis Avenue, 4-3-5-1 
11.  129A Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-23A, 4-16-3-24 
12.  133 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-22, 4-16-3-23 
13.  135 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-21 
14.  137 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-20 
15.  139 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-19 
16.  141 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-18 
17.  143 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-17 
18.  145 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-16 
19.  147 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-15 
20.  149 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-14 
21.  151 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-13 
22.  153 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-12 
23.  155 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-11 
24.  157 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-10 
25.  159 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-9 
26.  161 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-8 
27.  163 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-7 
28.  165 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-6 
29.  167 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-5 
30.  169 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-4 
31.  171 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-3 
32.  173 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-3-2 
33.  175 Lewis Avenue, 4-15-1-14 
34.  172 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-4-8 
35.  170 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-4-7 
36.  168 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-4-6 
37.  166 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-4-5 
38.  162 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-4-3 
39.  160 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-4-2 
40.  158 Lewis Avenue, 4-16-4-1 
41.  156 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-20 
42.  154 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-19 
43.  152 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-18 
44.  150 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-17 
45.  148 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-16 
46.  146 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-15 
47.  144 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-14 
48.  142 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-13 
49.  140 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-12 
50.  138 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-11 
51.  136 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-10 
52.  134 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-9 
53.  132 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-23 
54.  128 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-7 
55.  126 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-6 
56.  124 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-5 
57.  122 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-4 
58.  120 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-3 
59.  118 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-2 
60.  116 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-1 
61.  114 Lewis Avenue, 4-3-6-4 
62.  112 Lewis Avenue, 4-3-6-3 
63.  130 Lewis Avenue, 4-4-14-22 
64.  125 Lewis Avenue, 4-3-5-2 
65.  108 Lewis Avenue, 4-3-6-2B (also identified as lot 68B) 
66.  106 Lewis Avenue, 4-3-6-2 (also identified as lot 68A) 
The zoning map is to be marked so as to reflect this change. 
(Ord. No. 2000-17, 5-11-2000; Ord. No. 2000-17, add 9-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-003. - Zoning map amendment [(Lewis Avenue)]. 
1.  106 Lewis Avenue, 4-3-6-2 (also identified as 68A) - rezoned to C-2 
2.  108 Lewis Avenue, 4-3-6-2B (also identified as 68B) - rezoned to R-T 
The zoning map is to be marked so as to reflect this change. 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, 5-11-2000; Ord. No. 2000-18, add 9-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-004. - Zoning map amendment [(Highway 80)]. 
Zoned to C2 
1.  1213 Highway 80, 4-26-2-7 
The zoning map is to be marked so as to reflect this change. 
(Ord. No. 2000-19, 5-11-2000; Ord. No. 2000-19, add 9-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-005. - Zoning map amendment (Eagles Nest [Drive]). 
It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Tybee Island that the zoning map is amended so that the following properties are changed from their current zoning of R-2 to a zoning designation of R-1: 

 
(Ord. No. 2001-16, 7-12-2001) 
Sec. 13-006. - [Zoning map amendments (certain properties from C-2 to MD).] 
It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Tybee Island, duly assembled, that the zoning map is hereby amended so as to change the following designated properties from their current zoning of C-2 to a zoning designation of MD: 
Parcels 4-0024-01-001, 4-0024-01-002, and 4-0024-01-003. 
This ordinance shall be codified in a manner consistent with laws of the State of Georgia and the City of Tybee Island. 
(Ord. No. 2004-09, add 4-22-2004) 
Sec. 13-007. - [Zoning map amendments (specific property from C-2 to R-2).] 
It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Tybee Island, duly assembled, that the zoning map is hereby amended so as to change the following designated property from its current zoning of C-2 to a zoning designation of R-2: 
Parcel 4-0026-11-001. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2007) 
Sec. 13-008. - [Zoning map amendments (south end business overlay district and north end parks and public overlay district.)] 
(1)  The zoning map is hereby amended so as to adopt and reflect the south end business overlay district as depicted on the overlay on the map. 
(2)  The zoning map is hereby amended so as to adopt and reflect the north end parks and public overlay district as depicted on the overlay on the map. 
(Ord. No. 6-26-2008(5)) 
Secs. 13-009—13-011. - Reserved. 
Sec. 13-012. - Zoning map amendment (Brewer's Landing [1]). 
The zoning map is hereby amended so as to change the following designated properties from the zoning currently shown on the zoning map to the amended designation below: 

 
(Ord. No. 42-2011, 10-27-2011) 
Sec. 13-013. - Zoning map amendment (Brewer's Landing [2]). 
It is hereby ordained that the zoning map is hereby amended so as to change the following designated properties from the zoning currently shown on the zoning map to the amended designation below: 

 
(Ord. No. 09-2012, 12-8-2011) 
Sec. 13-014. - Zoning map amendment (Eagles Nest Lane). 

 
(Ord. No. 15-2013, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 13-015. - Zoning map amendment (between Teresa Ln. and Byers St.). 
It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the city, duly assembled, that the zoning map is hereby amended so as to change the following designated properties from the zoning currently shown on the zoning map to the amended designation below: 

 

(Ord. No. 32-2013A-2, § 1, 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 13-016. - Adoption of [the zoning] map of the 27th day of March, 2014. 
The zoning amendments identified in sections 13-001 through 13-015 were adopted in reference to the official map of the city dated April 22, 1999, as amended and readopted on December 10, 1999. In conformity with the adoption of a new zoning map incorporating all of such amendments on the 27th day of March, 2014, this section and section 4-020 are to clarify and confirm the adoption of the new map and that amendments to the map hereafter will be reflected in subsequent texts and on the map of the 27th day of March, 2014. 
(Ord. No. 21-2014, § 1, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 13-017. - Zoning map amendment (Cedarwood Drive). 

 
(Ord. No. 38-2014, 8-14-2014) 
Sec. 13-018. - Zoning map amendment (Lovell Avenue). 

 
(Ord. No. 51-2014, 10-10-2014) 
ARTICLE 14. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

Sec. 14-010. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical and cultural heritage of Tybee Island is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity, education, understanding and appreciation of historic properties, as well as the general welfare of the people; 
In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business through a democratic process; 
In order to enhance the opportunities for federal and state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal and state law; and 
In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal and state programs to do the same; 
The purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects and landscape features having special historical, cultural interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1999-13, 5-27-1999; Ord. No. 1999-13, add 6-4-1999; Ord. No. 1999-13, add 6-4-1999) 
Sec. 14-020. - Definitions. 
A.  "Certificate of appropriateness" (hereinafter "certificate") means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
B.  "Exterior architectural features" means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including but not limited to the kind of texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
C.  "Exterior environmental features" means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affects the historical character of the property. 
D.  "Historic district" means a geographically definable area designated by city council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 14-040B. 
E.  "Historic property" means an individual building, structure, site and object including the lot on which it sits necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by city council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 14-040C. 
F.  "Material change in appearance" means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
1.  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
2.  Demolition or relocation of a historical structure; 
3.  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
4.  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or, 
5.  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building; or other structure; and/or significant landscape features within a historic property or district. 
(Ord. No. 1999-13, 5-27-1999; Ord. No. 1999-13, add 6-4-1999; Ord. No. 1999-13, add 6-4-1999) 
Sec. 14-030. - Creation of a historic preservation commission. 
A.  Creation of the commission . There is created a commission whose title shall be the "Tybee Island Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "commission"). 
B.  Commission position within the city . The commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city. 
C.  Commission members: number, appointment, terms and compensation . The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All members shall be residents of Tybee Island and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. To the extent available on Tybee Island, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archeology, or related disciplines. Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year; two members for two years; and two members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
D.  Powers . The commission shall be authorized to: 
1.  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the jurisdiction of the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
2.  Recommend to the city council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects to be designated by this article as historic properties or historic districts; 
3.  Develop and recommend to city council historic guidelines; 
4.  Review applications for certificate(s) and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
5.  Recommend to the city council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
6.  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located on Tybee Island and on general historic preservation activities; 
7.  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including consultation with historic preservation experts, as the city council or the commission itself, from time to time, may deem it necessary or appropriate for the purpose of preserving historic resources; however, the commission shall not expend city funds without prior city approval; 
8.  Seek out local, state, federal and private funds for historic preservation and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of funds acquired; 
9.  Submit to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
10.  Initiate a historic marker program; 
11.  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
12.  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs, and with the consent of city council, enter into agreements to do the same. 
13.  To employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission, but only after first receiving approval by the city council. 
E.  Commission's power to adopt rules and standards . The commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business for the consideration of applications for designations and certificates, such as by-laws, removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers, as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
F.  Conflict of interest . At any time the commission reviews a project in which a member of the commission has ownership, economic or other vested interest, that member will be forbidden from presenting, voting or discussing the project, other than answering a direct question. 
G.  Records of commission meetings . A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. No. 1999-13, 5-27-1999; Ord. No. 1999-13, add 6-4-1999; Ord. No. 1999-13, add 6-4-1999; Ord. No. 06-2014, § 1, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 14-040. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
A.  Preliminary research by commission . 
1.  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources . The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources on Tybee Island. 
2.  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to city council for designation . The commission shall present to the city council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
3.  Commission's documentation of proposed designation . Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classifications, (i.e., historic, nonhistoric, intrusive) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
d.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
e.  Representative photographs. 
B.  Designation of a historic district . 
1.  Criteria for selection of historic districts . A historic district is a geographically or multiple property listing definable area which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Cause such area to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. These districts shall; 
b.  Have special character or special historical value or interest; or 
c.  Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of Tybee Island, Chatham County, State of Georgia, region, or nation. 
2.  Boundaries of a historic district . Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map, or in the absence of such a map, on an official map designated as a public record. 
3.  Evaluation of properties within historic districts . Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Historic/contributing (contributes to the district); 
b.  Historic/nonconforming; 
c.  Noncontributing (does not contribute but does not detract from the district, as provided for in [subsection] B.1.); 
d.  Intrusive (detracts from the district as provided for in [subsection] B.1.). 
C.  Designation of historic property . 
1.  Criteria for selection of historic properties . A historic property is a property that contains a building, structure, site or object, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to Tybee Island, Chatham County, State of Georgia, region, or nation, for one of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an example of a structure/site representation of its era; 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style, or building type; 
c.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to Tybee Island, Chatham County, State of Georgia, region, or nation; or 
d.  It is a site of natural interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the Tybee Island, Chatham County, State of Georgia, region, or nation. 
2.  Boundary description . Boundaries shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such properties and shall be shown on the official zoning map, or other designated map in the absence of such a map, or an official map designated as a public record. 
D.  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties . 
1.  Application for designation of historic districts or property . Designations may be submitted by the city council, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts . A historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties . A historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
2.  Required components of a designation ordinance . Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property, or historic properties; 
b.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
c.  Require that a certificate be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map, in the absence of such a map, an official map designated as a public record. 
3.  Required public hearings . The commission and the city shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues of the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties to the extent practical. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city's tax roll shall constitute legal notification to the owner. Because of the absence of street delivery to certain areas of the city, reasonable efforts of the commission to notify occupants by and through the owners of the properties and by publication shall suffice for notification hereunder. 
4.  Recommendations on proposed designations . A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. 
5.  City council action on commission recommendation(s) . Following receipt of the commission's recommendations, the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed; or send back to the commission with recommendations for revision; or, reject the ordinance. 
6.  Notification of historic preservation division . No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report, required in subsection A.3. of this section, to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources. 
7.  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation . Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure or site located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city council which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate prior to undertaking any material change to appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. Because of the absence of street delivery service to certain areas of the city, reasonable efforts of the city council to notify occupants by and through the owners of the properties and by publication shall suffice for notification hereunder. 
8.  Notification of other agencies regarding designation . The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation, including the local historical organization. 
9.  Moratorium on application(s) for alteration or demolition while application for historic designation is pending . If an application for alterations or demolition is being processed by the city no action shall be taken on the application until a decision on the historic designation is made upon by city council. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, 1-11-2001; Ord. No. 1999-13, add 6-4-1999; Ord. No. 2001-01 Historic Preservation, amended 4-19-2001; Ord. No. 1999-13, add 6-4-1999) 
Sec. 14-050. - Application to preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
A.  Approval of alterations to the exterior architectural features of existing buildings in historic districts or historic properties . After the designation by ordinance of a historic district or historic property, no material change in the exterior architectural appearance of any existing building within these areas shall be permitted to be made by the owner thereof unless or until applications for a certificate has been submitted to and approved by the commission. The certificate will certify that the change in exterior architectural appearance is compatible with the historical features of the building and the adjoining properties. 
B.  Approval of new construction within historic districts or historic properties . After the designation by ordinance of a historic district or historic property, no new building or structure shall be constructed until the owner thereof has submitted an application for a certificate to the commission, and the commission has approved it. These structures or developments shall conform in design, scale, building materials, setbacks and other exterior architectural features to the character of the designated district and site as specified in the commission's design guidelines. 
C.  Guidelines and criteria for certificate of appropriateness . When considering applications for certificate(s) to existing buildings, the secretary of the interior's "Standards for Historic Preservation Projects" including the secretary's "Standards for Rehabilitation" shall be used as a guideline along with any other criteria adopted by the commission. 
D.  Submission of plans to commission . In order for an application for a certificate to be reviewed, it must be submitted at least 15 days prior to a scheduled meeting of the commission. An application for a certificate shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, or plans as may be required by the commission. The application for certificate will be logged in by the city building official on the day it was received and copies of all applications for certificates shall be given to the chair of commission no later than 14 days before the scheduled meeting of the commission. 
E.  Acceptable commission reaction to application for certificate of appropriateness . 
1.  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved, and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style, and historic features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
2.  The commission shall deny a certificate if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
3.  The commission may make approval of a certificate conditional upon complying to certain situations which may be listed in the certificate. Such stipulations are to be used only to diminish the adverse impact of the changes in material appearances proposed in the application for a certificate. 
F.  Public hearing on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices and right to be heard . At least seven days prior to review of a certificate, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application, and shall give applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the applications. All meetings of the commission at which applications for certificate(s) are being discussed shall be open to the public. 
G.  Interior alterations . In its review of applications for certificate(s), the commission shall not consider interior arrangements or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
H.  Technical advice . The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any applications for certificate(s). 
I.  Deadline for approval or rejection of application of certificates of appropriateness . 
1.  The commission shall approve or reject an application for certificate(s) within 45 days after the filing by the owner of a historic property, or of a structure, site or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate being issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate(s) shall be sent via United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed by the commission. 
2.  Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
J.  Necessary actions to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness . 
1.  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest an alternative course of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if they so desire, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
2.  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such cases, no building permit shall be issued. 
K.  Undue hardship . Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of this section would result in exceptional practical difficulty; undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making or as result of any failure to maintain the property in good repair. 
L.  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness . 
1.  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the city code inspections officer shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
2.  The city council shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provision of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
M.  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced . A certificate shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are not renewable. 
N.  Recording of applications for certificate of appropriateness . The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
O.  Appeals . Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance of denial or approval of a certificate may appeal such determination to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the city council within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to this subsection or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for commission action, as provided in this subsection, the city council may approve, modify or reject the determination made by the commission if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decision of the city council may be taken to the Superior Court of Chatham County in the manner provided by law for appeal from conviction for ordinance violations. 
P.  Acquisition of property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by the city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(Ord. No. 1999-13, 5-27-1999; Ord. No. 1999-13, add 6-4-1999; Ord. No. 1999-13, add 6-4-1999; Ord. No. 06-2014, § 1, 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 14-060. - Historic preservation. 
(A)  The planning and zoning department shall notify in writing the historic preservation commission of each application for a demolition or relocation permit. 
(B)  The historic preservation commission shall have the authority to review each application for a demolition or relocation permit and make recommendations to the designated city official. 
(C)  The historic preservation commission shall use the criteria described in section 14-050 to determine whether the request is in accordance with the intent of this article and issue a written report of its findings to the designated city official. The commission shall have 45 calendar days from the date of notification of the permit application to submit its report. No demolition or relocation permit shall be issued until the report has been submitted or the required 45 calendar days have expired. 
(D)  The historic preservation commission may contact the owner of a structure which has been approved for demolition to request permission to remove historic fabric from the structure prior to the demolition. Where such permission has been granted by the owner, the historic preservation commission shall obtain the required permit for the activity from the planning and zoning department. 
(E)  When a permit application is submitted for any building aged 50 years or greater, the designated city official shall notify the Tybee Island Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) chairperson and/or HPC advisor. Prior to the permit being issued, the HPC representative shall advise the property owner if the property is deemed historically significant and what steps must be taken to ensure they do not lose specific tax incentives, tax freezes and/or FEMA historic preservation exemptions. 
At any time should the scope of work change and require further permitting, all work on the site shall cease. The owner or his/her representative is required to immediately notify the designated city official who will then notify the HPC chairperson and/or HPC advisor. Work shall not resume until the HPC representative has reviewed the changes and the permit has been updated to include the changes from the original scope of work. 
At no time will this permit process take more than 14 business days from submission of the permit request. 
(Ord. No. 1999-13, 5-27-1999; Ord. No. 1999-13, add 6-4-1999; Ord. No. 1999-13, add 6-4-1999; Ord. No. 06-2013, 1-10-2013; Ord. No. 16-2013-D, § 1, 6-13-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-2013-D, § 1, adopted June 13, 2013, amended App. A, § 14-060 to read as set out herein. Former App. A, § 14-060 pertained to demolition or relocation permit application. 
Sec. 14-070. - Maintenance of historic properties and building zoning code provisions. 
A.  Ordinary maintenance or repair . Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate. Prior to the issuance of a building permit the chair of the commission shall review and determine whether a certificate is required and indicate in writing the commission's determination. 
B.  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair . Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
1.  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, the deterioration of a building's exterior architectural features, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
2.  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 60 days in which to do this. 
C.  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes . Nothing in this article shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1999-13, 5-27-1999; Ord. No. 1999-13, add 6-4-1999; Ord. No. 1999-13, add 6-4-1999) 
Sec. 14-080. - Penalty provision. 
Violations of any provisions of this article shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of other validly-enacted ordinances of the City of Tybee Island in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1999-13, 5-27-1999; Ord. No. 1999-13, add 6-4-1999) 
ARTICLE 15. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-25 , § 1(Att.), adopted Dec. 8, 2016, repealed former Art. 15, §§ 15-010—15-100, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. 15 pertained to erosion and sedimentation control and derived from Ord. No. 07-2010, adopted May 27, 2010. 

Sec. 15-010. - Title. 
This article will be known as "The City of Tybee Island Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2016-25 , § 1(Att.), 12-8-2016) 
Sec. 15-020. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs) include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. 12-5-282. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means a certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the state in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable state law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Coastal Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 15-040.C. of this article. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section III, paragraph 5. 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. 12-7-8. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et. seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Coastal Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code section 12-5-30. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25 , § 1(Att.), 12-8-2016; Ord. No. 18-2017 , §§ 1, 2, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 15-030. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
1.  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
2.  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
3.  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
4.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
5.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
6.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of section 15-040C. of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
7.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
8.  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 or 10 of this section; 
9.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
10.  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
11.  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25 , § 1(Att.), 12-8-2016) 
Sec. 15-040. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
A.  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of sections 15-040B. and C. of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
B.  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
1.  Best management practices as set forth in sections 15-040B. and C. of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph 2 of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
2.  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
3.  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
4.  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
5.  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in C.15, 16 and 17, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
C.  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
1.  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
2.  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
3.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
4.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
5.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
6.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
7.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
8.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
9.  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq.; 
10.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
11.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
12.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
13.  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
14.  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 15-040B.2 of this article; 
15.  Except as provided in paragraphs (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of waterflow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
16.  There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed ; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
17.  There is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to Code section 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to Code section 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "Minor Buffer Impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
D.  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in sections 15-040B. and C. of this article. 
E.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25 , § 1(Att.), 12-8-2016) 
Sec. 15-050. - Application/permit process. 
A.  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
B.  Application requirements. 
1.  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the community development department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
2.  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the community development department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 15-050C. of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of sections 15-040B. and C. of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-10. 
3.  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
4.  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by sections 15-040C.15, 16 and 17 have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 15-050B.6, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
5.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
6.  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
C.  Plan requirements. 
1.  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in sections 15-040B. and C. of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
2.  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
D.  Permits. 
1.  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
2.  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by sections 15-040C.15, 16 and 17 are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 15-050B.6 are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
3.  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
4.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
5.  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
6.  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2016-25 , § 1(Att.), 12-8-2016) 
Sec. 15-060. - Inspection and enforcement. 
A.  The city will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
B.  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
C.  The community development department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
D.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
E.  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
F.  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to Code section 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25 , § 1(Att.), 12-8-2016) 
Sec. 15-070. - Penalties and incentives. 
A.  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
B.  Stop-work orders. 
1.  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
2.  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
3.  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
4.  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
C.  Bond forfeiture . If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 15-050B.6. The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
D.  Monetary penalties. 
1.  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25 , § 1(Att.), 12-8-2016) 
Sec. 15-080. - Education and certification. 
A.  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
B.  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
C.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
D.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25 , § 1(Att.), 12-8-2016) 
Sec. 15-090. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
A.  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and council within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
B.  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Chatham County, GA. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25 , § 1(Att.), 12-8-2016) 
Sec. 15-100. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
A.  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 8 day of December, 2016. 
B.  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
C.  Liability. 
1.  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
2.  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
3.  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25 , § 1(Att.), 12-8-2016) 
ARTICLE 16. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, adopted October 10, 2014, amended art. 16, divs. A—D, §§ 16-010—16-620, in its entirety. Former art. 16 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. of 2-26-2009; Ord. No. 05-2012, adopted December 14, 2011 and Ord. No. 13-2012, §§ 1.1—7.2, adopted April 12, 2012. 

DIVISION A. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-010. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Tybee Island Stormwater Management Ordinance.' 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-020. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, unless specifically defined below, words or phrases shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most effective application. Words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The word "shall" connotes mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases and words, and their derivatives, shall have the meaning given in this section: 
Accidental discharge shall mean a discharge prohibited by this article into the city separate stormwater system which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
Agricultural practices shall mean practices involving the establishment, cultivation, or harvesting of products of the field or orchard; the preparation and planting of pastureland, farm ponds; and the construction of farm buildings. 
Best management practices (BMPs) shall mean a wide range of management procedures, activities, and prohibitions or practices which control the quality and/or quantity of stormwater runoff and which are compatible with the planned land use. 
City shall mean the incorporated entity known as the City of Tybee Island, Georgia. 
City engineer shall mean any professional engineer registered in the state hired or contracted by the city to provide civil engineering service to the city including but not limited to stormwater management, land use, site design and construction, and other duties as may be assigned 
City separate stormwater system shall mean a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, highways, rights-of-way, city streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, both natural and manmade channels, storm drains, detention ponds, drainage easements dedicated to the city, other stormwater facilities) which meets all the following criteria: 
(1)  Owned and maintained by the city; 
(2)  Designed and used for collecting or conveying stormwater; 
(3)  Not a known combined sewer; and 
(4)  Not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW). 
Conveyance shall mean stormwater facilities designed for the movement of stormwater through the drainage system, such as concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales. 
Department shall mean the city planning and economic development department or such other department as may be then designated for stormwater management purposes. 
Development shall mean: 
(1)  The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, plots, sites, tracts, parcels, or other divisions by plat or deed; 
(2)  The construction, installation, or alteration of a structure, impervious surface, or drainage facility; 
(3)  Clearing, scraping, grubbing, or other activities that significantly disturb the soil, vegetation, mud, sand or rock of a site; or 
(4)  Adding, removing, exposing, excavating, leveling, grading, digging, burrowing, dumping, piling, dredging, or otherwise disturbing the soil, vegetation, mud, sand or rock of a site. 
Director shall mean the director of planning and economic development department or such other department head as may be then designated as responsible for stormwater management. 
Discharge shall mean the release of stormwater to the city separate stormwater system. 
Drainage shall mean the removal of stormwater from a given area either by gravity or by pumping. 
Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Employee shall mean any city employee as designated by the city manager to have authority in stormwater management, planning, maintenance, or construction. 
Exempt shall mean the release of the obligation to comply with specific sections of this article. 
Flood shall mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Illicit connection shall mean an unauthorized or illegal connection to a city separate stormwater system which results in discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff. 
Indirect discharge shall mean any discharge to the city's separate stormwater system via another conveyance system that is not owned, operated, or maintained by the city. 
Maintenance shall mean any action necessary to preserve stormwater facilities in proper working condition, in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this article. 
Maximum extent practicable (MEP) shall mean the discharge standards and controls necessary for the reduction of pollutants discharged into the city separate stormwater system. These standards and controls may consist of a combination of best management practices, control techniques, system design and engineering methods, and such other provisions for the reduction of pollutants discharged from the city separate stormwater system. 
NPDES shall mean the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit granted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Person shall mean any individual, firm, corporation, government agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two or more individuals having a joint or common interest, or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant shall mean any substance contributing to the contamination or alteration of stormwater's physical, chemical or biological properties, including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor; by the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters that will or is likely to create a nuisance or have a detrimental impact on the city's stormwater system which would preclude the legitimate use of such a system. 
Private property shall mean property or facilities owned by individuals, corporations, and organizations other than the city, state, or federal government. 
Procedure shall mean the method adopted by the city, by and through the director, to implement a regulation or regulations adopted under this article, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this Code or other codes, ordinances or resolutions of the city or other agencies. 
Quality shall mean those parameters of stormwater that relate to the physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of stormwater. 
Quantity shall mean those characteristics of stormwater that relate to the rate, volume, and duration of concentration of stormwater runoff. 
Regulation shall mean any local, state, or federal rule, ordinance, design directive or other policies adopted by the mayor and council pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
Sanitary sewer system means the complete sanitary sewer system of the city which discharges sewage directly or indirectly into the sewage treatment plant, including sanitary sewer pipelines, manholes and flushing inlets and appurtenances. 
Sediment shall mean solid particulate matter, both mineral and organic, that has been or is being transported by water, air, ice or gravity from its origin. 
Site shall mean any lot, plot, parcel or tract of land. 
Stormwater shall mean precipitation runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff. 
Stormwater management shall mean the procedures and steps taken to minimize the impact of stormwater as related to manmade changes in the land including, but not limited to, collection, conveyance, storage, treatment, and disposal of stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management manual shall mean the most recent manual of stormwater management criteria of the city. 
Stormwater management facilities shall mean any and all components of a stormwater drainage system, designed to perform a particular function, or multiple functions, including, but not limited to, pipes, swales, ditches, culverts, streets, detention basins, retention basins, constructed wetlands, infiltration devices, catchbasins, oil/water separators, sediment basins, natural systems, modular pavement and pump stations. 
Stormwater management plan shall mean all documents that provide information and specifications for the drainage systems, structures, BMPs, concepts, and techniques that will be used to minimize the impact upon the stormwater system by a particular development. 
Stormwater runoff shall mean the direct response of a land surface to precipitation to include surface and subsurface runoff that enters a ditch, stream, storm drain or other concentrated flow during and following the precipitation. 
Variance shall mean the modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements for specific circumstances where strict adherence of the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this article. 
Watercourse shall mean a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which collects and/or conveys surface water. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-030. - Applicability of chapter. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all existing and future discharges to the city separate stormwater system. 
(b)  If any term, requirement or provision of this article becomes invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this article shall not be affected, and any and all other requirements and provisions shall remain valid and be enforced to the fullest extent. 
(c)  When this article is in conflict with other ordinances, the ordinance with the most stringent requirements shall apply as determined by the director of planning and economic development. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-040. - Restrictions and limitations on the use of the city stormwater system. 
The primary purpose of the stormwater system is the conveyance of stormwater and other permissible discharges as outlined in section 16-200. 
(1)  No person shall discharge, spill, or dump substances or materials which are not entirely composed of stormwater or discharges otherwise exempted in section 16-200 into the city separate stormwater system or onto driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, streets, or other areas that discharge into the city separate stormwater system. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, modify, or tamper with any stormwater structure, appurtenance, or equipment. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful, without prior written approval of the director, to alter in any way any part of the stormwater system including, but not limited to, rerouting, removing, deepening, widening, enlarging, filling or obstructing any part of the stormwater system including fencing easements and rights-of-way which render the system inaccessible to equipment necessary to perform maintenance and repairs. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any pipe, open channel, or any other conveyance system that discharges anything except stormwater or exempted discharges listed in section 16-200 to the city separate stormwater system. Illicit connections will be disconnected and redirected to the city sanitary sewer system upon approval by the water/sewer manager at the expense of the responsible person. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to increase stormwater quantity discharged to the city separate stormwater system without an accepted stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-050. - The department responsibilities for stormwater management. 
The department shall be responsible for the management, maintenance, and improvement of the city's separate stormwater system, including activities necessary to control and monitor stormwater runoff quantity and quality. 
The department will: 
(1)  Administer the city's stormwater management program; 
(2)  Coordinate acceptance of stormwater management plans with city engineering with final acceptance based upon recommendations from the city engineer; 
(3)  Direct operations and maintenance of the city's stormwater facilities to ensure optimal levels of service; 
(4)  Establish and update this article and the stormwater management manual to include development standards and guidelines for regulating quantity and quality of stormwater runoff in compliance with NPDES permit requirements and changes in federal and state regulations; 
(5)  Monitor private property discharges to the city separate stormwater system; 
(6)  Take immediate steps to minimize effects of accidental discharges of pollutants into the city's stormwater system; 
(7)  Develop stormwater educational and public awareness programs. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-060. - Criteria for variance. 
For those situations when enforcement of this article will not enhance stormwater quality or reduce the impact of additional discharges, a variance may be granted. The following must be met prior to consideration of a variance request. If there is: 
(1)  No change to the rate, volume or concentration of runoff; 
(2)  No negative impact on any wetland, watercourse, or waterbody; 
(3)  No degradation of water quality; and 
(4)  No increase in base flood elevation within the special flood hazard area based on National Flood Insurance Program maps. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-070. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  All requests for a variance shall be submitted in writing to the director and shall state the specific variance requested, with supporting data, and reasons why a variance should be granted. 
(b)  The stormwater management director will conduct a review and render a decision within ten working days of receiving the request. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-080. - Inspections. 
The department may inspect, survey, and monitor any stormwater facility, public or private, for reasons including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  To ensure compliance with an accepted stormwater management plan; 
(2)  To conduct sampling of any substance or parameters at any location; 
(3)  To investigate suspicious discharges including illicit connections and spills; 
(4)  To ensure all stormwater facilities are operational to the maximum extent practicable. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-090. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
The director or other employees of the city bearing proper identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing. The city reserves the right to perform emergency repairs or maintenance to any portion of any stormwater system, public or private, when the stormwater system impacts a public stormwater system. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-100. - Discharge violation; remediation plan. 
(a)  Whenever the director or his designee finds that any person has violated or is violating this article, he shall serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation, notice to cease all activities in violation of this article, and the potential penalty involved. 
(b)  Upon determination that a violation of this article has occurred, a formal notice of violation shall be sent to the person from the director of stormwater management within five working days. 
(c)  Upon receipt of notice of violation, the person shall submit a remediation schedule to the director within ten working days. All corrective measures shall be completed within 30 days of the initial notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-110. - Emergency conditions. 
If a condition presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety, or general welfare because of unsafe conditions or improper maintenance, the city shall have the right, should the owner not take immediate action, to make necessary corrections to protect the public and to make the facility safe at the expense of the responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-120. - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this article is final unless the person submits a written request for a hearing within ten days of the notice of violation being served. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-130. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director may appeal same by filing a written notice with the director within ten working days of the action by the director. A notice of appeal shall state the specific reasons why the action of the director has adversely affected the person. 
(b)  The director shall prepare and send to the appellant a written response within ten working days of receipt of the appeal. 
(c)  Shall the appellant be dissatisfied, an appeal with the city manager may be requested within ten working days. The hearing shall be held within 30 days after receipt or on a date mutually agreed upon by the appellant and the city manager. The city manager shall then make his findings in writing within ten working days of the appeal hearing. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-140. - Penalty; costs. 
Any person who is found to have willfully and negligently failed to comply with any provision of this article, and the orders, rules, and regulations issued hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment or both. Each day in which a violation shall occur or continue to occur shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any person violating any provision of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage incurred by the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
DIVISION B. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 16-150. - Exemptions from stormwater management plan submittal. 
The following development activities are exempt from stormwater management plan submittal: 
(1)  Mining operations or oil and gas exploration, production, processing or treatment operations or transmission facilities, provided the stormwater runoff from these operations is composed entirely of flows which are from conveyances or systems of conveyances used for collecting and conveying precipitation runoff and which are not contaminated by contact with or that has not come into contact with any overburden, raw material, intermediate products, finished product or byproduct located on the site of such operations; 
(2)  Minor development activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, individual residential repairs, individual residential maintenance work, and other individual residential activities which result in minor soil erosion as determined by the director; 
(3)  Agricultural practices. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-160. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
A stormwater management plan shall include as a minimum the following: 
(1)  Site plan which conforms to all pertinent provisions of the subdivision regulation ordinance; 
(2)  Soil erosion/sediment control plan; 
(3)  Drainage report. The drainage report will contain a narrative that discusses pre- and post-development conditions and impacts for all upstream and downstream stormwater management facilities. The report shall include a site location plan, a detailed site plan for both the pre- and post-development conditions, pre- and post-development watershed boundaries, and all runoff and drainage system design calculations for the proposed development for the one-, five-, ten-, and 25-year 24-hour storms. Drainage calculations shall be performed using methods accepted by the director, as specified in the stormwater management guideline for private development activities. 
(4)  For development activities in the special flood hazard areas (zones A, V, AE, and VE on the latest Federal Emergency Management Agency/National Flood Insurance rate maps), areas that are known to have flooded repetitively, or areas where a hydrologic model predicts flooding will occur in the 100-year, 24-hour event, the developer must demonstrate that the 100-year flood elevations will have no increase resulting from development activity. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-170. - Stormwater management plan acceptance. 
(a)  Unless the development is specifically exempted in section 16-150 from requiring a stormwater management plan, any person planning a development shall submit to the permit center, three copies of a stormwater management plan for review and acceptance. 
(b)  All stormwater management plans shall be reviewed by the director or designated representative, based on the requirements of this article and all federal and state requirements. Plans may be accepted, rejected, or conditionally accepted pending modifications. 
(c)  Acceptance of a stormwater management plan will be acknowledged by a response from the director or his designated representative and will be valid for one year. Acceptance of a plan is solely an acknowledgment of satisfactory compliance with the requirements of these pertinent regulations and does not constitute a representation or warranty to the applicant or any other person concerning the safety, appropriateness, comprehensiveness, or effectiveness of any provision or omission from the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-180. - Requirements and procedures for modifications and renewals of accepted stormwater management plans. 
(a)  If construction does not begin within one year after stormwater management plan acceptance, it will be necessary to renew the acceptance of the stormwater management plan. 
(b)  All requests for modifications and renewals shall be submitted in writing to the director and shall include justification for the request. The director or his designated representative shall review and make a determination on the request within ten working days. 
(c)  Acceptance of a stormwater management plan will be acknowledged by a response from the director or his designated representative and will be valid for one year. Acceptance of a plan is solely an acknowledgment of satisfactory compliance with the requirements of these pertinent regulations and does not constitute a representation or warranty to the applicant or any other person concerning the safety, appropriateness, comprehensive, or effectiveness of any provision or omission from the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-190. - Minimum stormwater system design standards. 
(a)  There shall be no increase in the base flood elevation within the special flood hazard area (SFHA), as delineated by the latest National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) maps, or in any areas that are known to have flooded repetitively, or areas where a hydrologic model predicts flooding will occur in the 100-year, 24-hour event. Where hydrologic model results are conflicting, the stormwater management director shall decide which model will be used. 
(b)  Finished floor elevations for structures not included in the special flood hazard area shall be equal to or higher than that shown on the original subdivision plat or neighborhood grading and drainage plan or as determined by a registered civil engineer. 
(c)  The post-development peak rate of runoff cannot exceed the predevelopment peak rate of runoff for the one-, five-, ten-, and 25-year 24-hour events. Exception to this requirement shall be made for single-family homes provided that post-development run-off does not exceed one cubic feet per second (CFS). Exception shall also be made for single family lots that lie within a subdivision with an approved drainage plan. 
(d)  In all submittals, if drainage calculations indicate that post-development runoff will exceed predevelopment runoff, then on-site detention for the one-, five-, ten-, and 25-year 24-hour events is required at a discharge rate equal to or less than the pre-developed 24-hour peak rate of discharge for all storm events from the one-, five-, ten-, and including the 25-year event, or the capacity of the existing downstream conveyance system must be upgraded in capacity to accommodate the additional 25-year, 24-hour discharge generated by the new development. On projects that lie within drainage basins for which the city believes to have insufficient outfall or has knowledge of flooding that would be intensified by the proposed development, the 50- and 100-year events will also be considered in the drainage and drainage calculations. Where outfall is not existing or feasible, the city may allow retention. Stormwater management by retention will be for all events up to and including the 100-year storm. 
(e)  Drainage easements. The width and configuration requirements of drainage and maintenance easements/rights-of-way are listed in Section 2.30 of the Stormwater Management Guide for Private Development. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
DIVISION C. - STORMWATER QUALITY 

Sec. 16-200. - Exemptions. 
The following discharges are exempt from the discharge limitations set forth in section 16-210: 
(1)  Water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources; 
(2)  Landscape irrigation and lawn watering; 
(3)  Irrigation water; 
(4)  Diverted stream flows; 
(5)  Rising groundwaters; 
(6)  Infiltration to separate storm drains; 
(7)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
(8)  Foundation and footing drains; 
(9)  Water from crawl space pumps; 
(10)  Air conditioning condensation; 
(11)  Springs; 
(12)  Individual residential car washing; 
(13)  Snowmelt; 
(14)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
(15)  Flows from firefighting. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-210. - Stormwater discharge limitations. 
Discharges to the city's separate stormwater system shall, to the maximum extent practicable, not create a nuisance, cause interference with the legitimate use of city separate stormwater system, and shall not create the following conditions: 
(1)  Foam or floating, suspended or deposited macroscopic particulate matter; 
(2)  Bottom deposits or aquatic growth; 
(3)  Alteration of temperature, turbidity, or apparent color beyond present natural background levels; 
(4)  Visible, floating, suspended, or deposited oil, grease, or any products of petroleum origin; 
(5)  Toxic or deleterious substances to be present in concentrations or quantities which will cause harmful effects on aquatic biota, wildlife, or waterfowl, or which render any of these unfit for human consumption either at levels created in the receiving waters or as a result of biological concentration. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-220. - Watercourse protection/accidental discharge reporting requirements. 
(a)  Watercourse protection. Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(b)  Accidental discharge reporting. In the event of an accidental discharge to the city's separate stormwater system of any material or substance other than stormwater runoff or those discharges specifically excluded in section 16-200, the stormwater department shall be contacted immediately and notified of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. The responsible party shall take immediate steps to contain, treat or to otherwise minimize effects of the discharge on the city's system and receiving streams. Immediate steps shall be taken to ensure no recurrence of the discharge. A written report addressed to the director of stormwater management detailing the date, time, cause, quantity, and characteristics of the discharge and the corrective and preventative actions taken will be sent to the director within five working days of the incident. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-230. - Industrial/commercial activities. 
(a)  Any industry that discharges directly into the city's separate stormwater system and is required to obtain an individual NPDES permit is required to submit a copy of the NPDES permit and EPA form 2F or any that supersede it to the director. Additionally a site plan with drainage system and type and amount of discharge shall be included with the submittal. 
(b)  Any industrial or commercial activity not required to obtain an individual NPDES permit as defined by the Standard Industrial Codes (SIC) in 40 CFR 122, 123, and 124 but discharges stormwater to the city separate stormwater system is required to submit to the director the type of industrial/commercial activity, type of discharge, a site map with internal drainage system, and point of connection or discharge to the city separate stormwater system. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
DIVISION D. - POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 16-240. - Description. 
This division addresses post-construction stormwater management in Georgia's Coastal Nonpoint Source Management Area. This division establishes requirements for stormwater plans that are to be submitted before land development commences. The plans document how post-construction stormwater runoff quality and quantity will be effectively managed according to performance criteria described in this division. Guidelines for inspection, maintenance, and violations are also included. This division is linked with existing stormwater management manuals including the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, the Coastal Stormwater Supplement and local design manuals that provide the technical specifications for stormwater system design. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Subdivision 1. - General Provisions 

Sec. 16-250. - Findings of fact. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Land development activities alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds, increasing stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and pollutant loads, and increase flooding channel erosion, and pollutant transport and deposition in rivers and streams; 
(2)  Land development activities alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds, increasing stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and pollutant loads, and consequently, alter water levels and fluctuations and increase pollutant transport and deposition in wetlands; 
(3)  Land development activities alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds, increasing stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and pollutant loads, and alter salinity concentrations and fluctuations and increase productivity and pollutant transport and deposition in estuaries; 
(4)  Land development activities and alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds, increasing stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and pollutant loads, and increase bacteria transport and deposition in near coastal waters, which leads to beach contamination and closure and poses a serious threat to human health; 
(5)  Land development activities alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds, increasing stormwater runoff rates and volumes, and, consequently, decreasing the amount of rainfall that is available to recharge shallow groundwater aquifers; 
(6)  The negative impacts of land development activities on these important local aquatic resources can adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of the general public; 
(7)  The negative impacts of land development can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and pollutant loads on development and redevelopment sites; 
(8)  Communities within the coastal nonpoint source management area are required to comply with a number of state and federal regulations that require the adverse impacts of increased stormwater runoff rates, volumes and pollutant loads to be controlled and minimized; 
(9)  Therefore, the city has determined that it is in the public interest to control and minimize the adverse impacts of land development activities and has established this set of stormwater management provisions to regulate post-construction stormwater runoff rates, volumes and pollutant loads on development and redevelopment sites. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-260. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this division is to protect and maintain the integrity of local aquatic resources, and, consequently, the health, safety and welfare of the general public, by establishing minimum stormwater management provisions that control and minimize the adverse impacts of land development activities. This division seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of local aquatic resources; 
(2)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria that will reduce flooding, channel erosion, and pollutant transport and deposition in local aquatic resources; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria that will help preserve existing hydrologic conditions and development and redevelopment sites; 
(4)  Establish design criteria for structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria; 
(5)  Encourage the use of better site planning, better site design and low impact development practices to the maximum extent practical at development and redevelopment sites; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term upkeep and maintenance of structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed and pose no threat to public safety; and, 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans and for the inspection of approved land development projects. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-270. - Applicability and exemptions. 
(1)  This division shall be applicable to all land development activities, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (2). These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment activity within the city that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(a)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(b)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition, or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(c)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the designated city official to be a hotspot land use; or 
(d)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate, and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(2)  The following activities are exempt from this division: 
(a)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project that is otherwise subject to this division; 
(b)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(c)  Projects that are exclusively for agricultural or silvicultural activities within areas zoned for these agricultural and silvicultural use; 
(d)  Maintenance and repairs of any stormwater facility deemed necessary by the (administrator); 
(e)  Any part of a land development project that was approved by the (administrator) prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived; and 
(f)  Redevelopment that constitutes the replacement of the original square footage of impervious cover and original acreage of other land development activity when the original development is wholly or partially lost due to natural disaster or other acts of God occurring after (date of adoption [October 10, 2014]). 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-280. - Designation of administrator of this division. 
The designated city official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-290. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This division is not intended to interfere with, modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this division should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this division imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-300. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this division shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this division. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-310. - Stormwater management manual. 
The city will utilize the standards, criteria, and information presented in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement (CSS), the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, and any relevant local addenda, for the proper implementation of this division. The CSS also serves as the local design manual for the purpose of this division. These references may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring, and local experience. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Subdivision 2. - Definitions 

Sec. 16-320. - Terms defined. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a property owner or other responsible person who has submitted an application for a post-development stormwater management permit. 
Better site design means site design techniques that can be used during the site design process to minimize the creation of new impervious cover and reduce a site's impact on the watershed. Better site design techniques include reducing clearing and grading limits, roadway lengths and widths, and parking lot and building footprints. 
Better site planning means site planning techniques that can be used during the site planning process to protect and conserve natural areas that are critical in preserving pre-development site hydrology and reducing a site's impact on the watershed. Better site planning techniques include conserving significant stands of trees and other vegetation, natural drainage features, and riparian buffers. 
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Dedication means the deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management practice for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Easement means a legal right granted by a land owner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for conveyance or treatment of stormwater runoff and access to stormwater management practices. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land development activities. 
Evapotranspiration means the loss of water to the atmosphere by both evaporation and transpiration, which is the evaporation of water by plants. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Green infrastructure means better site planning and design techniques and low impact development practices that are used during the site planning and design process to preserve and/or replicate the pre-development hydrology of a development or redevelopment site and reduce a site's impact on the watershed. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. Hotspots may be permanent or temporary. Hotspots include, but are not limited to, fueling stations (including temporary fueling stations during construction) and golf courses. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impaired waters means those streams, rivers and lakes that currently do not meet their designated use classification and associated water quality standards under the Clean Water Act. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that greatly impedes or prevents the passive, natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets, and roads, except those designed specifically to provide active, engineered infiltration. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries that regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infill development means land development that occurs within designated areas based on local land use, watershed, and/or utility plans where the surrounding area is generally developed, and where the site or area is either vacant or has previously been used for another purpose. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Infiltration facility means any stormwater management practice designed to provide active, engineered infiltration of retained water to the subsurface. These stormwater management practices may be above or below grade. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement and covenant means a written agreement and covenant providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any change in land cover, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, filling, and paving, that alters the hydrologic response of local watersheds. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities that comprise, facilitate, or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
Low impact development means small-scale, distributed stormwater management practices that can be used during the site design process to replicate existing hydrologic conditions, help offset the creation of new impervious cover and reduce a site's impact on the watershed. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point, such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants, such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials, and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices, such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal, and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain) and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm, or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant, which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this division, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Recharge means the replenishment of groundwater aquifers. 
Redevelopment means a change to previously existing, improved property, including but not limited to the demolition or building of structures, filling, grading, paving, or excavating, but excluding ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of buildings on the existing footprint, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements that do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Riparian buffer means an area of land at or near a streambank, wetland, or waterbody that has intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological processes it performs or is otherwise sensitive to changes which may result in significant degradation of water quality. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater hotspot means an area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment, and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation, and water quality degradation and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this division. 
Stormwater management practice means structural and nonstructural practices that control stormwater runoff and provide for or enhance stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices that are used to capture, convey, and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for an existing development site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet local stormwater management criteria. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater management practice means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release, or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, transfer of ownership, or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Watercourse means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water. 
Watershed management plan means a document, usually developed cooperatively by government agencies and other stakeholders, to protect, restore, and/or otherwise manage the water resources within a particular watershed or subwatershed. The plan commonly identifies threats, sources of impairment, institutional issues, and technical and programmatic solutions or projects to protect and/or restore water resources. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Subdivision 3. - Permit Procedures and Requirements 

Sec. 16-330. - Permit application requirements. 
No owner or developer shall perform any land development activity without first meeting the requirements of this division and having been issued a permit from the city. Unless specifically exempted by this division, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. Unless otherwise exempted by this division, the following items shall accompany a permit application: 
(1)  Stormwater management concept plan and record of a consultation meeting held in accordance with section 16-340; 
(2)  Stormwater management design plan in accordance with section 16-350; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement and plan in accordance with section 16-360, if applicable; 
(4)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with sections 16-370 and 16-380; and 
(5)  Performance bond in accordance with section 16-390. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-340. - Stormwater management concept plan and consultation meeting. 
Prior to the submittal of a stormwater management design plan, inspection and maintenance agreement and plan, and permit application, the landowner or developer shall submit to the city for review and approval, a preliminary concept plan describing, in general, how stormwater runoff through and form the development will be conveyed and managed. 
The submittal should include the following components: 
(a)  Natural resources inventory. A graphic illustration of the natural resources at the site as they exist prior to the start of the project. The natural resources inventory shall be prepared in accordance with section 16-420. 
(b)  Proposed site plan. A graphic illustration of the proposed site layout including, at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; natural drainage features; perennial and intermittent streams; wetlands; soil types; groundwater recharge areas; floodplains; stands of trees and other vegetation; existing infrastructure; existing easements; proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of proposed roads, buildings, parking areas, and other impervious surfaces. 
(c)  Stormwater management concept plan. A graphic illustration of the proposed stormwater management system including, at a minimum; location of existing and proposed better site planning and design techniques, low impact development practices, and structural stormwater management practices; location of existing and proposed stormwater conveyance systems, such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of existing floodplains and floodways; the relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and stormwater management systems; and the location of any proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
The stormwater management concept plan shall utilize, to the maximum extent practical, better site planning and design techniques and low impact development practices to reduce stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and pollutant loads and reduce the site's impact on the watershed. Such techniques and practices include, but are not limited to: conservation and/or restoration of natural areas, such as forests, wetlands, and riparian buffers, minimization and/or disconnection of impervious surfaces, and small-scale distributed stormwater management practices that intercept and treat or otherwise manage stormwater runoff closer to its source. 
All applicants are encouraged to hold a consultation meeting with the city to discuss the proposed development project, the stormwater management concept plan, and opportunities to use better site planning and design techniques and low impact development practices to reduce runoff rates, volumes and pollutant loads and the site's impact on the watershed. This consultation meeting shall take place onsite after submittal, but prior to approval, of the stormwater management concept plan for the purposes of verifying site conditions and the feasibility of the stormwater management plan. 
Local watershed plans and any other relevant resource protection plans will be consulted during review of the stormwater management concept plan. If necessary, a follow-up meeting may be held with the applicant before formal site design commences to verify the feasibility of the stormwater management system that will be used to control and minimize the impacts of the proposed land development project. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-350. - Stormwater management design plan. 
Subsequent to approval of the stormwater management concept plan and completion of formal site design, the owner or developer shall submit to the city for review and approval, a stormwater management design plan that details how stormwater runoff through and from the development will be conveyed and managed. The stormwater management design plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this division, including the post-construction stormwater management criteria set forth in subdivision 4. 
The submittal should include the following components: 
(1)  Certification by plan preparer. The stormwater management design plan shall be prepared in accordance with the criteria outlined in this section by a certified design professional such as a landscape architect, professional surveyor, or professional engineer who must certify that the design of the stormwater management system meets the requirements of this division and the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement, the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, and any relevant local addenda. 
(2)  Certification by owner. The owner shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved stormwater management design plan. 
(3)  Stormwater management design plan. The stormwater management design plan shall address the requirements of this division and ensure that better site planning and design techniques and low impact development practices are being used to the maximum extent practical to reduce stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and pollutant loads and reduce the site's impact on the watershed. The stormwater management design plan shall include maps, narrative descriptions, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The stormwater management design plan shall include all of the information required in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement, the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, and any relevant local addenda. 
(4)  Stormwater management concept plan. A copy of the approved stormwater management concept plan shall be included with the submittal of the stormwater management design plan. The stormwater management design plan shall be consistent with the approved concept plan. If changes to the proposed land development activity have resulted in modification of the approved concept plan, the city may require a revised concept plan or a written statement providing rationale for the changes made to the approved concept plan. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-360. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement and plan. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a permit for any land development activity requiring one, the applicant (or owner of the site, if different) must execute an inspection and maintenance agreement and plan that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site, unless the stormwater management system is dedicated to and accepted by the city. 
(2)  The inspection and maintenance agreement and plan shall include the following information: 
(a)  Identification by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. 
(b)  A statement that responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management system, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. 
(c)  A provision stating that, if portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate, for each portion of the stormwater management system, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(d)  A maintenance schedule stating when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management system. 
(e)  Plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the stormwater management system between scheduled maintenance and remedies for the default thereof. 
(3)  The inspection and maintenance agreement and plan shall be approved by the city prior to approval of the stormwater management design plan and recorded with the deed upon approval of the stormwater management design plan. 
(4)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement and plan, the city may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in subdivision 6 of this division. 
(5)  The terms of the stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement and plan shall provide for the city to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. These terms include the right to enter a property when the city has a reason to believe that a violation of an approved stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement and plan or this division is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of an approved stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement and plan or this division. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-370. - Permit application procedure. 
(1)  Applications for post-construction stormwater management permits shall be filed with the city on a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 16-330 (two copies of the stormwater management design plan and the stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement and plan, shall be included). 
(3)  The city shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management design plan, and inspection and maintenance agreement and plan are approved or disapproved. 
(4)  If the permit application, stormwater management design plan, or inspection and maintenance agreement and plan are disapproved, the city shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements of this division and resubmit the same, in which event subsection 16-370(3) and this section shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the city that the permit application, stormwater management design plan, and inspection and maintenance agreement and plan, if applicable, meet the requirements of this division, the city may issue a post-construction stormwater management permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved stormwater management design plan and the provisions of this division and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development, and drainage will be done according to the approved stormwater management design plan; 
(b)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved stormwater management design plan; 
(c)  The city shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project in accordance with subdivisions 5 and 6 of this division; 
(d)  No changes may be made to an approved stormwater management design plan without review and written approval by the city; and 
(e)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit a statement certifying that the project has been completed in accordance with the approved stormwater management design plan and as-built plans for the stormwater management system, as required by section 16-550. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-380. - Application review fees. 
A non-refundable permit fee shall be collected at the time the post-construction stormwater management permit application is submitted. Any monetary collection shall be credited to a local budget to support plan review, administration and management of the permitting process, and inspection of all projects subject to this division. The city shall develop a fee schedule based on the area of land disturbed by the project and may amend the fee schedule from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-390. - Performance bonds. 
The city shall require from the developer a surety or cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or other means of security acceptable to the city prior to the issuance of any building and/or grading permit for any land development activity requiring a permanent stormwater management system. The amount of the security shall not be less than the total estimated construction cost of the permanent stormwater management system. The bond required in this section shall include provisions relative to forfeiture for failure to complete work specified in the approved stormwater management design plan, compliance with all of the provisions of this division, other applicable laws and regulations, and any time limitations. The bond shall not be fully released without a final inspection of the completed work by the city, submission of "as-built" plans, a recorded inspection and maintenance agreement and plan, and a certification of completion by the applicant that the stormwater management system complies with the approved stormwater management design plan and provisions of this division. A procedure may be used to release parts of the bond held by the city after various stages of construction have been completed and accepted by the city. The procedures used for partially releasing performance bonds must be specified by the local authority in writing prior to the approval of a stormwater management design plan. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-400. - Compliance through off-site stormwater management practices. 
The stormwater management design plan for each land development project shall include structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices located on the development or redevelopment site unless provisions are made to manage stormwater runoff at an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for that purpose, be designed and adequately sized to meet the post-construction stormwater management criteria set forth in subdivision 4 of this division, provide a level of stormwater quality and quantity control that is equal to or greater than that which would be provided by on-site stormwater management practices, and have a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, stormwater management measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels between the site and the location of the off-site or regional facility. 
To be eligible for compliance through an off-site stormwater management practice, the applicant must submit a stormwater management design plan to the city that shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility and demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the city, that the off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage or endangerment to public health or safety; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Subdivision 4. - Post-Construction Stormwater Management Criteria 

Sec. 16-410. - Structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices criteria. 
All development and redevelopment sites shall utilize structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices to control and minimize the increased stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and pollutant loads caused by land development in accordance with the criteria presented below. Better site planning and design techniques and low impact development practices should be used to the maximum extent practical to reduce runoff rates, volumes, and pollutant loads and the site's impact on the watershed. Such techniques and practices include, but are not limited to, conservation and/or restoration of natural areas, such as forests, wetlands, and riparian buffers, minimization and/or disconnection of impervious surfaces, and small-scale distributed stormwater management practices, such as rain gardens, pervious pavement, and stormwater planters, that intercept and treat or otherwise manage stormwater runoff close to its source. 
For structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices not included in the Coastal Stormwater Supplement or the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal and runoff reduction rates have not been provided, the effectiveness of the structural or nonstructural stormwater management practice must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the city before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the post-construction stormwater management criteria, the city may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or due to increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the development or redevelopment site in question. 
The following criteria shall apply to all land development activities and stormwater management design plans, unless otherwise provided for in this division. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-420. - Natural resources inventory. 
A graphic illustration of the natural resources at the development or redevelopment site, as they exist prior to the start of land development activities, shall be prepared during the site planning process. The Natural Resources Inventory shall include, at a minimum: existing topography; natural drainage features; perennial and intermittent streams; wetlands; riparian buffers; floodplains; steep slopes; soil types; groundwater recharge areas; areas with high groundwater; stands of trees and/or other vegetation; and areas with significant habitat value. Protection, conservation and/or restoration of a site's natural resources through the use of better site planning techniques may, at the discretion of the city, allow for a reduction in stormwater runoff volume as a means of complying with the post-construction stormwater management criteria outlined in sections 16-430 through 16-480. The better site planning techniques that qualify for this credit, and the procedures for calculating the runoff reduction provided by these nonstructural stormwater management practices, is provided in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-430. - Runoff reduction. 
(a)  Some portion of the stormwater runoff generated on a development or redevelopment site shall be captured and retained, reused, or otherwise reduced in order to preserve and/or replicate pre-development site hydrology, recharge shallow groundwater aquifers, promote baseflow to on-site and downstream aquatic resources, and minimize the water quality impacts of land development. A stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is designed to capture and retain, reuse, or otherwise reduce the prescribed runoff reduction volume from the site, as defined in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement; 
(2)  Appropriate structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices that provide for the interception, evaporation, transpiration, passive infiltration, active (engineered) infiltration, extended filtration, and capture and reuse of stormwater runoff have been selected, designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the standards, criteria, and information presented in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement; and, 
(3)  Stormwater runoff from any development or redevelopment site that is defined by the city as a stormwater hotspot is not managed through the use of structural or nonstructural stormwater management practices that provide for passive or active (engineered) infiltration of stormwater runoff, unless adequate pre-treatment is provided, as defined by the city. 
(b)  Green infrastructure, which includes better site planning and design techniques and low impact development practices, shall be used to the maximum extent practical during the site planning and design process to capture and retain, reuse, or otherwise reduce the prescribed runoff reduction volume on a development or redevelopment site. 
(c)  The city may reduce or waive the runoff reduction requirements on a development or redevelopment site with high groundwater, groundwater recharge areas, tight or contaminated soils, or other site constraints that prevent the use of one or more runoff reduction processes. When seeking a reduction in or waiver from runoff reduction requirements, the applicant shall demonstrate that structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices that provide for the interception, evaporation, transpiration, passive infiltration, active (engineered) infiltration, extended filtration, and capture and reuse of stormwater runoff have been used to the maximum extent practical and that no additional runoff reduction can be provided on the site. Any of the prescribed runoff reduction volume that is not captured and retained, reused, or otherwise reduced on the site, shall be captured and treated in an appropriate structural stormwater management practice that has been selected, designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the standards, criteria, and information presented in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-440. - Aquatic resource protection. 
All stormwater management systems shall be designed to protect on-site and downstream aquatic resources from the water quality and water quality impacts of land development. A stormwater management system is presumed to comply with this standard if: 
(1)  It provides aquatic resource protection in accordance with the criteria and information provided in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement; and, 
(2)  Appropriate structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices have been selected, designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the standards, criteria, and information presented in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement and any relevant local addenda. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-450. - Water quality. 
A significant portion of the stormwater runoff generated on a development or redevelopment site shall be adequately treated before discharge to minimize the water quality impacts of land development. A stormwater management system complies with this requirement if it meets the runoff reduction requirements of section 16-430 and the aquatic resource protection requirements of section 16-440. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-460. - Groundwater recharge. 
Groundwater recharge shall be preserved on a development or redevelopment site in order to preserve and/or replicate pre-development site hydrology, recharge shallow groundwater aquifers, and promote baseflow to on-site and downstream aquatic resources. A stormwater management system complies with this requirement if it provides groundwater recharge in accordance with the criteria and information provided in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement. 
The prescribed groundwater recharge volume on a development or redevelopment site, as defined in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement, shall be considered part of the runoff reduction volume defined in section 16-430, and shall not be managed in addition to the prescribed runoff reduction volume. Green infrastructure, which includes better site planning and design techniques and low impact development practices, shall be used to the maximum extent practical during the site planning and design process to preserve groundwater recharge on a development or redevelopment site. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-470. - Overbank flood protection. 
All stormwater management systems shall be designed to control the post-development peak discharge generated by the overbank flood protection storm event, as defined in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement, to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of damaging overbank flooding. A stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It provides overbank flood protection in accordance with the criteria and information provided in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement; and 
(2)  Appropriate structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices have been selected, designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the standards, criteria, and information presented in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement and any relevant local addenda. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-480. - Extreme flood protection. 
All stormwater management systems shall be designed to control and/or safety convey the post-development peak discharge generated by the extreme flood protection storm event, as defined in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement, to protect downstream properties from flood damage, maintain the boundaries of existing floodplains, and protect the physical integrity of downstream stormwater conveyance features, management practices, and flood control facilities. A stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It provides extreme flood protection in accordance with the criteria and information provided in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement; and 
(2)  Appropriate structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices have been selected, designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the standards, criteria, and information presented in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement and any relevant local addenda. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-490. - Redevelopment criteria. 
Land development that qualifies as redevelopment shall meet one of the following criteria: 
(1)  Reduce impervious cover. Reduce existing site impervious cover by at least 20 percent. 
(2)  Provide stormwater management. Manage the stormwater runoff from at least 20 percent of the site's existing impervious cover and any new impervious cover in accordance with the post-construction stormwater management criteria outlined in sections 16-430 through 16-480 using stormwater management practices designed in accordance with the standards, criteria, and information presented in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement, the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, and any relevant local addenda. 
(3)  Provide off-site stormwater management. Provide a level of stormwater quality and quantity control that is equal to or greater than that which would be provided by on-site stormwater management practices, in accordance with section 16-400. 
(4)  Combination of measures. Any combination of subsections (1)—(3) that is acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-500. - Structural stormwater management practices. 
All structural stormwater management practices shall be selected, designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the standards, criteria, and information presented in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement, the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, and any relevant local addenda. Applicants shall consult the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement, the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, and any relevant local addenda for guidance on selecting structural stormwater management practices that can be used to satisfy the post-construction stormwater management criteria outlined in sections 16-430 through 16-480. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-510. - Nonstructural stormwater management practices. 
The use of nonstructural stormwater management practices, including better site planning and design techniques and low impact development practices, is encouraged to preserve and/or replicate the pre-development hydrology of a development or redevelopment site, reduce a site's impact on the watershed, and minimize reliance on structural stormwater management practices. The use of nonstructural stormwater management practices may, at the discretion of the city, allow for a reduction in stormwater runoff volume as a means of complying with the post-construction stormwater management criteria outlined in sections 16-430 through 16-480. The nonstructural stormwater management practices that qualify for this credit, and procedures for applying and calculating the runoff reduction provided by these nonstructural stormwater management practices, is provided in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-520. - Stormwater conveyance systems. 
Stormwater conveyance systems, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutters, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters, shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining development and redevelopment sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance systems that are designed to convey stormwater runoff from more than one parcel shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods used to calculate stormwater runoff rates and volumes shall be in accordance with the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems, and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management design plan using the methods included in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and, 
(3)  Planning and design of stormwater conveyance systems shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Subdivision 5. - Construction Inspection of Stormwater Management Systems 

Sec. 16-530. - Notice of construction commencement. 
The applicant must notify the city before the commencement of construction. In addition, the applicant must notify the city in advance of construction of critical components of the stormwater management practices shown on the approved stormwater management design plan. The city may, at its discretion, issue verbal or written authorization to proceed with critical construction steps, such as installation of permanent stormwater management practices based on stabilization of the drainage area and other factors. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-540. - Inspections during construction. 
Periodic inspections of the stormwater management practices shown on the approved stormwater management design plan shall be conducted by staff or representatives of the city during construction. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management design plan for establishing compliance with the provisions of this division. All inspection shall be documented in written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  The name of the inspector; 
(3)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management design plan; 
(4)  Violations of the approved stormwater management design plan; and, 
(5)  Any other variations from the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing about the nature of the violation and the remedial measures that are required to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the approved stormwater management design plan, as described in section 16-610. In the event that the remedial measures described in such notice have not been completed by the date set forth in the notice, any one or more of the enforcement actions outlined in section 16-620 may be taken against the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-550. - Final inspection and as built plans. 
Subsequent to the final installation and stabilization of all permanent stormwater management practices shown on the approved stormwater management design plan and before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy the applicant is responsible for certifying that the project has been completed in accordance with the approved stormwater management design plan and submitting "as built" plans for all permanent stormwater management practices shown on the approved stormwater management design plan. The "as built" plans must show the final design specifications for all structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices and must be certified by a licensed landscape architect, professional surveyor, or professional engineer. A final inspection shall be conducted by the staff or representatives of the city to confirm the accuracy of the "as built" plans. A final inspection is required before any performance bond or other guarantee can be released. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Subdivision 6. - Ongoing Inspection and Maintenance of Stormwater Management Systems 

Sec. 16-560. - Maintenance responsibility. 
(a)  The responsible party named in the recorded stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement and plan (section 16-360), shall maintain in good condition and promptly repair and restore all structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices, maintenance access routes, and appurtenances, including, but not limited to grade surfaces, walls, drains, dams, structures, vegetation, erosion and sediment controls, and other protective devices. Such repairs, restoration, and maintenance shall be in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement and plan. 
(b)  If the responsible party named in the recorded inspection and maintenance agreement and plan is a homeowner's association or other owner's association, such as a unit owner's association, the responsible party shall submit to the city a copy of a recorded declaration that provides: 
(1)  That stormwater management practices are part of the common elements of the development and shall be subject to the requirements of the stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement and plan; 
(2)  That membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners or unit owners of the development and their successors; 
(3)  That the association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members; 
(4)  That the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement and plan shall receive the highest priority for expenditures by the association except for any other expenditures that are required by law to have a higher priority; 
(5)  That a separate fund shall be maintained by the association for the routine maintenance, reconstruction, and repair of the stormwater management practices, and kept in an account insured by the FDIC or by another entity acceptable to the city; 
(6)  That the routine maintenance, reconstruction, and repair fund shall contain at all times the dollar amount reasonably determined from time to time by the city to be adequate to pay for the probable reconstruction and repair cost (but not routine maintenance cost) of the stormwater management system for a three-year period; and 
(7)  That, to the extent permitted by law, the association shall not enter into voluntary dissolution unless responsibility for the stormwater management practices is transferred to a successor. 
(c)  The city, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement and plan, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management practice or facility for maintenance, provided such practice or facility meets all of the requirements of this division, is in proper working order at the time of dedication, and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area for inspection and regular maintenance. Such adequate and perpetual access shall be accomplished by granting of an casement to the city or through a fee simple dedication to the city. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-570. - Maintenance inspections. 
(a)  Periodic inspections of the stormwater management practices shown on an approved stormwater management design plan and subject to the terms and conditions of an approved inspection and maintenance agreement and plan shall be conducted by staff or representatives of the city to document repair and maintenance needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the approved inspection and maintenance agreement and plan and provisions of this division. All inspections should be documented in written reports that contain the following: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  The name of the inspector; 
(3)  The condition of: 
a.  Vegetation and filter media, 
b.  Fences and other safety devices, 
c.  Spillways, valves, and other hydraulic control structures, 
d.  Embankments, slopes, and safety benches, 
e.  Reservoirs and permanent pools, 
f.  Inlet and outlet channels and structures, 
g.  Underground drainage structures; 
h.  Sediment and debris accumulation in storage and forebay areas; 
i.  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
j.  Any other item that could affect the proper function of the stormwater management system; and 
(4)  A description of repair, restoration, and maintenance needs. 
(b)  If any repair, restoration, or maintenance needs are found, the responsible party named in the recorded stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement and plan shall be notified in writing about the repair, restoration, or maintenance needs and the remedial measures that are required to bring the stormwater management system into compliance with the approved stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement and plan, as described in section 16-610. In the event that the remedial measures described in such notice have not been completed by the date set forth in the notice, any one or more of the enforcement actions outlined in section 16-620 may be taken against the responsible party named in the approved stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement and plan. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-580. - Records of maintenance activities. 
The responsible party shall make and maintain records of all inspections, maintenance, and repairs, and shall retain the records for a minimum of five years. These records shall be made available to the city during inspections and at other reasonable times upon request of the city. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-590. - Failure to maintain. 
If the responsible party fails or refuses to meet the terms and conditions of an approved stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement and plan and/or the requirements of this division, the city, after 30 days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or safety, 24-hours-notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation by performing the work necessary to place the stormwater management practice in proper working condition. The city may assess the responsible party for the cost of the repair work, which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorum tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes by the city. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Subdivision 7. - Violations, Enforcement and Penalties 

Sec. 16-600. - Violations of this division. 
Any action or inaction that violates the provisions of this division or the requirements of an approved stormwater management design plan, stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement and plan, or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this subdivision. Any such action or inaction that is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-610. - Notice of violation. 
If the city determines that an owner, applicant, or other responsible person has failed to comply with the provisions of this division, or the terms and conditions of an approved stormwater management design plan, permit, or inspection and maintenance agreement and plan, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such owner, applicant, or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in a land development activity covered by this division without having first secured a stormwater management permit, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the person in charge of the land development activity being conducted on the development or redevelopment site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner, applicant, or other responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the provisions of this division, or the terms and conditions of the approved stormwater management design plan, permit, or inspection and maintenance agreement and plan, and the date for the completion of such remedial measures; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is issued; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or safety, a written notice of appeal must be filed within 24 hours after the notice of violation). 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 16-620. - Penalties. 
(a)  In the event that the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was issued. 
(b)  Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the owner, applicant, or other responsible person in writing of its intended action and shall provide a reasonable opportunity of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or safety, 24-hours-notice shall be sufficient) to correct the violation. In the event the owner, applicant, or other responsible person fails to correct the violation by the date set forth in said notice, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order that shall be served on the owner, applicant, or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the owner, applicant, or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise corrected the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the remedial measures necessary to correct such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other structure constructed or being constructed on the site until the owner, applicant, or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise corrected the violation or violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation, or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke, or modify the permit authorizing the land development activity. A suspended, revoked, or modified permit may be reinstated after the owner, applicant, or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise corrected the violation or violations described therein, provided the permit may be modified as the city may deem necessary to enable the owner, applicant, or other responsible person to take the remedial measures necessary to correct such violation or violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the owner, applicant, or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to correct the violation or violations described therein by the date set forth in the notice of violation, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after the date set forth in the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this division, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the city municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for up to 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1970 CODE 
This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 1970 Code that are included in this Code. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1983 CODE 
This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 1983 Code, as updated through April 9, 2004, that are included in this Code. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table gives the location within the Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1983 Code, as updated through April 9, 2004, that are included. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 