CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF GROVETOWN, GEORGIA
____________
CHARTER AND
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY
____________
Published by Order of the Mayor and Council, 1990
Republished 2012
____________
OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF GROVETOWN, GEORGIA
AT THE TIME OF THE 1990 CODIFICATION
____________
Dennis O. Trudeau
Mayor
____________
James H. Birdwell
George W. James, III
C. H. Stephens
George W. Williams
City Council
____________
Jim Blanchard, Jr.
City Attorney
____________
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
2/414
Darleen H. Plunkett
City Clerk-Treasurer
OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF GROVETOWN, GEORGIA
AT THE TIME OF 2012 REPUBLICATION
____________
George W. James
Mayor
____________
Leland "Sonny" McDowell
Mayor Pro Tem
____________
Jennifer Jones
Bruce Stoddard
Dale Stoddard
City Council
____________
Shirley Beasley
City Administrator
____________
Brendan Fleming
City Attorney
____________
Vicky Capetillo
City Clerk
PREFACE
This Code constitutes a complete republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of
Grovetown, Georgia.
Source materials used in the preparation of this republication were the 1990 Code, as supplemented through
November 25, 2002, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
3/414
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within
each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and
which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their
location within the Code is included at the back of this Code.
Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local
government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash
refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter.
Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of Chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this
system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their
proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one
section that would logically come between Sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would
be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles,
may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the
end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or
division. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new
chapters.
Page Numbering System
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an
abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents
the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon
indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of
the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may
or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes:
CHARTER CHT:1
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1
CODE CD1:1
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE CCT:1
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1
CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1
CODE INDEX CDi:1
Indexes
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several
headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language
generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the
indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is
interested.
Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the
publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be
properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
4/414
of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete
pages.
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised
pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted
according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be
inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and
filed for historical reference purposes.
Acknowledgments
This republication was under the direct supervision of Bonnie Mitchell, Editor, of the Municipal Code
Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their
sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.
The publisher is most grateful to Vicky Capetillo, City Clerk, and other officers of the city for their cooperation
and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the
publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to
all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs.
Copyright
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of
Grovetown, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents;
section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering
system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or
reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the
City of Grovetown, Georgia.
© Copyrighted material.
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Grovetown, Georgia. 2012.
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been
considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are
codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent
nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits."
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a
more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution.
Ordinance
Number
Date
Adopted
Include/
Omit
Supplement
Number
156 4-12-04 Include Republication
158 7-12-04 Include Republication
159 12-27-04 Include Republication
161 5-23-05 Include Republication
164-02 7-11-05 Include Republication
165-02 7-11-05 Include Republication
166-02 7-11-05 Include Republication
167 4-24-06 Include Republication
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
5/414
167-02 7-11-05 Include Republication
168-02 7-11-05 Include Republication
170-02 7-11-05 Include Republication
171-02 7-11-05 Include Republication
173-02 2-13-06 Include Republication
174 10-10-06 Include Republication
175 11-13-06 Include Republication
182 7-16-07 Include Republication
184 7-16-07 Include Republication
187 10- 8-07 Include Republication
188 6-23-08 Include Republication
193 10-27-08 Include Republication
198 4-27-09 Include Republication
200 7-27-09 Include Republication
201 9-14-09 Include Republication
202 9-28-09 Include Republication
204 6-14-10 Include Republication
205 6-14-10 Include Republication
206 9-13-10 Include Republication
207 8- 9-10 Include Republication
210 6-13-11 Include Republication
211 6-13-11 Include Republication
212 12-27-11 Include Republication
213 11-14-11 Include Republication
214 10-10-11 Include Republication
215 12-12-11 Include Republication
216 1- 9-12 Include Republication
CHARTER
FOOTNOTE(S):
(1) Editor's note— The charter, consisting of Ga. Laws 1998, Act No. 787, p. 4198, and amendments, is set out
herein as enacted, except as noted, and except that material enclosed in brackets has been inserted by the editor
for explanation or to update state law references. Amendatory acts and ordinances are cited in parentheses
following amended sections or subsections. Also cross references and state law references have been inserted in
footnotes.
Act. No. 787, adopted April 2, 1998, repealed the city charter in its entirety and enacted a new charter. The
previous charter derived from Ga. Laws 1959, Act No. 111, p. 2223; Ga. Laws 1970, Act. No. 825, p. 2226, § 2;
Ord. No. 73, adopted Oct. 17, 1973.
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
6/414
Sec. 1.10. - Name.
This city and the inhabitants thereof are constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name
and style Grovetown, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession.
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries.
(a)
The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the earliest effective date in 1998 of the adoption of this
charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries
of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained
permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or
Description) of the corporate limits of the City of Grovetown, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of
such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the
same force and effect as with the original map or description.
(b)
The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the
corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is
designated to replace.
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction.
(a)
This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this
state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all
the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law.
(b)
The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention
particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. These powers shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1)
Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent
the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city;
(2)
Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and
to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the
disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by
ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this charter;
(3)
Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to
authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purposes for which a
municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the
city;
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
7/414
(4)
Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures;
to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all
housing and building trades;
(5)
Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges,
occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as
are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of
payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any
city taxes or fees;
(6)
Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use
and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in
Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted;
(7)
Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons,
firms, and corporations;
(8)
Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within
or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet
such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city;
(9)
Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the state
through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the
control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions
for the protection of the environment;
(10)
Erosion. To prescribe erosion control regulations not inconsistent with general law; and to prescribe penalties
and punishment for violations thereof;
(11)
Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to
prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection
and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof;
(12)
Flood control. To acquire by condemnation or other proceedings any real property which may be necessary for
the protection of the city from damages by floods; and to prescribe flood control regulations not inconsistent with
general law;
(13)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
8/414
Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other
sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all
individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business in the city benefiting from such services; to
enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such
service charges;
(14)
General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of
property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city
and to provide for the enforcement of such standards;
(15)
Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers
and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor
may impose;
(16)
Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such
standards;
(17)
Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences
in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for
commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp
or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials;
(18)
Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including
parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city;
(19)
Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices,
commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority
for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same;
(20)
Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for
the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws
of the State of Georgia;
(21)
Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or
mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city;
(22)
Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the
city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and p
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
9/414
violations thereof;
(23)
Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including
but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants,
cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public
utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for
the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same;
(24)
Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property;
(25)
Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter
and the laws of the State of Georgia;
(26)
Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide
subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy,
and esthetically pleasing community;
(27)
Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish,
operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency;
(28)
Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is
or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public;
(29)
Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of
public ways, parks and playgrounds, public grounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market
houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems,
other public utilities, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, and charitable,
cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical
institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the
corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be
acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are now or may
hereafter be enacted;
(30)
Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances;
(31)
Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial;
(32)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
10/414
Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for or impose taxes on public utilities and
public service companies and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service
applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid
regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission;
(33)
Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of
signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or
adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of
the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances;
(34)
Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city;
(35)
Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct,
pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and
light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of
way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to
require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands
and to impose penalties for failure to do so;
(36)
Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping,
operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on those to
whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the
availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for
enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those
connected with the system;
(37)
Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate
the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of
glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items;
(38)
Special areas of public regulation. To regulation or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or
transportation of any intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage,
and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and
any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the
conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by
taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult
bookstores, and massage parlors;
(39)
Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any
public improvements;
(40)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
11/414
Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all
property subject to taxation;
(41)
Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law;
(42)
Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to
require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts
to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles;
(43)
Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and
(44)
Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or
desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general
welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into
execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this
charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal
governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be
held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to
be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable
laws of the State of Georgia.
Sec. 1.13. - Exercise of powers.
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be
carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into
execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia.
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE
Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; number; election.
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter,
shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and four councilmembers. The city council
established in this charter shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the city governing authority
under prior law. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by this charter.
Sec. 2.11. - City councilmembers; terms and qualifications for office.
The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are
elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall
have been a resident of the city for 12 months and have attained the age of 25 years prior to the date of the
election of mayor or members of the city council; each shall continue to reside therein during that person's period
of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city.
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions.
(a)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
12/414
Vacancies—The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon such person's failing or ceasing to
reside in the city or upon the occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution, Title 45 of the O.C.G.A., or
such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. A vacancy in the office of mayor or
councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this charter.
(b)
Suspension—Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the
general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the
duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall
be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this charter.
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses.
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by
ordinance.
Sec. 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices.
(a)
Conflict of interest—No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political
entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly:
(1)
Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is
incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the
independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties;
(2)
Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or
service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the
independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties;
(3)
Disclose confidential information, including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to
Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental
body by which that person is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the
financial or other private interest of that person or others;
(4)
Accept any gift valued at more than $75.00, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any
person, firm, or corporation which to that person's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner
whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which that person is engaged; provided,
however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and
services in connection with any such campaign;
(5)
Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or
(6)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
13/414
Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in
which that person has a financial interest.
(b)
Disclosure—Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any financial interest, directly
or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such
interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a financial interest in any matter pending
before the city council shall disclose such interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city
council, and that person shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating
thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter
applies who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or
within such entity shall disclose such interest to the governing body of such agency or entity.
(c)
Use of public property—No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to
which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit,
convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body
of such agency or entity.
(d)
Contracts voidable and rescindable—Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or
implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render such contract or sale voidable at the option of the city
council.
(e)
Ineligibility of elected official—Except where authorized by law, no councilmember shall hold any other elective
or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof
during the term for which that person was elected. No former councilmember shall hold any compensated
appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which that person was elected.
(f)
Political activities of certain officers and employees—No appointed officer of the city shall continue in such
employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. No employee of the
city shall continue in such employment upon election to any public office in this city or any other public office
which is inconsistent, incompatible, or in conflict with the duties of the city employee. Such determination shall
be made by the mayor and city council either immediately upon election or at any time such conflict may arise.
(g)
Penalties for violation:
(1)
Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the
requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have
forfeited that person's office or position.
(2)
Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit that person's office or position as described in paragraph (1)
of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
14/414
government for a period of three years thereafter.
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations.
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any
department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take
testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued
in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as may be provided by ordinance.
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council.
Except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of
government of this city.
Sec. 2.17. - Eminent Domain.
The city council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate and maintain public ways, parks, public
grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment and
facilities, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, and hospitals; and charitable, educational,
recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, and penal industrial development complexes, commercial
development complexes, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and any other public improvements
inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof; and for such purposes, property may be condemned
under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future.
Sec. 2.18. - Organizational meetings.
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the first business day in January next following the
election of the mayor and councilmembers. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of
office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows:
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city
and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia
and the United States of America."
Sec. 2.19. - Meetings.
(a)
The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance.
(b)
Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or two members of the city council. Notice
of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48
hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all
councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be
waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also
constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business
stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting.
(c)
All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law, and notice to the public of special
meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible as provided by Code Section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A.
or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
15/414
Sec. 2.20. - Rules of procedure.
(a)
The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this
charter and shall provide for keeping of a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record.
(b)
All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and
shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any
committee at any time.
Sec. 2.21. - Quorum; voting.
(a)
Three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council.
Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any
councilmember shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal.
Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of three councilmembers shall be required for
the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion.
(b)
In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of councilmembers holding office, then the
remaining councilmembers in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the
city council. A vote of a majority of the remaining councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any
ordinance, resolution, or motion.
Sec. 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedures.
(a)
Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No
ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of
the City of Grovetown hereby ordains…" and every ordinance shall so begin.
(b)
An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city
council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules
which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced,
except for emergency ordinances provided for in Section 2.24 of this charter. Upon introduction of any
ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall
file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council
may designate.
Sec. 2.23. - Action requiring an ordinance.
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance.
Sec. 2.24. - Emergencies.
(a)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
16/414
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call
of the mayor or two councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may
not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services;
or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall
be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an
emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists
and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or
without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three
councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it
may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon
which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this
section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing
ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances.
(b)
Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency
meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with Code Section 50-14-1 of the
O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted.
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations.
(a)
The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting
ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for
ordinances generally except that:
(1)
The requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.22 of this charter for distribution and filing of copies of the
ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting
ordinance; and
(2)
A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated
and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 2.26 of this charter.
(b)
Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for inspection by the
public.
Sec. 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing.
(a)
The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that
purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council.
(b)
The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having
the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall
be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
17/414
rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as
"The Code of the City of Grovetown, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments,
and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city
council.
(c)
The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following
its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the
public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this
charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the
same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council
shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current
changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code.
Sec. 2.27. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation.
The mayor shall be elected and shall serve for a term of four years and until the mayor's successor is elected and
qualified. The mayor shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of the city for 12
months prior to the election. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of the mayor's
service. The mayor shall forfeit the office of mayor on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for
councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for
councilmembers.
Sec. 2.28. - Mayor pro tempore.
By a majority vote, the councilmembers shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore. The mayor
pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's physical or mental disability or
absence. The mayor pro tempore shall sign all contracts and ordinances in which the mayor has a disqualifying
financial interest as provided in Section 2.14 of this charter.
Sec. 2.29. - Powers and duties of mayor.
The mayor shall:
(1)
Preside at all meetings of the city council;
(2)
Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official
spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy;
(3)
Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits;
(4)
Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other
instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing;
(5)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
18/414
Vote on matters before the city council or in case one vote is needed to pass any motion, resolution, ordinance, or
other question before the council; the mayor or mayor pro tempore, if he or she be presiding, may vote and be
counted toward a quorum as any other councilmember;
(6)
Prepare and submit to the city council a recommended annual operating budget and recommended capital
budget; and
(7)
Fulfill such other executive and administrative duties as the city council shall by ordinance establish.
(Act. No. 135, § 1, 4-9-99)
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS
Sec. 3.10. - Boards, commissions, and authorities.
(a)
The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative,
quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the
composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof.
(b)
All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such
terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority,
terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law.
(c)
The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary
expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority.
(d)
Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold
any elective office in the city.
(e)
Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner
prescribed in this charter for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law.
(f)
No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with
the clerk of the city an oath obligating that person to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of that person's
office, such oath shall be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor.
(g)
All members of boards, commissions, or authorities of the city serve at will and may be removed for cause at any
time by a vote of three members of the city council unless otherwise provided by law.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
19/414
(h)
Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall
elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson and may elect as its secretary one of
its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of
the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter,
ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct
of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city.
Sec. 3.11. - City attorney.
The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized,
and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney
shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city
is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as
directed; shall advise the councilmembers and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects
of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of such person's position as
city attorney.
Sec. 3.12. - City clerk/treasurer
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of
the official city seal and city records; maintain city council records required by this charter; and perform such
other duties as may be required by the city council.
Sec. 3.13. - Position classification and pay plans.
The mayor shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be
submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its
agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council
shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan.
For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees.
Sec. 3.14. - Personnel policies.
The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning:
(1)
The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment;
(2)
The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service
ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan;
(3)
Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absences, overtime pay, and the order and manner in
which layoffs shall be effected;
(4)
Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and
(5)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
20/414
Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel
affairs.
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH
Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name.
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Grovetown.
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge.
(a)
The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as
shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by
ordinance.
(b)
No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have
attained the age of 25 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall possess all qualifications
required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed
and qualified.
(c)
Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance.
(d)
Judges serve at will and may be removed from office at any time for cause by a vote of three members of the city
council.
(e)
Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that such judge will honestly and
faithfully discharge the duties of the judge's office to the best of the judge's ability and without fear, favor, or
partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal.
Sec. 4.12. - Convening.
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance.
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers.
(a)
The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations
as provided by law.
(b)
The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such
punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail.
(c)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
21/414
The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or
imprisonment for one year or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or
alternative sentencing, as now or hereafter provided by law.
(d)
The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall
be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to
superior courts for violations of state law.
(e)
The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those
charged with violations before such court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real
property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for
that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, that person's bond shall be forfeited by
the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's
sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is
accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to
appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited
to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be
enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes.
(f)
The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the
possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such
oaths as are necessary.
(g)
The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the
issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized
by this charter or by law.
(h)
Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with
offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as
a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city.
(i)
The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of
this city granted by law to mayors, recorders, police courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the
abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations.
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari.
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and
ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior
Court of Columbia County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of
certiorari.
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
22/414
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and
regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court;
provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to
municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available
for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court
proceedings at least 48 hours prior to such proceedings.
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL
Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law.
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the
O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended.
Sec. 5.11. - Regular elections; time for holding.
(a)
There shall be a municipal general election biennially in odd-numbered years on the Tuesday next following the
first Monday in November.
(b)
There shall be elected the mayor and two councilmembers at one election and at every other election thereafter.
The remaining councilmember seats shall be filled at the election alternating with the first election so that a
continuing body is created.
Sec. 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections.
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be
listed without party designations.
Sec. 5.13. - Election by plurality vote.
The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected.
Sec. 5.14. - Special elections; vacancies.
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant as provided in Section 2.12 of this
charter, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term
of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that
office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all
other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the
O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended.
Sec. 5.15. - Other provisions.
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and
regulations as it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A.,
the "Georgia Municipal Election Code."
Sec. 5.16. - Removal of officers.
(a)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
23/414
A councilmember, the mayor, or other appointed officers provided for in this charter shall be removed from
office for any one or more of the causes provided in Title 45 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are
or may hereafter be enacted.
(b)
Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following
methods:
(1)
Following a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. In the event an elected officer is sought
to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the
ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service
of such written notice. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall
be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of
appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Columbia County. Such appeal shall be
governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or
(2)
By an order of the Superior Court of Columbia County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal
brought by any resident of the City of Grovetown.
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE
Sec. 6.10. - Property tax.
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the
corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of
raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the
repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the
city council in its discretion.
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods.
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time
period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of
these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the
time when due.
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes.
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied
by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, or professions for the purpose of such taxation in
any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this
charter.
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees.
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business in this
city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or
permit where such activity is not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations.
Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as
provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for
obtaining or keeping such licenses or permits as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitates.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
24/414
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises.
(a)
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the
purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership
corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation
companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the
same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no
franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city
receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all
franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the city clerk. The city council may provide by
ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted.
(b)
If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the
use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric
companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas
companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations.
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges.
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers,
sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and outside the corporate
limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such
charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter.
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments.
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing,
widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and
appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid,
such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter.
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes.
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific
mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general
powers of this city to govern its local affairs.
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees.
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue
due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded
by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest;
issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts
of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or
fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions.
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds.
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project,
program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be
exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time such issue
is undertaken.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
25/414
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds.
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be
paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued.
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans.
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless
otherwise provided by law.
Sec. 6.22. - Lease-purchase contracts.
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods,
materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies, provided the contract terminates without further
obligation on the part of the municipality at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the
close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance
with the requirements of Code Section 36-60-13 of the O.C.G.A., or other such applicable laws as are or may
hereafter be enacted.
Sec. 6.23. - Fiscal year.
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the
year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city
government.
Sec. 6.24. - Budget ordinance.
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution
of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the
scope, content, and form of such budgets and plans. The city council shall also comply with the budgeting and
auditing provisions of Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A.
Sec. 6.25. - Operating budget.
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year,
the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget
shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the
city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a
general summary of the budget, and other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget and the
capital improvement budget provided for in Section 6.29 of this charter, the budget message, and all supporting
documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection.
Sec. 6.26. - Action by city council on budget.
(a)
The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor, except that the budget as finally
amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this
charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund
shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues.
(b)
The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the
thirty-first day of December of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts
appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
26/414
a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget
for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out
the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational
unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.24 of this
charter.
(c)
The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual
appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise
unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable.
Sec. 6.27. - Levy of taxes.
The city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such
ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together
with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated
for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general
government of this city.
Sec. 6.28. - Changes in appropriations.
The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget
at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional
appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus.
Sec. 6.29. - Capital improvements.
(a)
On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal
year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended
capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city
council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and budget. The
city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or
improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except
to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 2.24 of this charter.
(b)
The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget of each year. No appropriation
provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was
made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the mayor may submit amendments to the
capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by the mayor's recommendations.
Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by
ordinance.
Sec. 6.30. - Audits.
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified
public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted
auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the
requirements of this charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public.
Sec. 6.31. - Procurement and property management.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
27/414
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless:
(1)
It is in writing;
(2)
It is drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city
attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and
(3)
It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council minutes.
Sec. 6.32. - Purchasing.
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city.
Sec. 6.33. - Sale of property.
(a)
The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental
or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law.
(b)
The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by
the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes
and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value.
(c)
Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel
or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the
city council may authorize the mayor to sell and convey said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an
abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilitates the highest and best
use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights of way of
said street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the
property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by
ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title
and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or
is hereafter made.
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials.
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in
such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by
ordinance or as may be provided by law.
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
28/414
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are
declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council.
Sec. 7.12. - Pending matters.
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or
administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city
agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council.
Sec. 7.13. - Construction and definitions.
(a)
Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not be considered as a part thereof.
(b)
The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive.
(c)
The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa.
(d)
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, the term:
(1)
"City council" means the members of the city council and the mayor.
(2)
"Councilmember" means a member of the city council other than the mayor.
Sec. 7.14. - Specific repealer.
An Act entitled "An Act to incorporate the City of Grovetown" approved March 9, 1959 (Ga. L. 1959, p. 2223),
and all amendatory Acts thereto, is repealed.
Sec. 7.15. - Effective date.
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such
approval.
Sec. 7.16. - General repealer.
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed.
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto.
Year Act
Number
Page
Number
Section Section
this Charter
1959 111(H.B. 2223 1—46 1—46
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
29/414
No. 95)
1970 825 2226 1 8
2 10
2 12
2 13
3 34A
1982 855 3592 1 9
1998 787 4198      Rpld 1—46
     Added 1.10—1.13
2.10—2.29
3.10—3.14
4.10—4.15
5.10—5.16
6.10—6.33
7.10—7.16
1999 135 1 2.29
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES
This table shows the location of the ordinances of the city which are amendatory of the Charter.
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date
Section Section
this Charter
73 10-17-73 10
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the
"Code of Ordinances, City of Grovetown, Georgia," and may be so cited.
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and all ordinances amending the same, the following rules shall be observed,
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body:
Bonds. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds
where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they are bound thereby.
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(1).
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
30/414
City. The term "city" shall mean the City of Grovetown, Georgia. Where appropriate, it shall also mean duly
authorized officials, officers and employees of the city.
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations, when a period of time
measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the
exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be
counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have
through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for
such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, section 1-4-
1, as amended, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the
privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(3).
Council, city council, mayor and council, governing authority, governing body. The terms "council," "city
council," "mayor and council," "governing authority" and "governing body" shall mean the mayor and council of
the City of Grovetown, Georgia.
County. The term "county" shall mean Columbia County, Georgia.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires an official or the head of a department of the
city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the official or head of the department
to designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the
terms of the provision designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing one (1) gender shall extend and be applied to the other genders, except where
inappropriate.
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the
minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general
provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be
controlling.
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as
giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.
Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons as the term "person" is
defined herein, whether acting by themselves or through an agent or employee.
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
Number. A word importing only the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things as
well as to one (1) person or thing.
Oath. The word "oath" shall include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted
for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed."
Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it.
Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or person in possession under a bond for title.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
31/414
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships,
receivers, trustees and personal representatives, and to bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
Personal property. The words "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as
herein defined.
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
Public place. The words "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent
thereto, or any open area.
Real property. The words "real property" shall include lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property
line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
Signature, subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark intended as such
when the person cannot write.
State. The term "state," in reference to a political entity, shall mean the State of Georgia.
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts
and all other public highways in the city.
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person
holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or
with others.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
Title of officer or official. Whenever the title of an officer is given, it shall be construed as though the words "of
the City of Grovetown" were added.
Week. The word "week" shall mean seven (7) calendar days.
Written, in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year.
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections and subsections.
The catchlines of the several sections and subsections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate
the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or subsections, nor as
any part of the section or subsection, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections or subsections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances.
(a)
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed
took effect.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
32/414
(b)
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect.
Sec. 1-5. - Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses
and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code
shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect the remaining clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this Code.
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language.
(a)
All ordinances passed subsequent to the passage of the ordinances originally included herein, which amend,
repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code
and added hereto. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected
thereby.
(b)
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific
reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ;#rule; of the Code of
Ordinances, City of Grovetown, Georgia is hereby amended to read as follows: ____________." The new
provision may then be set out in full as desired.
(c)
In the event a new section not theretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be
used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Grovetown, Georgia is hereby amended by adding a section (or
article or chapter) to be numbered ;#rule;, which said section (or article or chapter) reads as follows:
____________." The new section (or article or chapter) may then be set out in full as desired.
(d)
All sections, articles, chapters, or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section,
article or chapter number, as the case may be.
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code.
(a)
By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or
directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of
ordinances passed by the council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the
supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they
will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially
obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current
through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be
included in like manner.
(b)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
33/414
In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c)
When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized
to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances
included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example,
the codifier may:
(1)
Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2)
Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the
supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3)
Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to
accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;
(4)
Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division,"
etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ;#rule; through ;#rule;" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections
of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and
(5)
Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted
into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material
included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations; abatement of nuisances.
(a)
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city amending this Code, any act is prohibited or
is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code, ordinance or
resolution the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no
specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance or
resolution shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six (6) months or both, or by fine, imprisonment or alternative sentencing as provided by
law. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance or resolution shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
(b)
In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any
of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city,
as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.
(Ord. of 11-25-02)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
34/414
Charter reference— Jurisdiction of municipal court, § 9; providing court costs, § 34; appearance bond, § 16;
certiorari, § 17.
State law reference— By virtue of the 1983 Const., Art. VI, § 10, ¶ 1, and O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1, the court is now
entitled "municipal court;" appointment of judge, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2; maximum punishment authorized,
O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); powers of judges of municipal courts in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3;
jurisdiction of courts extended, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-22; waiver of jury trial necessary, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-23.
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time
of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code, ordinance or other public document.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part of this
Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby.
(b)
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, mutilate, or in any other manner alter any ordinance book or minute
book, or any notice posted by the city for the benefit of the public, or any other document or record of the
municipal government of the city.
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the
validity of any of the following:
(1)
Any rates, fees or charges consistent with this Code;
(2)
Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any
bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city;
(3)
Any ordinance consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing
through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or
loading zones;
(4)
Any ordinance consistent with this Code fixing salaries of officials, officers or employees of the city;
(5)
Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance; any ordinance levying any tax;
(6)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
35/414
Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution to any person;
(7)
Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or
vacating any street or public way in the city;
(8)
Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city;
(9)
Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor;
(10)
Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city or providing regulations for platting or
subdividing of property;
(11)
Any ordinance establishing or changing the boundary of the city;
(12)
Any ordinance regulating zoning in the city;
(13)
Any ordinance enacted after October 23, 1989.
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at
length in this Code.
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(2) Charter reference— Municipal court, §§ 9, 34.
(2) Cross reference— Personnel, Ch. 12.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. - Municipal court.
There is hereby created in the city a municipal court to be presided over by a judge, appointed as provided in
section 9 of the charter.
(Ord. No. 1, § 1, 1-12-60)
Charter reference— Costs, subpoenas, etc., § 34.
State law reference— By virtue of the 1983 Const., Art. VI, § 10, ¶ 1 and O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1, the court is now
entitled "municipal court;" appointment of judge, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2; maximum punishment authorized,
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
36/414
O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); powers of judges of municipal courts in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-5 et seq.,
40-13-22, 40-13-23.
Sec. 2-2. - Councilmembers' salary.
(a)
The mayor shall receive a salary of five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) per month (six thousand six hundred
dollars ($6,600.00) per annum);
(b)
Each member of the council shall receive three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month (three thousand six hundred
dollars ($3,600.00) per annum).
(Ord. of 10-24-88, § 1; Ord. No. 105, §§ 1, 2, 4-12-93)
Charter reference— Minimum salaries, § 8.
Secs. 2-3—2-19. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL MEETINGS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(3) Charter reference— Quorum, voting by mayor, passage of measures, § 7; duties of clerk, § 12.
Sec. 2-20. - Place.
The city council shall hold both regular and special meetings in the appropriate section of the building now
known as City of Grovetown City Hall - Community Building.
Sec. 2-21. - Order of business.
At each regular meeting of the council the following regular order of business shall be observed unless dispensed
with by a majority vote of the members present:
(1)
Call to order by the presiding officer.
(2)
Reading of minutes of the previous meeting by the city clerk for correction and approval.
(3)
Grievances from citizens.
(4)
Communications from the mayor.
(5)
Reports from committees, the mayor, members of the council and other offices.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
37/414
(6)
Old business.
(7)
New business.
(8)
Adjournment.
Sec. 2-22. - General rules of order.
Except as otherwise provided in the charter or this Code, the rules of order and parliamentary procedure
contained in "Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised," shall govern the transaction of business by and before
the council at its meetings.
Sec. 2-23. - Disturbing meetings.
It shall be unlawful to engage in disorderly or contemptuous behavior which disturbs any meeting of the council.
Sec. 2-24. - Legislation—General procedure.
The enactment of city legislation shall be accomplished under the provisions of section 7 and other applicable
sections of the charter.
Sec. 2-25. - Same—Official copy.
A true copy of an ordinance which has been duly enacted by the council, signed by the mayor, and attested to by
the city clerk, shall be known as an official copy of an ordinance of the city.
Secs. 2-26—2-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - CODE OF ETHICS
Sec. 2-51. - Intent.
It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the city that the members of its governing authority
be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain;
and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the governing authority. The governing authority finds that
the public interest requires that they protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical
standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the governing authority in situations where a conflict
may exist.
(Ord. No. 137, 2-28-00)
Sec. 2-52. - Definitions.
As used in this article, the term:
(1)
Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the mayor or mayor pro tem containing specific
allegations of misconduct by a member; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six (6) months
of discovery of the alleged misconduct.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
38/414
(2)
Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest held by or accruing to a member of the
governing authority as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action
by or with the city. A member of the governing authority shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions
involving:
a.
Any person in the member's immediate family;
b.
Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other
benefits unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which
the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate;
c.
Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise
provided herein; or
d.
Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured.
(3)
Governing authority or "member of the governing authority" means the mayor or any council member of the city
and any member appointed to any board or commission of the city.
(Ord. No. 137, 2-28-00)
Sec. 2-53. - Prohibitions.
No member of the governing authority shall:
(1)
By conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him/her or unduly
enjoy his/her favor in the performance of official acts;
(2)
Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for
him/herself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of
official duties;
(3)
Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his/her official position for his/her or
another person's private gain;
(4)
Use his/her official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public;
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
39/414
(5)
Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when
such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official
duties;
(6)
Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is
applicable to him/her by virtue of being a member of the governing authority;
(7)
Use his/her position to request or require an employee to:
a.
Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work
is not furthering a city interest;
b.
Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment;
c.
Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and
d.
Work for the member personally without paying the employee just compensation;
(8)
Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he/she direct
employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved;
(9)
Use his/her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any
financial benefit to himself/herself or persons having an interest.
Prohibition (2) of this section shall not apply in the case of;
(1)
An occasional non-pecuniary gift of insignificant value;
(2)
An award publicly presented in recognition of public service;
(3)
A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an
institution or individual authorized by the laws of the state to engage in the making of such a loan or financial
transaction;
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
40/414
(4)
Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia law.
Prohibition (5) of this section shall not apply to a member of the governing authority who is a licensed
professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long as disclosures required
by section 2-54 are made to the board or commission chairperson thirty (30) days prior to any action being taken,
and the member is associated with the project at the time the initial application is filed.
(Ord. No. 137, 2-28-00)
Sec. 2-54. - Disclosure of conflicts of interest.
An appointed member of the governing authority who has an interest that he/she has reason to believe may be
affected by his/her official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the governing authority shall
disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement thirty (30) days prior to the governing
authority's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and abstain from discussion and voting. An
elected member of the governing authority shall disclose the nature of any interest he/she has at the time such
matter is presented to mayor and council for discussion. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into
the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to
this section, the member shall refrain from all ex-parte communications with other members regarding the
application in which he/she has an interest.
(Ord. No. 137, 2-28-00)
Sec. 2-55. - Disqualification.
A member of the governing authority shall disqualify himself/herself from participating in any official act or
action of the city which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he/she has
an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large.
(Ord. No. 137, 2-28-00)
Sec. 2-56. - Prohibited contracts.
The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the governing
authority or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest. This section shall not
apply in the case of:
(1)
The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds;
(2)
The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in
the community for such loan;
(3)
Contracts entered into in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6;
(4)
Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor
prepares a written record explaining the emergency;
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
41/414
(5)
Contracts entered into with a member of the governing authority, or with a business in which a member of the
governing authority has an interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of
the nature of such member's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver of the
prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the city administrator following disclosure.
(Ord. No. 137, 2-28-00)
Sec. 2-57. - Restrictions on contracts with former members of the governing authority.
The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person, who has been
within the preceding twelve-month period a member of the governing authority, unless the contract is awarded
by a competitive bid or a committee selection process.
(Ord. No. 137, 2-28-00)
Sec. 2-58. - Complaints.
Any person having a complaint against any member of the governing authority for an alleged ethics violation
shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the
alleged violation against the governing authority. The complaint shall be filed with the mayor, or in the event the
complaint regards the mayor, shall be filed with the mayor pro tem. Upon receipt of a complaint, the mayor, or in
the event the complaint regards the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall, appoint three (3) members of council, who,
along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets
forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the
complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous
or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. In the event the complaint
is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as
provided herein.
(Ord. No. 137, 2-28-00)
Sec. 2-59. - Board of ethics.
(a)
Composition of the board of ethics:
(1)
The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five (5) residents of the city to be appointed as provided in
paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the
city for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the
city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if
the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or
official action of the city.
(2)
The mayor and council members shall each designate two (2) qualified citizens to provide a pool of ten (10)
individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board of ethics and who will be available for a
period of two (2) years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed.
(3)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
42/414
The city administrator shall maintain a listing of these ten (10) qualified citizens. Should the investigating
committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the mayor and council, at the
first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens
until the specified five (5) members of the board of ethics have been appointed. Such board will elect one (1) of
its members to serve as chairman.
(4)
The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing authority of the city shall
provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the
city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to
perform its duties and responsibilities.
(b)
The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers:
(1)
To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs;
(2)
To hold a hearing within sixty (60) days after the receipt of complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the
specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent refiling if a
complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six (6) months;
(3)
To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this article and to make available
to the public information disclosed as provided in this section;
(4)
To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this article;
(5)
To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person
has violated any provisions of this article;
(6)
To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints;
(7)
To report its findings to the governing authority for such action as the governing authority deems appropriate.
(Ord. No. 137, 2-28-00)
Sec. 2-60. - Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints.
The board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the
governing authority charged as soon as practicable. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail,
return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days after filing of the complaint. The board of
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
43/414
ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all
circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of witnesses. The
decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to mayor and council within five (5) days after completion of the
hearing.
(Ord. No. 137, 2-28-00)
Sec. 2-61. - Penalty and member rights.
(a)
Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in
this article shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the city.
(b)
At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry
shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten (10) business days before a hearing, to be
represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in
opposition or in extenuation.
(Ord. No. 137, 2-28-00)
Sec. 2-62. - Appeals.
(a)
Any member of the governing authority or the complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of
ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section.
(b)
An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the superior
court of the county within thirty (30) days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application
shall act as supersedes.
(Ord. No. 137, 2-28-00)
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(4) Editor's note— Ord. No. 147, adopted Nov. 11, 2002, repealed chapter 3, sections 3-1—3-37, 3-40—3-44,
and replaced it with a new chapter 3, sections 3-101—3-112, 3-146—3-163, 3-214, 3-216, 3-217, 3-251—3-256.
Former chapter 3 pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. No. 55, §§ 1—8, 10—34, 36—47, adopted
Aug. 3, 1976; and Ord. of Dec. 23, 1985.
(4) Cross reference— Consumption on public property, § 11-1; public drunkenness, § 11-2.
(4) State Law reference— Local licensing authority, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; local regulatory authority, O.C.G.A. §§
3-4-49, 3-5-40 et seq., 3-6-40.
ARTICLE I. - RESERVED
Secs. 3-1—3-100. - Reserved.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
44/414
ARTICLE II. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 3-101. - Sale of alcoholic beverages in the city; license a privilege.
(a)
Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the city under a license granted by the city council upon the terms and
conditions provided in this chapter.
(b)
All licenses issued under the terms of this chapter shall be a grant of privilege to carry on the business of selling
alcoholic beverages during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the terms of
the license and the ordinances and laws of the city and the state.
(c)
All licenses issued under the terms of this chapter shall have printed on the front of such licenses the following
words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled, and is subject to any further
ordinances which may be enacted by the city council of Grovetown, Georgia."
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-102. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever
process produced.
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all drinks or beverages containing alcohol, including, but not limited to,
distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine.
Alcoholic treatment facility means any alcohol treatment facility owned and operated by the state, city, or county,
including the buildings and the surrounding property or campus directly incorporated into such use.
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction
of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not
more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and
strong beer. The terms do not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine.
Church building means the main structure used by any religious organization for purposes of worship and the
surrounding property or campus directly incorporated into such use in compliance with the zoning ordinances of
the city. A church must have its property zoned as church property prior to asserting any rights as a church with
respect to this chapter.
City council means the city council board of Grovetown, Georgia.
City park or playground means a park, recreation center, ball fields or playgrounds owned and operated by the
city for use by the citizens of the city.
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more
than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
45/414
Eating establishment means a business establishment open to the public which sells prepared food for
consumption by the public on the premises, with a full service kitchen which must contain at least a threecompartment pot sink, a commercial grade stove or grill and oven which is permanently installed, and a
commercial grade cooler or refrigerator, offering food service every hour such establishment is open, and
deriving at least sixty (60) percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared food items which shall
not include the sale of any alcoholic beverages. An eating establishment which was in operation on January 1,
2003, possessed a city business license at that time, and has been in continuous operation since January 1, 2003,
must have its full service kitchen approved by the health department and the engineering department. Any other
eating establishment must have its full service kitchen approved by the health department, engineering
department and the fire marshal where state law requires the establishment to be inspected by the fire marshal.
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage made from fruits, berries or grapes, containing more than twentyone (21) percent alcohol by volume, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added.
The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy.
Governing authority means the city council of Grovetown, Georgia.
Hotel means a business establishment open to the public, which provides sleeping accommodations for rent to
the general public, either on a transient or permanent residence basis, either maintaining a minimum of thirty
(30) rooms available for rent and having one (1) or more public dining rooms with kitchen facilities as required
for an eating establishment, or maintaining less than thirty (30) rooms, but at least three (3) rooms which are
available for rent, having at least one (1) public dining room with kitchen facilities as required for an eating
establishment, and deriving gross sales from the sale of prepared food items in an amount exceeding its gross
sales from the sale of alcoholic beverages. A motel meeting the qualifications set out in this definition shall be
deemed a hotel. A hotel may grant a franchise or lease to a third party for the operation of an establishment
pursuant to a license within the hotel, and such establishment shall still be treated as part of the hotel.
Indoor commercial recreational establishment means a business establishment open to the public which
regularly serves prepared food during every hour it is open for business, and which derives at least seventy (70)
percent of its total annual gross sales from sales of prepared food and other goods and services other than
alcoholic beverages, with the sale of alcoholic beverages being incidental to the establishment's primary business
activity at the location. The primary business activity shall be offering a recreational activity such as, but not
limited to, dinner theaters, bowling centers, bingo parlors, and other similar activities. Outdoor recreational
activities, dance halls, nightclubs, taverns, video arcades, skating arenas, adult entertainment and/or sexually
related entertainment and similar activities are specifically excluded from this definition.
License means a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
Licensee means the person to whom a license under this chapter is issued.
Liter means the metric measurement currently used by the United States.
Main entrance door means the principal entrance by which access may be obtained to the operational area of a
structure. In the case of a city park or playground or other similar facility which does not have a principal
entrance to a structure, this term shall mean the main entrance gate to the facility.
Outdoor commercial recreational establishment means a business establishment, the primary business of which
is offering outdoor recreational activities and/or outdoor sports spectator activities to members of the public or
members of the establishment if it is a private club, and which regularly serves prepared food during every hour
in which it is open for business, and which derives at least seventy (70) percent of its total annual gross sales
from the sale of its recreational activities, sports spectator activities, prepared food and other goods and services
other than alcoholic beverages, with the sale of alcoholic beverages being incidental to the establishment's
primary business activity at that location. The primary business activity shall be offering an outdoor recreational
activity or sports spectator activity such as, but not limited to, golf courses, golf training centers and/or driving
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
46/414
ranges, tennis facilities, swimming facilities, automobile race tracks, fishing facilities and other similar activities.
Adult entertainment and/or sexual entertainment facilities are specifically excluded from this definition.
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container.
Premises means a physically identifiable place of business of one (1) or more contiguous rooms, operating under
the same trade name, where alcoholic beverages are sold. In hotels and private clubs, the premises shall include
eating areas, ballrooms, meeting facilities, reception rooms, guest rooms and patio areas of such hotel or private
club located within the boundaries of the land on which such hotel or private club is built.
Private club means any nonprofit corporation or association organized under the laws of this state which:
(1)
Has been in existence at least one (1) year prior to filing an application for a license;
(2)
Has at least seventy-five (75) regular dues-paying members; and
(3)
Owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building
or space:
a.
Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment;
b.
Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and
guests; and
c.
Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other
compensation, any profits for the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a "fixed salary," as such term is defined in
O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1, as amended from time to time.
Retail consumption dealer means any person holding the appropriate license who sells at retail, only to
consumers and not for resale, alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises.
Retail package dealer means any person holding the appropriate license who sells at retail, only to consumers
and not for resale, alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages for consumption off the premises.
School building means only the state, county or church school buildings and buildings at other schools in which
are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of the state and the surrounding
property or campus which is directly incorporated into such uses, provided that schools other than state or county
schools must be in compliance with the county zoning ordinances. A school must have its property zoned as
school property prior to asserting any rights as a school with respect to this chapter.
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person holding the appropriate license who sells alcoholic beverages
to other wholesale dealers, to retail package dealers or to retail consumption dealers.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
47/414
Wine means any alcoholic beverage made from fruits, berries or grapes which contain not more than twenty-one
(21) percent alcohol, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. This term
includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths,
special natural wines, sake, rectified wines, etc. This term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other
ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a
wine at the point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to this definition.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-103. - Adding to, refilling container; misrepresentation.
No person shall add to or permit another to add to any original container of an alcoholic beverage another
substance or additional alcoholic beverage, or refill any alcoholic beverage container in any manner, or
misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-104. - Employment of underage persons prohibited; exceptions.
(a)
No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under eighteen (18) years of age to dispense, serve,
sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverage.
(b)
The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under eighteen (18) years of age who are employed in
supermarkets, grocery stores, convenience stores, gasoline stations or other licensees whose principal business is
other than the sale of alcoholic beverages from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for
consumption off the premises.
(c)
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age shall work as an entertainer in any establishment operated
pursuant to a license under this chapter without written consent from his parents or guardian.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-105. - Sale or possession without proper identification prohibited.
Each licensee under this chapter shall require and properly check identification of any person seeking to purchase
an alcoholic beverage to ensure that no underage person is sold or served an alcoholic beverage or has in his
possession an alcoholic beverage while on the premises of the licensee. "Identification" shall mean and include
any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph
and giving such person's date of birth and shall include, but not be limited to, a passport, military identification
card, driver's license or state department of public safety identification card.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-106. - Restriction of sales; violation; penalty.
(a)
No licensee or his agents or employees shall do any of the following:
(1)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
48/414
Knowingly sell, furnish or cause to be furnished alcoholic beverages to any person under twenty-one (21) years
of age.
(2)
Knowingly sell, offer to sell, furnish or cause to be furnished any alcoholic beverages to any person who is
noticeably intoxicated, or who is of unsound mind or who is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are
known to such licensee or his agents or employees.
(3)
Sell, offer to sell, furnish or cause to be furnished alcoholic beverages or permit alcoholic beverages to be
consumed on the premises of the licensee on any day or at any time when the sale or consumption of alcoholic
beverages is prohibited by law.
(b)
The penalty for violation of this section shall be as follows:
(1)
For the first offense within a period of thirty-six (36) consecutive months, a fine of not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or a suspension of the license issued under
this chapter held by the licensee for the location where the offense occurred for a period not to exceed ninety
(90) days.
(2)
For the second offense at the same location within a period of thirty-six (36) consecutive months, a fine of not
less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or
confinement in the city or county jail for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days and/or a suspension of the license
for the location where the second offense occurred for a period of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
(3)
For the third offense at the same location within any period of not less than thirty-six (36) consecutive months, a
fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or confinement in the city or county jail for a period not to exceed
sixty (60) days and/or suspension of the license issued under this chapter held by the licensee for the location
where the third offense occurred for a period of not more than three hundred sixty (360) days, or revocation of
the license issued under this chapter held by the licensee for the location where the third offense occurred.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-107. - Purchase or possession by underage persons.
(a)
No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall purchase or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage.
Upon being charged with such offense, where appropriate, the department of public safety shall notify the
offender's parents by telephone or by certified mail, return receipt requested, of such offense.
(b)
No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall attempt to purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage or
misrepresent his age in any manner for the purpose of obtaining alcoholic beverages. Upon being charged with
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
49/414
such offense, where appropriate, the department of public safety shall notify the offender's parents by telephone
or by certified mail, return receipt requested, of such offense.
(c)
Any person who violates any provision of this section may, upon conviction, be subject to penalties as set forth
in section 1-8
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-108. - Copy of building plans to be submitted with application; approval and maintenance of premises.
Each application for a license under this chapter must have submitted with it a copy of the plans of the building
in which the proposed establishment will be located. If the construction of the building has not been completed at
the time of the filing of the application, a copy of the building permit must also be provided. The completed
building or the proposed building shall comply with all ordinances of the city, regulations of the state revenue
commissioners and the state. If a license is issued relating to an establishment located in a building, the
construction of which is not complete at the date of such issuance, the license shall be subject to the condition
that the building must be approved by the building inspector when completed. Each applicant for a license shall
submit with the application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building, or a copy of the lease if
the applicant is leasing the building. If the applicant is a franchisee, such applicant shall submit with the
application a copy of the franchise agreement. All facilities for which a license shall be issued shall have
adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open
areas may be clearly seen by the customers in such facility. The licensee shall maintain the premises, the building
in which the premises is located and the surrounding grounds and parking areas in a neat, clean and well
maintained condition and appearance, free of trash, litter and any unsightly conditions at all times.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-109. - Election day sales.
The sale of alcoholic beverages on any election day is authorized; provided, however, no alcoholic beverages
shall be sold on primary or election days within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any polling place or the outer
edge of any building within which such polling place is established.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-110. - Establishments operated under licenses issued and outstanding pursuant to prior ordinances;
currently outstanding licenses; exceptions for prior establishments.
(a)
All licenses issued by the city for the sale of beer and/or which are outstanding on January 1, 2003, the effective
date of this chapter, shall continue in effect until they expire according to the terms of such licenses. Upon the
expiration of such licenses, new renewal licenses must be obtained pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
Establishments operating under such currently issued licenses shall be operated after January 1, 2003, the
effective date of this chapter, in accordance with all of the applicable requirements of this chapter.
(b)
No holder of a license to sell beer and/or wine in the city, either for on-premises consumption or in packages for
off-premises consumption, issued pursuant to any ordinance which preceded this chapter, which license was in
effect on January 1, 2003, the effective date of this chapter, actually operating a business pursuant to such license
shall be denied a license for the same type and scope of operations as were being carried on at such date due to
the fact that such business does not qualify as an eating establishment, hotel, indoor commercial recreational
establishment or private club.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
50/414
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-111. - Violation; penalties.
The penalties for any violation of this chapter, unless otherwise specified in this chapter, shall be as follows:
(1)
For any violation which is also a violation of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code (O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.), a
fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment in the city or county jail for a period
not to exceed one (1) year;
(2)
For any other violation of this chapter, such penalties and costs as set forth in section 1-8; and
(3)
In addition to the penalties set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this section and totally distinct and separate
from such penalties, any violation of this chapter or any failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter
shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of any or all licenses issued under this chapter held by
the licensee, regardless of the number of licenses or locations involved and regardless of whether or not the
licensee knew of or contributed to such violation. It is the intent of this subsection, without limiting its
generality, to grant to the city council the right to suspend or revoke any and all licenses held by a licensee when
any violation of this chapter occurs at any place of business operated by the licensee pursuant to a license.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-112. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter are expressly repealed.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Secs. 3-113—3-145. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - LICENSES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(5) State Law reference— Local permit or license required for wholesale or retail sales of alcoholic beverages,
O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(a); governing authority to set forth ascertainable standards pertaining to the granting, refusal,
suspension or revocation of alcoholic beverage permits or licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(b)(1); local license
required for wholesale or retail sales of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 3-146. - Required for sale or possession for sale.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage when such
person is not operating pursuant to a license to sell or possess for sale such alcoholic beverages, or to sell any
alcoholic beverage in violation of the terms of the license or of this article.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-147. - Separate application and license required for each location of sale; jointly held license for
concessions and similar arrangements.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
51/414
(a)
Each license under this article shall be limited to the operation of an establishment or enterprise for the sale of
alcoholic beverages at a specific location as set forth in the license. Separate applications must be made and
separate licenses must be obtained for each location at which an activity requiring a license is conducted.
Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a retail consumption dealer or retail package dealer from catering or
supplying a private party or gathering being put on by a third party at a location other than that covered by the
license.
(b)
For a retail consumption dealer, if the sale of alcoholic beverages within an establishment or business at a
specific location is handled through a concession contract, the license for such location shall be obtained jointly
in the name of the entity which operates the business or establishment within which such concession is located
and the name of the entity operating the concession. A "concession contract," for purposes of this subsection,
shall mean an agreement or arrangement where the person selling alcoholic beverages is doing so as a
department or section of a larger business enterprise, for example, a beverage service operated within a hotel,
food and beverage services operated within an indoor commercial recreational establishment or outdoor
commercial recreational establishment, or a beverage service operated within an eating establishment. For
purposes of determining whether a particular business enterprise qualifies as an eating establishment, hotel,
indoor commercial recreational establishment or an outdoor commercial recreational establishment, the
activities, facilities and sales of the business enterprise as a whole shall be aggregated, and the individual sales or
facilities of any concession therein shall not be treated separately.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-148. - Application procedure.
(a)
A person desiring to obtain a license under this article shall make application to the city clerk on the forms
prescribed by the city clerk.
(b)
The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1)
The name and address of the applicant and the proposed business to be carried on;
(2)
If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of all of the partners unless there are more than twenty (20)
partners, in which case the application shall list all partners having, directly or indirectly, at least a five-percent
interest in the assets or revenues of the partnership;
(3)
If a corporation, the names and residence addresses of the officers, the directors, the registered agent for service
of process, the manager of the business for which the license is sought and all shareholders unless there are more
than twenty (20) shareholders, in which case the application shall list all shareholders holding at least five (5)
percent of the capital stock of the corporation; and
(4)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
52/414
If a private club, the names and residence addresses of the officers, directors and the manager of such private
club.
(c)
All applicants shall furnish data, fingerprints, evidence of financial responsibility in the form of a bond in the
amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) or insurance with a minimum coverage of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) per person and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per incident, a copy of the
current city business license for the establishment, certification from the tax commissioner that all taxes due to
the city and county by the applicant have been paid and other material as required by the city clerk. Failure to
furnish such data as required by the city clerk shall be deemed to be a withdrawal of the application.
(d)
Each application for an initial license as opposed to a license renewal shall have attached thereto a plat of the
land on which the establishment is proposed to be located showing the location of the improvements thereon.
Such plat must be prepared by a land surveyor registered under the laws of the state and the surveyor shall show
on the plat and certify as to the accuracy thereof the distance from the main entrance door of the proposed
establishment to any school building, church building, city park or playground, or alcoholic treatment facility
located within five hundred (500) yards thereof measured under the applicable provisions of section 3-152
(e)
All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer empowered by law to
administer oaths.
(f)
An application shall be presented to the city council or a committee designated by the city council within fortyfive (45) days after the date such application is deemed complete by the city clerk. The city clerk shall notify the
applicant in writing of the date on which the application will be presented to the city council or its designated
committee, which notice shall be given in sufficient time to enable the applicant to meet the public notice
requirements as set forth in section 3-151
(g)
At the time the application is presented to the city council or its designated committee, the applicant may appear
and present any matters in support of the application and any other person may appear and present matters in
opposition to the application. Upon hearing all of the presentations, the city council or its designated committee
shall take action denying or granting the application or deferring action for a period not to exceed forty-five (45)
days in order to obtain further information. If the application is denied, the city council or its designated
committee shall set forth, in reasonable detail, the reasons for the denial.
(h)
In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this article, the applicant may not
reapply for a similar license for the same location for at least one (1) year from the date of such denial.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-149. - Withdrawal of application; refund of fees.
Any application for a license made pursuant to this article may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time. If the
application is withdrawn before the license is issued, any sums deposited as license fees will be refunded. After
issuance of a license, no refunds will be made. No refunds shall be made under any circumstances for
investigation and administrative fees required in this article.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
53/414
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-150. - Licensing qualifications.
(a)
A license under this article will be issued only to a person who is a citizen of the United States or an alien
lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United States. Where an applicant is other than a natural
person, such applicant must be an entity organized and existing under the laws of the United States or one (1) of
its states, and the natural persons who are required to join in the application must meet the qualifications of this
subsection.
(b)
For a license to be issued to a general partnership, the application must be made jointly by the partnership, any
managing partner and all other partners owning at least a twenty-percent interest in the assets or revenues of the
partnership. If there is no managing partner, nor a partner meeting the ownership requirements, the application
then must be made jointly in the name of the partnership and the general partner owning the greatest percentage
interest in the assets and revenues of the partnership. At least one (1) of the applicants shall be a natural person.
If none of the applicants required in this subsection is a natural person, then the natural person having primary
responsibility for the operation of the business for which the license is sought shall join in the application.
(c)
Where the applicant for a license is a limited partnership, the application shall be made jointly by the limited
partnership, its general partner and any other partner, limited or general, owning at least a twenty-percent interest
in the assets or revenues of the limited partnership. At least one (1) of the applicants must be a natural person. If
none of the applicants required in this subsection is a natural person, then the natural person having primary
responsibility for the operation of the business for which the license is sought shall join in the application.
(d)
Where the applicant for a license is a corporation, the application shall be made jointly in the name of the
corporation and its president or vice-president and any stockholder owning at least twenty (20) percent of the
total outstanding capital stock of the corporation.
(e)
Where the applicant for a license is a private club, the application shall be made jointly in the name of the private
club and its president or general manager.
(f)
Where the applicant for a license is an entity other than a natural person, partnership, corporation or private club,
the application shall be made jointly in the name of the entity, the natural person having chief executive officer
authority over the business activities of the entity and any other person having at least a five-percent interest in
the assets or revenues of the entity. The application shall further disclose the type of entity making the
application and every person having an ownership interest in the assets or revenues of the entity.
(g)
Licenses issued to corporations, general partnerships, limited partnerships, private clubs or other types of entities
must be issued jointly to the entity and all of the other persons required by this section to join in the application.
(h)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
54/414
No person shall be granted a license unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the city council or its designated
committee that such person shall be of good moral character or, in the case of an entity which is not a natural
person, that such entity has a good reputation, and in no event shall a license be granted to any person who has
been convicted or has pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any charge involving a crime of moral
turpitude, gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or illegal possession of alcoholic
beverages within a period of ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of such application. In the case of a
partnership, corporation, private club or other business entity, a license shall not be issued to the partnership,
corporation, private club or other entity if any partner, officer, director, shareholder or other person required to be
listed on the application, even if such person is not required to be a joint applicant, cannot meet the requirements
as set forth in this subsection in the same manner as though such individual was the applicant. At the time an
application is submitted for a license, the applicant shall, by a duly sworn affidavit, certify that all of the
requirements of this section have been met by the applicant and the other persons required to be listed on the
application as set forth in this subsection. Should any person in whose name a license is issued or any person
whose name is required to be listed on the application for a license under this article, after the license has been
issued, be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a charge involving a crime of moral turpitude,
gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or illegal possession of alcoholic beverages, the
license shall be immediately revoked and cancelled.
(i)
No license under this article shall be issued to any person convicted or pleading guilty or nolo contendere to any
charge under any federal, state or local law constituting a felony within ten (10) years prior to the date of the
filing of the application for such license.
(j)
No license under this article shall be issued to any person who has had any license issued under the police
powers of any city or county revoked within two (2) years prior to the filing of the application for a license under
this article.
(k)
The city council or its designated committee may decline to issue a license under this article when any person
having any ownership interest in or control over the land or building in which the establishment to be operated
pursuant to the license will be located does not meet the same character requirements as set forth in this section
for the licensee.
(l)
If a person in whose name a license under this article is issued is not a county resident, such person must appoint
and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required
or permitted by law or under this article may be served. The registered agent must be a resident of the county. If
the licensee is not a natural person, it will be required to appoint and maintain a registered agent in the county if
it does not have in the county any agent upon whom process can legally be served for such entity under the laws
of the state. The licensee shall file the name of such registered agent, along with the written consent to serve of
such agent, with the city clerk.
(m)
An application for a license under this article may be denied where it appears to the city council or its designated
committee that the applicant does not have adequate financial strength, adequate financial participation in the
proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the applicant is intended or is likely to
be a surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license under this article.
(n)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
55/414
The city council or its designated committee, in its discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances
which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, the application or the proposed location of the
establishment. If, in the city council's or the committee's judgment, circumstances are such that issuing of a
license under this article would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be
grounds for denying the application.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-151. - Public notice of application for new license.
A person filing an application for a new license under this article as opposed to an application for the renewal of
an existing license shall give public notice of the filing of the application as follows:
(1)
By publishing a notice of the application in the newspaper in which sheriff's sales in the county are placed, in a
form approved by the city clerk, three (3) times in the thirty (30) days preceding the consideration of the
application by the city council;
(2)
By posting a sign for at least thirty (30) days preceding the consideration of the application by the city council in
a prominent position on the property where it can be readily read from the road, which states:
"Application has been made to the city council for a license to sell (beer) (wine) (distilled spirits) for
consumption (on) (off) premises at this location."
Date:
____________
Name of Applicant
____________ ____________
The applicant must provide the city council proof of the giving of such public notice at or prior to the city
council's consideration of the application.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-152. - Distance requirements.
(a)
No establishment operated pursuant to a license under this article shall be located in a building which is closer
than one hundred (100) yards to a church building, library, daycare, children's nursery, or an alcoholic treatment
facility, or closer than two hundred (200) yards to a school building. In applying this section, the city council
shall determine what property is included in a school building, church building, city park or playground, or
alcoholic treatment facility consistent with the definitions set forth in section 3-102, and the determination of the
city council shall be final.
(b)
For purposes of this section, subject to the qualifications set forth in this subsection, distances shall be measured
in a straight line from the main entrance door of the establishment for which the license under this article is being
sought to the nearest point on the boundary line of the land making up the campus of the church building, school
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
56/414
building, or alcoholic treatment facility. All lots and parcels of land bordering on Wrightsboro Road at the edge
of the city limits up to and including the intersection of Wrightsboro Road and Robinson Avenue is hereby
declared to be a "special commercial growth center" only for the purposes of complying with this article. As
such all distances from any church building, school building, or alcoholic treatment facility which is built,
acquired or established after December 31, 2002, or in the case of areas added to the designated areas which are
built, acquired or established after the effective date of such designation, distance shall be measured from the
main entrance door of the establishment for which a license is being sought to the nearest point of the centerline
of the nearest traveled road, street or highway, then measured along such centerline to a point on the centerline
nearest the main entrance door of the school building, church building, or alcoholic treatment facility and then
measured in a straight line from such centerline to such main entrance door. If any church building, school
building, or alcoholic treatment facility located in one (1) of the designated areas on December 31, 2002 or the
effective date of designation of an area added to the designated areas after December 31, 2002, as the case may
be, thereafter has added to its campus additional land, measurement of the distance requirements shall continue
to be made as provided in the first sentence of this subsection (b), but the land acquired after December 31, 2002,
or the effective designation date, as the case may be, shall not be considered to be part of the land or campus of
the church building, school building, or alcoholic treatment facility.
(c)
No establishment which is being operated pursuant to a city license to sell beer and/or wine on January 1, 2003,
the effective date of this article, shall be denied continued operation under such existing license, nor denied any
renewal of such license, nor shall any new owner of such establishment be denied a new license based upon the
measurements set forth in this section. Upon cessation of the operation of the establishment as set forth in section
3-156 pursuant to such license, such exemption shall cease.
(d)
If the distance requirements in this section are met at the time of issuance of a license under this article, the
subsequent opening and operation of a church building, school building, or alcoholic treatment facility within the
distances prohibited in this section shall not prevent the continued operation of the establishment pursuant to the
license or the renewal of the license or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent owner of such
establishment as long as the business operation of the establishment does not cease as set forth in section 3-156
(e)
The holder of title to any property making up a church building, school building, or alcoholic treatment facility
may waive the distance requirements of this section as they apply to such facility in any specific instance by
recording in the real estate records in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county, a written instrument
evidencing such waiver and setting out the terms thereof, which instrument shall be executed and witnessed with
the same formalities as a deed filed for record in the clerk's office.
(f)
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city council from amending this section, adding additional special
commercial growth centers nor amending any distance requirements in the future.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-153. - Administrative and investigative fees.
(a)
Upon making application for a license under this article, the applicant shall pay a license fee for the license, an
administrative and investigative fee and such other fees as may be established from time to time by the city
council by resolution adopted in open meeting and kept on file in the office of the city clerk. The initial schedule
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
57/414
of fees shall be adopted and is attached to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Ordinance adopted January 1, 2003.
Such schedule of fees shall remain in effect until amended by the city council. All applicants shall be furnished a
copy of the schedule of fees at the time of application for a license under this article. In addition, all fees and
taxes due the state, city, and/or county by the applicant, or upon the property on which the establishment is to be
located, must be paid in full at or prior to the time of filing the application for the license.
(b)
All licenses granted under this article shall be for a calendar year and the full license fee must be paid for a
license application at the time of the filing of the application.
(c)
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of
the license fee, together with a separate certified check in the amount of the applicable investigate and
administrative fees. If the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be
refunded, but the investigative and administrative fees shall be retained.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-154. - Display at place of business.
A license issued under this article shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to public view at the place of
business for which the license was granted.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-155. - Transferability.
(a)
No license under this article shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided in this section.
(b)
In case of the death of a licensee who is the sole licensee, the establishment for which the license was issued
shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages in accordance with the terms of the license for a period of
forty-five (45) days from the date of death of the licensee or until approval of a new licensee, whichever shall
first occur; provided, however, that no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed after the seventh day after the
date of death of the licensee until such time as a personal representative of the estate of the deceased licensee,
appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall have registered with the city clerk on forms
prepared by the city clerk. Such personal representative shall be subject to all of the requirements that applied to
the deceased licensee, and shall agree in writing to operate the establishment during the interim period in
accordance with the terms of the license and the laws of the state and city.
(c)
In the case of licenses issued jointly to partnerships and certain partners, corporations and certain officers or
stockholders, private clubs and certain officers or other entities and certain persons related thereto as set forth in
section 3-150, if one (1) of the joint holders of such a license severs his association with the establishment
operated pursuant to the license, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of fortyfive (45) days from the date determined by the city clerk to be the date of severance, provided no such sale shall
be authorized until such time as an application to substitute the person taking the place of the departing person as
a joint holder of the license is made by the appropriate person. If the change is one which results from a change
in control of the licensee, partnership, corporation or other business entity, then an application for a new license
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
58/414
must be filed. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell under the previous license shall be
revoked by operation of law.
(d)
Any change in the ownership of a licensee which is not a natural person which would change the ownership
information furnished on the most recently updated application for the license must be reported to the city clerk
within ten (10) days following the occurrence of such change in ownership. If such change in ownership results
in an additional person being required to be a joint licensee under section 3-148, or an additional person being
listed on the application, but not as a joint licensee, the license may be revoked if any such person fails to meet
the qualifications required by this article. If such change in ownership results in a change in control of the
business entity which is a joint licensee, then a new application must be filed for the issuance of a new license. If
an application for a new license is filed within seven (7) days of the date on which the change in control
occurred, then the establishment may continue to operate under the old license for a period of forty-five (45)
days from the date of the change in control or until the new license is issued or denied, whichever shall occur
first.
(e)
If substantially all of the assets of an establishment operated pursuant to a license under this article are sold,
conveyed or otherwise transferred by the licensee, and if an application for a new license is filed with the city
clerk within seven (7) days of such sale or transfer, the establishment may continue to be operated under the then
existing license for a period of forty-five (45) days or until a new license is issued or denied to the new owner,
whichever shall occur first.
(f)
Under no circumstances shall a license be transferred where the original holder of the license is under
suspension.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-156. - Automatic forfeiture for nonuse.
Any licensee who shall, for a period of two (2) consecutive months after the license under this article has been
issued, cease to operate the business of selling alcoholic beverages as authorized in the license shall, after the
two-month period, automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. If the business
operation of selling alcoholic beverages is interrupted as a result of damage to the premises which is being
repaired or because the premises is being remodeled, then this section shall not apply to such cessation of
operation. If a license is issued for the operation of an establishment in a building which has not yet been
completed, the license will not be forfeited unless the licensee fails to begin operations within a period of one
hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance of the license.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-157. - Expiration; renewal.
(a)
All licenses granted under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew
their license shall file application with the city clerk on the form provided for renewal of the license for the
ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed on or before October 31 of each year. If a renewal
application is received after October 31, the city cannot assure the applicant that a renewal license will be issued
by January 1 and the licensee will have to cease the sale of alcoholic beverages from January 1 until the renewal
license is issued. If a license renewal application is received after December 31, such application shall be treated
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
59/414
as an application for a new license and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules, regulations and
fees for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been issued.
(b)
Any person applying for renewal of a license must pay the license, administrative and investigative fees at the
time of filing the application. Failure to pay such fees at that time shall result in the application for renewal being
treated as not filed or withdrawn.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-158. - Audits.
The city clerk, in order to determine if the provisions of this chapter are being complied with or to determine the
eligibility of an applicant, may require a licensee or an applicant for a license under this article to provide the
city clerk with audited financial statements of the licensee or applicant for such period as the city clerk may
determine. The city clerk shall also have the authority to conduct an audit of the books and records of a licensee
or an applicant. If the city clerk deems it necessary to conduct such an audit, the city clerk shall so notify the
licensee or applicant of the date, time and place of the audit. The city clerk shall designate the person to perform
such audit. The licensee shall cooperate with such audit or forfeit all licenses issued under this article. If an
applicant for a license fails to cooperate with an audit, the application shall be deemed withdrawn.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-159. - Collection of delinquent sums.
If any person shall fail to pay any sum due under this chapter, the city clerk or his/her designee shall issue an
execution against the delinquent person and his property for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax. The failure
to pay any taxes or fees shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and the license of the business to sell alcohol
shall be suspended immediately.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-160. - Licensee to maintain copies of regulations; responsibility for instruction; violations.
Each licensee shall keep a copy of this chapter, the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code and any regulations issued
under such code on the premises. The licensee shall instruct any employee or agent of the licensee working in
connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages as to the requirements of all laws and regulations applicable to
such sales so that the licensee, his agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar
with the requirements of the laws and regulations applicable to such sales. The licensee shall be responsible for
any acts of his agents or employees which are in violation of this chapter or of the laws of the state or the rules
and regulations of the state revenue commissioner applicable to the sale of alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-161. - Suspension, revocation.
(a)
A license under this article may be suspended or revoked by the city council when the licensee furnishes
fraudulent or untruthful information on the application or any renewal application for a license, or for failure of
the licensee to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter or other laws or
ordinances of the city or state.
(b)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
60/414
Whenever the state shall revoke or suspend any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the license issued
under this article shall be automatically revoked or suspended, as the case may be.
(c)
If the city clerk, the city council or its designated committee believes that probable cause exists to find that a
violation of sections 3-106, 3-188 and/or 3-194 has occurred in an establishment operated pursuant to a license
under this article, the city council or its designated committee may temporarily suspend such license pending
final determination and action on the matter by the city council or its designated committee.
(d)
The city clerk shall revoke all of the licenses of any licensee under this article who has had three or more
suspensions or revocations of a license, including all of his licenses in any consecutive thirty-six-month period.
(e)
The city clerk shall revoke a license under this article where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed at
the location covered by the license during a period of suspension of such license.
(f)
The city council may suspend or revoke any license under this article when the licensee does not meet the
licensing qualifications set forth in this article and such information becomes known to the city clerk or the city
council.
(g)
An act or omission of a licensee under this article, by the owner of a twenty (20) percent or more interest in an
establishment operated pursuant to a license, the manager of an establishment operated pursuant to a license or
an employee of the establishment operated pursuant to a license working in some aspect of the sale of alcoholic
beverages who willingly or knowingly performed any act, which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or
this chapter will subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of his license when the city council determines
that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues;
provided, however, that in the case of a manager or employee, the city council must determine that the acts of the
manager or employee were known to or, under reasonable circumstances, should have been known to the
licensee, or were condoned by the licensee, or that the licensee had not established reasonable practices or
procedures to prevent such act or omission from occurring.
(h)
A license under this article may be suspended or revoked whenever the city council determines that a licensee no
longer maintains adequate financial strength or responsibility upon which issuance of the license was based or
whenever the licensee has defaulted in any obligation of any kind whatsoever lawfully owing to the city.
(i)
A license under this article may be suspended or revoked whenever the city council determines that the
establishment operated pursuant to the license has been the scene of repeated incidents of violence resulting in
injury to a person or damage to property or a disturbance of the peace or requiring the intervention of law
enforcement officers on the scene of a single incident of severe violence resulting in the death of a person or
serious injury to a person requiring inpatient hospital care for the injured person.
(j)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
61/414
Upon completion of any period of suspension, a license under this article shall not be reinstated until the licensee
has paid the city a reinstatement fee equal to the original license fee for that calendar year. In addition, the
licensee shall pay the administrative and investigative fees and update all license application forms.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-162. - Hearings.
(a)
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, or unless waived by the licensee, no license under this article shall be
suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as provided in this section.
(b)
The city clerk shall provide written notice to the licensee of the initiation of an action to suspend or revoke a
license. Such written notification shall set forth, in reasonable detail, the reasons for such action and shall notify
the licensee of the right to a hearing under the provisions of this section. Any licensee against whom action for
the suspension or revocation of a license is initiated may have a hearing concerning such action before the city
council or a committee thereof designated by the city council. Such hearing shall be by written request, filed in
the office of the city clerk within twenty (20) days after the date of the notice of the initiation of the action from
the city clerk to the licensee. Such written request shall set forth the reasons why the licensee feels that the
proposed action should not be taken and, in reasonable detail, the grounds and facts which the licensee contends
support the licensee's position. The city council shall determine whether or not the license shall be temporarily
suspended during the period prior to the hearing and until action is taken by the city council or its designated
committee. Failure of the licensee to request a hearing within the time specified shall be deemed to be a waiver
by the licensee of a right to a hearing, and the city council shall be authorized to proceed with final action on the
matter without the holding of a hearing.
(c)
The city council, by resolution, may assign the duties of conducting a hearing to a committee of the city council.
The committee's action shall be final.
(d)
A hearing, if requested, shall be held within forty-five (45) days of the date of filing the request for a hearing
with the city clerk. At such hearing the licensee shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the
expense of the licensee, and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.
(e)
The action of the city council or its committee shall be forwarded to the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after
the conclusion of the hearing, and the city clerk shall notify the licensee by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of the action taken by the city council or its committee.
(f)
The action of the city council or its committee shall be final when taken.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-163. - Notice.
For the purpose of this chapter, notice shall be deemed to be delivered when such notice is personally served,
served upon the licensee's registered agent, or, if mailed, it must be mailed to the licensee at the address given in
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
62/414
the latest application for the license under this article by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be
deemed delivered on the third business day after the date of deposit in the United States mail.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Secs. 3-164—3-185. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Sec. 3-186. - Outdoor advertising.
(a)
No outdoor advertising or signs promoting the sale of alcoholic beverages or the prices thereof shall be permitted
on the premises of any establishment operated pursuant to a license under this article.
(b)
Wholesale dealers may place wall-mounted signs on the principal building advertising the name of the company
and brands sold at wholesale. Such signs must otherwise comply with city ordinances regulating signs.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-187. - Sale of beverages by indoor and outdoor commercial recreational establishments.
(a)
A retail consumption dealer which is an indoor commercial recreational establishment shall not sell alcoholic
beverages at any time that such dealer is having a promotion or event for which it can reasonably be anticipated
that in excess of fifty (50) percent of those persons attending will be under twenty-one (21) years of age.
(b)
A retail consumption dealer which is an outdoor commercial recreational establishment shall not sell alcoholic
beverages at any time that such dealer is having a promotion or event for which it can reasonably be anticipated
that in excess of fifty (50) percent of those persons attending will be under twenty-one (21) years of age.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-188. - Gambling prohibited on the premises of retail consumption dealers.
There shall be no gambling, betting, lotteries, games of chance or the operation of any scheme for hazarding
money or any other thing of value on the premises of any retail consumption dealer. No retail consumption
dealer shall permit in his establishment slot machines, pinball machines or similar machines which require a
federal gambling stamp. Notwithstanding anything in this division to the contrary, this section shall not prohibit
the sale on the premises of any retail consumption dealer of state lottery tickets, cards or games which are legally
sold under the laws of the state.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-189. - Open area and patio sales.
(a)
Alcoholic beverage sales can be made by a retail consumption dealer in a patio/open area type environment if the
retail consumption dealer has been approved to do so by the city clerk.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
63/414
(b)
To obtain such approval, the patio/open area must be enclosed by a permanent structure providing for public
ingress/egress only through the main structure on the premises covered by the license. The purpose of this
requirement is to prevent a customer from leaving the outside sales area with an open drink container without the
licensee's knowledge.
(c)
The height of the enclosing structure shall be a minimum of four (4) feet above ground level. Such enclosing
structure does not have to be solid, nor does it have to restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open sales area.
Such enclosing structure must be permitted and approved by the engineering services department.
(d)
There must be an approved emergency fire exit (not for general public use unless an emergency exists) from the
patio/open sales area which should be of the type that sounds an alarm so that the licensee will be alerted in the
event of unauthorized use when no emergency exists.
(e)
If a licensee desires a patio/open sales area inside an existing structure, plans will be reviewed and approved on
an individual basis by the city clerk. Interior-type patio/open sales areas must also meet the requirements of the
city's planning, zoning, engineering and fire codes, and any applicable codes of the state.
(f)
Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, if the retail consumption dealer is an outdoor
commercial recreational establishment, alcoholic beverage sales can be made outdoors in the open, provided that
such alcoholic beverages must be consumed on the premises of the outdoor commercial recreational
establishment and may not be carried off of such premises.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-190. - Outside consumption prohibited; exception.
(a)
No person shall leave the building in which alcoholic beverages are sold with open alcoholic beverage containers
unless such person is in a patio/open sales area which is approved in accordance with section 3-189. It is the
licensee's responsibility to ensure that no open alcoholic beverage containers are carried out of the building in
violation of this section.
(b)
People shall not gather outside any building in which alcoholic beverages are sold and consume alcoholic
beverages or loiter and mill about. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee operating the business in such
building to prevent such gatherings.
(c)
Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, a person purchasing an alcoholic beverage at an outdoor
commercial recreational establishment which is a retail consumption dealer may leave the building in which such
alcoholic beverage is sold and may consume such alcoholic beverage outdoors or may purchase and consume
such alcoholic beverage outdoors, provided that the alcoholic beverage must be consumed on the premises of the
outdoor commercial recreational establishment and may not be carried off of such premises.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
64/414
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-191. - Solicitation.
A retail consumption dealer shall not require, permit, suffer, encourage or induce any employee or person to
solicit on the premises, for himself or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase
by the patron of any drink, whether an alcoholic beverage or nonalcoholic beverage.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-192. - Happy hours or similar promotions.
(a)
No retail consumption dealer, his employees or agents, in connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages, shall:
(1)
Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person;
(2)
Deliver more than one (1) alcoholic beverage to one (1) person at a time;
(3)
Sell, offer to sell, furnish or cause to be furnished to any person an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages
during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public;
(4)
Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without proportionately increasing the price regularly
charged for such alcoholic beverage;
(5)
Encourage or permit on the premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or
the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize; and
(6)
Sell, offer to sell, furnish or cause to be furnished any alcoholic beverages for a price less than the cost of the
ingredients to the licensee.
(b)
No retail consumption dealer shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the premises, any
of the practices prohibited under subsection (a) of this section.
(c)
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit retail consumption dealers from offering free food or
entertainment at any time, or to prohibit the retail consumption dealer from including an alcoholic beverage as
part of a meal package, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe, or pitchers or buckets of
beer.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
65/414
Sec. 3-193. - Restriction of noise.
Noise levels above those otherwise allowed by city ordinances shall not be permitted beyond the boundaries of
the land on which facilities operated pursuant to a license under this article are located.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-194. - Certain types of entertainment, attire and conduct prohibited.
The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are not permitted in or at any establishment operating
pursuant to a license under this article:
(1)
The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such
person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast
below the top of the areola, or of any portion of a person's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or
genitals;
(2)
Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner set forth in subsection (1) of this section, or where
any person performs acts of or acts which simulate:
a.
Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are
prohibited by law;
b.
The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals; or
c.
The displaying of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, or any portion of a person's pubic
hair, anus, vulva or genitals.
(3)
The use of artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform, simulate or depict any of the prohibited conduct or
activities set forth in subsection (2) of this section, or the showing of any film, still pictures, electronic
reproduction or other visual reproductions depicting any of the acts set forth in subsection (2) of this section; or
(4)
The holding, promotion or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night or any other activity where patrons
of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the prohibited conduct set forth in
this section.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-195. - Inspection of licensed establishments.
Officers of the department of public safety and health department and the fire marshal shall have the authority to
inspect an establishment operated pursuant to a license under this article during the hours in which the
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
66/414
establishment is open for business. Such inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with
the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city
officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this Code.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-196. - Closing establishment in case of emergency.
The director of the department of public safety or the city clerk, or their designees, may immediately close an
establishment operated pursuant to a license under this article in case of an emergency, for the safety of the
public or to investigate a crime for a period of time not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours, or for such longer
period of time as law enforcement officials may reasonably require to complete a criminal investigation at the
establishment.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-197. - Bringing alcoholic beverages into establishments.
No person shall bring his own alcoholic beverages into any commercial establishment regardless of whether or
not such establishment is operated pursuant to a license under this article.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-198. - Consumption on-premises of distilled spirits; locations where permitted.
A license for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises will be issued only for an
eating establishment, a hotel, an indoor or outdoor commercial recreational establishment or a private club.
When eating establishments are located in hotels, shopping malls or high-rise office or apartment buildings,
every public entrance to the eating establishment shall be from the outside or a public lobby, hallway, mall or
other publicly used interior portion of the primary use structure.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-199. - Hours and days of sale of distilled spirits.
(a)
Distilled spirits shall not be sold for consumption on the premises, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. until
1:55 a.m. on Monday through Saturday morning at 1:55 a.m. and from 9:00 a.m. Saturday until 11:55 p.m. on
Saturday. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises is permitted on Sundays from 12:30 p.m.
until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual
gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual
establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least fifty (50) percent of
its total gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging.
(b)
Distilled spirits shall not be sold for consumption on the premises at any time in violation of any local ordinance
or regulation, or of any special order of the city council.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02; Ord. No. 173-02, § 1, 2-12-06)
Sec. 3-200. - Consumption sales only of distilled spirits.
Persons holding a license to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to make
any package sales of alcoholic beverages on such premises.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
67/414
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-201. - Drinks to be served by employees.
Alcoholic beverages sold by the drink must be served by employees of the licensee within the premises covered
by the license.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-202. - Storage of inventory.
A retail consumption dealer must keep his inventory of alcoholic beverages only on the premises covered by his
license.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-203. - Beer and wine consumption on-premises; locations where permitted.
No license for the sale of beer or wine for consumption on the premises will be issued, except for an eating
establishment, a hotel, an indoor or outdoor commercial recreational establishment or a private club.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-204. - Hours and days of sale of beer and wine for on-premises consumption.
(a)
Beer and wine shall not be sold for consumption on the premises, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. until
1:55 a.m. on Monday through Saturday morning at 1:55 a.m. and from 9:00 a.m. Saturday until 11:55 p.m. on
Saturday.
(b)
No beer and/or wine shall be sold for consumption on the premises at any time in violation of any local
ordinance or regulation, or of any special order of the city council.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-205. - Temporary permit for nonprofit civic organizations requirements.
Upon filing an application and paying the requisite fees, a nonprofit civic organization may be issued a
temporary permit authorizing the organization to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises for a
period not to exceed two (2) days. No more than two (2) temporary permits, covering a total of four (4) days,
shall be issued to an organization in any calendar year. Nonprofit organizations shall comply with all
requirements of this chapter for operations by a retail consumption dealer, except that the alcoholic beverages
may be included in the price of admission to the event, no excise taxes shall be paid or collected on such sales,
and such other exceptions as the city clerk or the city council or its designated committee may approve. No
public notice of the application shall be required for any temporary permit. An application for a temporary
permit under this section must be filed not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date for which the temporary
permit is sought. Such application shall be made on forms prescribed by the city clerk and shall contain all
information required by such forms. The chief executive officer and chief operating officer of the organization
must be joint applicants for the temporary permit. All applications for temporary permits under this section must
be approved by the city council or its designated committee, who shall have the authority to determine if the
applicant is a nonprofit civic organization, and such determination in this regard shall be final.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
68/414
Sec. 3-206. - Package sales.
Package sales of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits shall be allowed on Sunday between the hours of
12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m.
(Ord. No. 215, 12-12-11)
Secs. 3-207—3-213. - Reserved.
Sec. 3-214. - Wholesale purchase of distilled spirits, beer and wine.
(a)
No retail consumption dealer or retail package dealer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person
other than a wholesaler. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to any person other than a retail
consumption dealer or retail package dealer; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the purchase
by one retail consumption dealer or retail package dealer of another retail consumption dealer's or retail package
dealer's entire stock in a bona fide purchase of an ongoing business.
(b)
No alcoholic beverage shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city, except by a wholesaler. The name of
the wholesaler shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-215. - Reserved.
Sec. 3-216. - Hotel in-room service.
(a)
Definition. As used in this section, "in-room service" means the delivery of alcoholic beverages, in unbroken
packages, by an employee of a hotel to a registered guest's room when such alcoholic beverages have been
ordered by the guest, and the guest will be billed for such alcoholic beverages at the time of delivery, and when
the sale of such alcoholic beverages is completed at the time of delivery; and the provision of a cabinet or other
facility located in a hotel's guest room which contains alcoholic beverages and which is provided upon written
request of the guest, and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest, and for which the sale of the
alcoholic beverages contained in such cabinet or other facility is final at the time requested, except for a credit
which may be given to the guest for any unused portion.
(b)
License. A hotel, if it has a license to sell alcoholic beverages either by the package and/or by the drink, may be
authorized by the city council to make similar sales through in-room service. A hotel, prior to providing in-room
service, must obtain from the city a license permitting such hotel to provide in-room service of alcoholic
beverages.
(c)
Restrictions and limitations. The sale of alcoholic beverages by in-room service shall be subject to all restrictions
and limitations of this chapter relative to the retail sale of alcoholic beverages, except as provided otherwise in
this section, and shall be authorized only on such days and during such hours as the sale of the alcoholic
beverages in question is otherwise authorized in the city.
(d)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
69/414
Package size. Distilled spirits sold through in-room service shall not be sold in packages containing less than two
hundred (200) milliliters each.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-217. - Certain government facilities.
Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the city council may permit the sale of alcoholic
beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises at such city-owned facilities and under such conditions
as the city council may determine from time to time.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Secs. 2-218—2-250. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - EXCISE TAXES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(6) State Law reference— Authority to impose excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-
4-13o; imposition of excise tax on malt beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80.
Sec. 3-251. - Retail sales of distilled spirits by the drink.
Every purchaser at retail of distilled spirits by the drink in the city shall pay a tax thereon at the rate of three (3)
percent of the retail price or charge for such drink, or at such higher rate as may be permitted by the laws of the
state. Such tax shall not apply in any portion of the city in which an excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by
the drink is being imposed, levied and collected by a municipality. Such tax shall be collected by the retail
consumption dealer, who shall remit such tax to the city clerk on or before the tenth day of the following
calendar month, along with a report of the retail consumption dealer's gross sales derived from the sale of
distilled spirits by the drink during the reporting period on forms prescribed by the city clerk. Credit card sales
shall be reported as part of gross sales, and taxes collected on such credit card sales shall be submitted to the city
in the same manner as required for cash sales. Each retail consumption dealer shall be allowed a deduction equal
to the rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50, as amended from time to time,
provided that such tax is not delinquent at the time of payment.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-252. - Wholesale sales of distilled spirits and wine.
There is levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter, including a proportionate amount calculated
at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter, on all sales of distilled spirits and wine in the city by wholesalers
to retail consumption dealers and retail package dealers. Such tax shall be paid to the city clerk by the wholesaler
selling such distilled spirits or wine to any retail consumption dealer or retail package dealer on or before the
tenth day of the following calendar month, along with a report of the wholesaler's gross sales of distilled spirits
and wine in the city during the reporting period on forms prescribed by the city clerk. Wine containing less than
one-half (½) of one (1) percent alcohol by volume shall not be subject to such tax. It shall be a violation of this
chapter for any wholesaler to sell, ship or deliver, in any manner, any distilled spirits or wine to a retail
consumption dealer or retail package dealer without collecting such tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of
this chapter for any retail consumption dealer or retail package dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell
any distilled spirits or wine on which such tax has not been paid. Each wholesaler shall be paid three (3) percent
of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement for collection of the tax, provided that the tax is paid on or
before its due date.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
70/414
Sec. 3-253. - Wholesale sales of beer.
There is levied an excise tax on all beer sold by wholesalers to retail consumption dealers and retail package
dealers in the city at the highest rate allowed by the state, but not less than the following:
(1)
Where beer is sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, six dollars ($6.00) on each container sold containing not
more than fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of
fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons; and
(2)
Where beer is sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of five cents ($0.05)
per twelve (12) ounces, and a proportionate rate on all fractional parts of twelve (12) ounces.
Beer which contains less than one-half (½) of one (1) percent alcohol by volume shall not be subject to such tax.
Such tax shall be paid to the city clerk by the wholesaler selling the beer to any retail consumption dealer or
retail package dealer on or before the tenth day of the following calendar month, along with a report of the
wholesaler's gross sales of beer in the city during the reporting period on forms prescribed by the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-254. - Deficiency determination.
(a)
Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return
of the tax or the amount of the tax to be paid to the city by any person, the city clerk may cause an audit of the
books and records of the licensee to be performed and may compute and determine the amount required to be
paid upon the basis of any information within the city clerk's possession or that may come into the city clerk's
possession. One (1) or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more
monthly periods. It shall be the duty of each licensee subject to the collection or payment of any of the excise
taxes set forth in this article to keep and preserve his records relative to the collection and payment of such taxes
for three (3) years.
(b)
Interest. The amount of the deficiency determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one
(1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the tenth day after the close of the monthly period in which the
amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment thereof.
(c)
Offsetting of overpayments. In making a deficiency determination, the city clerk may offset overpayments for a
period against underpayments for another period, penalties and the interest on underpayments.
(d)
Penalty for negligence or disregard of rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency
determination has been made is due to negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, a penalty of fifteen (15)
percent of the amount of such deficiency shall be added to the tax.
(e)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
71/414
Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made is
due to fraud or an intent to evade any provision of sections 3-251—3-256, or other authorized rules and
regulations, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the deficiency shall be added to such tax.
(f)
Notice of city clerk's determination; service of. The city clerk or his designated representative shall give to the
licensee written notice of a deficiency determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If such
service is made by mail, such service shall be made pursuant to section 3-163
(g)
Time within which notice is to be mailed. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade the provisions of this article
or authorized rules and regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall
be mailed within three (3) years after the tenth day of every month following the monthly period for which the
amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last
expire.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-255. - Determination if no return made.
(a)
Estimate of gross receipts. If any licensee fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the
amount of the gross receipts of the licensee or of the total sales in the city which are subject to the tax. The
estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based
upon any information which is in or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Upon the basis of such
estimate, the city clerk shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the city, adding to such
determined sum a penalty equal to fifteen (15) percent thereof. One (1) or more determinations may be made for
one (1) or more periods.
(b)
Offsetting of overpayments. If making a determination, the city clerk may offset overpayments for a period or
penalties against the interest on the underpayments.
(c)
Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the
rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the tenth day of the month following the monthly
period for which the amount, or any portion thereof, should have been returned, until the date of payment.
(d)
Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to
evade sections 3-251—3-256 or rules and regulations, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount
required to be paid by the person, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in addition to the fifteen (15)
percent penalty provided in section 3-254(d).
(e)
Giving of notice; manner of service. Promptly after making his determination, the city clerk shall give to the
person written notice, to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice in section
3-163
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
72/414
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Sec. 3-256. - Collection.
(a)
Security. Whenever the city clerk deems it necessary to ensure compliance with sections 3-251—3-256, he may
require any person subject to such sections to deposit with him such security as the city clerk may determine.
The amount of the security shall be fixed by the city clerk, but shall not be greater than twice the person's
estimated average liability for the period for which he files returns, determined in such a manner as the city clerk
deems proper, or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), whichever amount is the lesser. The amount of the security
may be increased by the city clerk subject to the limitations provided in this section. The city clerk may sell the
security at public auction, with the approval of the city council, if it becomes necessary to do so in order to
recover any tax or any amount required to be collected, interest or penalty due. Notice of the sale may be served
upon the person who deposited the security personally or by mail. If service is by mail, it shall be made in the
manner prescribed for service of a notice of determined deficiency and shall be addressed to the person at his
address as it appears in the records of the city clerk. Upon any sale, any surplus above the amounts due shall be
returned to the person who deposited the security.
(b)
Notice of delinquency to persons holding credits or property of delinquent; duty of persons so notified. If any
person is delinquent in the payment of the amount required to be paid by him, or if a delinquency determination
has been made against him which remains unpaid, the city clerk may, not later than three (3) years after the
payment became delinquent, give notice thereof by registered mail to all persons in the city having in their
possession or under their control any credits or other personal property belonging to the delinquent, or owing any
debts to the delinquent. After receiving the notice, the persons so notified shall neither transfer nor make any
other disposition of the credits, other personal property or debts in their possession or under their control at the
time they receive the notice until the city clerk consents to a transfer or disposition, or until twenty (20) days
elapse after the receipt of the notice. All persons so notified shall, within five (5) days after receipt of the notice,
advise the city clerk of all of the credits, other personal property or debts in their possession, under their control
or owing by them.
(c)
Action for tax collection. At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be
collected under this article becomes due and payable, and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency
of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected under this article, the city clerk may bring an action in
the courts of this state, any other state or of the United States in the name of city to collect the amount
delinquent, together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident
thereto.
(d)
Duty of successors or assignees of licensee to withhold tax from purchase money. If any licensee liable for any
amount under sections 3-251—3-256 sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall
withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a
receipt from the city clerk showing that he has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due.
(e)
Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the
purchaser of a business fails to withhold the purchase price as required, he becomes personally liable for the
payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price valued in money.
Within thirty (30) days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the city clerk shall
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
73/414
either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his address, as it appears on the records of the city
clerk, of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. The time within which the
obligation of the successor may be enforced shall begin at the time the licensee sells out his business or at the
time that the determination against the licensee becomes final, whichever occurs later.
(f)
Refund of tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax,
penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the
city under sections 3-251—3-256, it may be offset as provided in section 3-254(c) or it may be refunded
provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is
filed with the city clerk within three (3) years from the date of payment. The claim shall be audited and shall be
made on forms provided by the city clerk. If the claim is approved by the city clerk and the city council, the
excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from
the person from whom it was collected or by whom paid, and the balance may be refunded to such person, his
administrators or executors.
(g)
The city council or its designated committee may decline to issue a license under this article when any person
having any ownership interest in or control over the land or building in which the establishment to be operated
pursuant to the license will be located does not meet the same character requirements as set forth in this section
for the licensee.
(h)
If a person in whose name a license under this article is issued is not a county resident, such person must appoint
and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required
or permitted by law or under this article may be served. The registered agent must be a resident of the county. If
the licensee is not a natural person, it will be required to appoint and maintain a registered agent in the county if
it does not have in the county any agent upon whom process can legally be served for such entity under the laws
of the state. The licensee shall file the name of such registered agent, along with the written consent to serve of
such agent, with the city clerk.
(i)
An application for a license under this article may be denied where it appears to the city council or its designated
committee that the applicant does not have adequate financial strength, adequate financial participation in the
proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the applicant is intended or is likely to
be a surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license under this article.
(j)
The city council or its designated committee, in its discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances
which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, the application or the proposed location of the
establishment. If, in the city council's or the committee's judgment, circumstances are such that issuing of a
license under this article would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be
grounds for denying the application.
(Ord. No. 147, 11-11-02)
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS AND FOWL
FOOTNOTE(S):
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
74/414
(7) Charter reference— Authority to regulate, and to require vaccination, § 30.
(7) Cross reference— Disposal of dead animals, §§ 9-117(4), 9-125(c).
(7) State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-5, 16-12-4.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Animal: Any member of the family "animalis."
At large: Off of the property of the animal's owner, unless under control of the owner or within a vehicle being
driven or parked on the streets or highways of the city.
Attack dog: A dog which has been trained in any manner to attack persons or animals upon command.
Cat: Any animal classified as "felis libyca domestica."
Control: An animal shall be deemed to be under control when it is controlled by a leash or other physical
attachment or is within the property limits of its owner or beside a competent person and obedient to such
person's command or is in a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets or highways of the city or is in the rear
of a pickup or open truck and controlled by a leash or other physical attachment.
Dangerous dog: Any dog that, according to the records of animal control:
(1)
Inflicts a severe injury on a human without provocation on public or private property at any time after March 31,
1989; or
(2)
Aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been
classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification.
Dog: Any animal classified as "canis familars."
Dog control officer: An individual selected under this Code or under provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c) to aid in
the administration and enforcement of this chapter and applicable state law.
Guard-security dog: A dog which has been trained or is used for guard and/or security purposes.
Inoculation: The administration of antirabic vaccine, approved by the board of health of the county, administered
by a licensed veterinarian or other person approved and authorized by such board of health to administer
inoculations.
Kennel, city: Three (3) or more dogs six (6) months or older. (See the zoning ordinance for more complete
detail.)
Kennel or pound, county: Any premises designated by the animal control department for the purpose of
impounding and caring for dogs and other animals found at large in violation of this chapter.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
75/414
Livestock: Any animal of the equine, bovine, or swine class, including goats, sheep, mules, horses, hogs, cattle,
and other grazing animals.
Owner: Any person as defined in section 1-2, specifically including but not limited to an individual, corporation,
partnership, firm, or trust owner, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog,
dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog or any other animal within the city.
Potentially dangerous dog: Any dog that without provocation bites a human being on public or private property
at any time after March 31, 1989.
Proper enclosure: An enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's
property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to
prevent the entry of young children or other individuals and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any
such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides
of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a
manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also
provide protection from the elements for the dog. A symbol indicating a dangerous dog will be posted clearly
(see section 4-42, Figure 1).
Records of an appropriate authority: Records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency;
records of any county, or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any
federal, state, or local court; or records of a dog control officer provided for in this chapter.
Severe injury: Any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple
sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death.
Vicious animal: A savagely aggressive, or dangerous, animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise threaten the safety of human beings.
State law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-3-2, 4-8-21.
Sec. 4-2. - Violation; penalties.
(a)
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or fails to comply with any requirement hereof shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a first offense, not less than
two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than four hundred dollars ($400.00) for a second offense, and not
less than four hundred dollars ($400.00) and not more than six hundred dollars ($600.00) for a third offense, or
imprisoned in the county jail for not more than sixty (60) days, or both, and in addition shall pay the cost of such
action.
(b)
If a person who has three (3) previous convictions for a violation of this chapter knowingly and wilfully fails to
comply with any provision hereof, charges against such person shall be referred to the district attorney for
prosecution.
(Ord. No. 88, §§ 19, 30, 9-11-89)
Sec. 4-3. - Redemption of impounded animals—Procedure; fees.
Any animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be reclaimed, except as provided herein
for dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs, by its owner by payment of a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for
the first impoundment, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the second impoundment, and thirty-five dollars ($35.00)
for the third impoundment, and fifty dollars ($50.00) for the fourth impoundment, and one hundred dollars
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
76/414
($100.00) for each impoundment thereafter, plus a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each day of
impoundment. Any animal which is not reclaimed by its owner within five (5) days pursuant to section 4-4 may
be adopted by payment of a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). In the event that such reclaimed or adopted animal is
required by law to be vaccinated or inoculated, such person reclaiming or adopting such animal shall reimburse
the city for the cost of such vaccinations and inoculations. The animal control department shall cause such
animals to be vaccinated or inoculated at the expense of the person reclaiming or adopting such animal.
(Ord. No. 88, § 11, 9-11-89)
Sec. 4-4. - Same—Disposition of unreclaimed animal.
Any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter which is not reclaimed within ten (10) days by its
owner may be disposed of in a recognized humane manner by the animal control department, or placed in the
custody of some person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner and who shall agree to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 88, § 12, 9-11-89)
Sec. 4-5. - Liability of city and employees.
(a)
In the operation and enforcement of this chapter, the city assumes no liability or responsibility for the
enforcement or nonenforcement of this chapter. By owning or maintaining such animals in the city, the owner or
possessor of such animal consents to the operation of and enforcement of this chapter. By operation and
enforcement of this chapter, the city makes no representation upon which members of the public may rely for
their safety.
(b)
The city officers and employees, and other delegated persons of the animal control, shall not be liable for any
injury to any animal picked up as a result of a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 88, §§ 16, 29(G), 35, 9-11-89)
Sec. 4-6. - Abandonment of animals.
(a)
No person shall release an animal on any property, public or private, with the intention of abandoning the animal.
(b)
No person shall intentionally abandon a dead animal on any private property belonging to another unless the
person so doing shall have first obtained permission from the owner of the property on which the animal is being
left.
(c)
No person shall abandon a dead animal on any public property or public right-of-way unless the place on which
the animal is being left is an approved sanitary landfill or other facility designated by the city as a public facility
for receiving trash or refuse.
(Ord. No. 88, § 28, 9-11-89)
State law reference— Abandonment of dead dogs, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-1.1, 4-8-2.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
77/414
Sec. 4-7. - Cruelty; neglect.
(a)
Prohibited: No person shall, by such person's act, omission or neglect, cause unjustifiable physical pain,
suffering or death to any living animal. This section does not apply to killing of animals raised for the purpose of
providing food, nor does it apply to any person who hunts wild animals in compliance with the game and fish
laws of this state. Killing or injuring an animal for humane purposes or in the furtherance of medical or scientific
research is justifiable.
(b)
Permitted acts: No person shall perform a cruel act on any animal, nor shall any person harm, maim or kill any
animal, or attempt to do so; except that a person may:
(1)
Defend such person's self or property or the person or property of another from injury or damage being caused
by an animal; or
(2)
Kill any animal causing injury or damage to livestock or poultry.
(c)
Physical abuse: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously kill, maim, disfigure, torture, beat with a
stick, chain, club, or other object, mutilate, burn or scald with any substance, drive over or otherwise cruelly set
upon any animal, except that reasonable force may be employed to drive off vicious or trespassing animals.
(d)
Failure to care for and maintain: It is unlawful for any person to fail, refuse, or neglect to provide any animal in
such person's charge or custody, as owner or otherwise, with proper food, drink, shade, care or shelter, or to carry
any animal in or upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner. Any animal habitually kept outside shall be
provided with a structurally sound, weatherproof enclosure, large enough to accommodate the animal.
(e)
Keeping diseased or crippled animal: It is unlawful for any person to have, keep, or harbor any animal which is
infected with any dangerous disease or any incurable, painfully crippling condition. The animal control
department may impound such diseased or painfully crippled animal, and all such animals impounded may be
disposed of humanely as soon thereafter as conveniently possible. In the case of humane disposition of such
animal, the animal control department shall not be required to give any notice. This section shall not be
construed to include veterinary hospitals or animals under active veterinary care.
(f)
Authority of animal control department in case of animal neglect: Whenever the animal control board finds that
any animal is or will be without proper care because of injury, illness, incarceration or other voluntary absence of
the owner or person responsible for the care of such animal, or because of the failure, refusal or neglect of the
owner or person responsible for the care of such animal to provide proper care, the animal control department
may pick up such animal for protective care; and in the event of sickness or injury, the animal control department
may take such action as called for to prevent undue pain and suffering, including immediate humane disposal of
the animal.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
78/414
(Ord. No. 88, § 29, 9-11-89)
State law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-5, 16-12-4.
Sec. 4-8. - Vicious animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, accompany or be responsible for the presence of any vicious
animal upon the public property, streets, alleys or rights-of-way of the city, or any other public place therein, or
on the premises of another, without permission, at any time, unless, in addition to the other requirements of this
chapter, such animal shall be securely muzzled and controlled by a leash or other physical attachment not longer
than six (6) feet to effectively prevent it from biting any person or other animal.
(Ord. No. 88, § 15, 9-11-89)
Cross reference— Dangerous dogs, § 4-40 et seq.
Sec. 4-9. - Application of provisions to exotic animals and other animals.
All sections of this chapter pertaining to vicious animals, dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs, shall
apply to all exotic animals, all animals other than those specifically mentioned herein, and any animal with a
known propensity to bite, and/or with a known vicious tendency.
(Ord. No. 88, § 19, 9-11-89)
Sec. 4-10. - Biting animals—Impoundment.
Any animal which bites any person shall be impounded as provided for herein for a period of ten (10) days for
observation, and upon release to the owner shall be inoculated and tagged as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 88, § 16, 9-11-89)
State law reference— Notice of bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4.
Sec. 4-11. - Same—Posting of premises.
The owner of any animal which bites any person as a first offender shall post on the premises where such first
offender is located a clearly visible sign warning "Beware of Dog," and/or "Beware of Animal."
(Ord. No. 88, § 17, 9-11-89)
Sec. 4-12. - Rabies inoculation; tag and collar required; identification.
All dogs and cats located within the city shall be inoculated for rabies and shall wear a collar to which shall be
attached a valid vaccination tag and an identification tag, label or impression showing the name and address of
the owner of such dog or cat. In addition thereto, any other animal required by the laws of this state to be
inoculated or vaccinated shall have attached a valid vaccination tag.
(Ord. No. 88, § 9, 9-11-89)
Secs. 4-13—4-19. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - DOGS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 4-20. - Dog control officer—Designated; arrest powers.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
79/414
With the consent of the county animal control, the director of the animal control and the director's designees shall
be designated as dog control officers as provided in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c) in cooperation with the city police
department in carrying out the duties of the dog control officer. A person shall not be authorized to make arrests
unless that person is a law enforcement officer having the powers of arrest.
(Ord. No. 88, § 20, 9-11-89)
Sec. 4-21. - Same—Interference therewith.
No person shall hinder, molest, or interfere with any person authorized or empowered to perform any duty with
reference to dogs under this article.
(Ord. No. 88, § 13, 9-11-89)
Sec. 4-22. - Dog census.
The chief of police shall annually cause a canvass to be made of all dogs owned or harbored within the city, and
shall report the results, including the names of all persons owning or harboring such animals, to the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 88, § 14, 9-11-89)
Sec. 4-23. - Dogs at large—Generally.
Every dog within the city shall be either kept on a leash being held by the owner or kept within a fenced area or
other area which confines such dog to a limited area. Any dog found roaming the streets shall be forthwith seized
by the proper authority and the owner shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8.
(Ord. No. 88, § 33, 9-11-89)
Sec. 4-24. - Same—Female dogs in heat.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any female dog to allow such dog to run at large while in heat.
(b)
Any person violating this section shall be caused to pay a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) after
trial and conviction in the municipal court.
(Ord. No. 88, § 32, 9-11-89)
State law reference— Permitting female dogs in heat to roam at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6.
Sec. 4-25. - Registration of attack and guard-security dog; fees.
(a)
The owner of an attack dog and/or a guard-security dog which is either housed, leased, rented, or utilized in the
city shall register such dog with the animal control officer as an attack and/or guard-security dog.
(b)
Upon registration the owner of an attack and/or guard-security dog shall pay, in addition to all other fees, a fee of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(Ord. No. 88, § 18, 9-11-89)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
80/414
Sec. 4-26. - Dog license—Required; application; evidence of inoculation required; issuance of tag.
(a)
Every person owning or harboring a dog within the city shall, on or before the fifteenth day of January in each
year, apply to the city clerk for a license for each dog so owned or harbored, and at the time of application shall
present and file with the city clerk a certificate signed by either: (1) a licensed veterinarian of the state showing
that such dog has been inoculated against rabies within one (1) year, or (2) by some properly qualified person
approved by the board of health. Whereupon, after the payment of the fee hereinafter set forth, the city clerk
shall issue to such person a license, together with an official tag, which tag shall be fastened to the collar of the
dog so licensed. In the event of a dog being acquired after the fifteenth day of January, a license shall be obtained
as aforesaid within one (1) month after the date of acquiring the animal.
(b)
No person shall attach a license tag to any dog to which it is not issued or remove a license tag from the collar of
any dog without the consent of its owner.
(Ord. No. 88, §§ 2, 13, 9-11-89)
Cross reference— Rabies inoculation, § 4-12.
Sec. 4-27. - Same—Fees; expiration; not applicable to "licensed kennels"; lost, etc., tags.
(a)
Initial: The fee for obtaining the dog license required shall be two dollars ($2.00) for each dog. Such license
shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of the year obtained. The license fee mentioned in this section
shall not apply to dogs in a licensed kennel.
(b)
Replacement of lost, etc., tags: If any such tag required is lost or destroyed, the owner, on making affidavit of
such loss before the city clerk and paying one dollar ($1.00), shall receive a new tag. The number of the lost tag
shall be noted on the city clerk's register and a list of such lost numbers shall be reported to and kept by the chief
of police.
(Ord. No. 88, §§ 6, 7, 9-11-89)
Sec. 4-28. - Same—Delinquent applications.
For any application made thirty (30) days after the fifteenth day of January, the applicant shall be assessed a
penalty of fifty (50) percent of the license fee, which amount shall be added and collected with the regular
license fee. The aforesaid penalty is not applicable in the event the animal is acquired after the fifteenth day of
January. In this event, the above stated penalty will be enforced at the expiration of thirty (30) days after the date
of acquiring the animal.
(Ord. No. 88, § 3, 9-11-89)
Sec. 4-29. - Kennel license.
The fee for obtaining a license known as a "kennel license" shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). Such license shall
only be issued to persons dealing in, boarding, or caring for dogs and shall cover all dogs in their custody,
provided, that each dog in the care and custody of any such person having a kennel license shall have been
vaccinated against rabies within one (1) year and shall bear an identification tag approved by the board of health,
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
81/414
showing that such dog has been properly inoculated against rabies. The word "kennel" shall apply to anyone
selling or boarding dogs.
(Ord. No. 88, § 8, 9-11-89)
Sec. 4-30. - Transfer of licenses.
(a)
If there is a change in ownership of a dog or kennel during the license year, the new owner may have the current
license transferred to such person's name upon payment of a transfer fee of fifty cents ($0.50) to the city clerk.
(b)
Licenses are not transferable from one (1) animal to another.
(Ord. No. 88, §§ 4, 5, 9-11-89)
Sec. 4-31. - Impoundment.
(a)
It shall be the duty of every police officer to seize and impound or cause to be seized and impounded, any dog at
large within the city not bearing tags as provided in this chapter.
(b)
Furthermore, all animals found at large upon public places or upon the premises of another or upon the public
streets, highways, alleys, and rights-of-way of the city, in violation of this chapter, shall be immediately
impounded by the animal control department. The city employees, or any other persons or delegated persons of
the animal control shall not be liable for any injury to any animal picked up under this section.
(Ord. No. 88, § 10, 9-11-89)
Cross reference— Redemption, § 4-3; disposition of unclaimed animal, § 4-4.
Sec. 4-32. - Barking, etc., dogs.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep within the city any dog which, by barking, biting, howling, or
in any other manner, disturbs the quiet of any person.
(b)
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to cause, either by disturbance or by any other means, any dog
to bite, bark, howl, or in any other manner disturb the quiet of any person.
(c)
Any person violating the above provisions of this section shall be caused to pay a fine not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00) after trial and conviction in the municipal court.
(Ord. No. 88, § 31, 9-11-89)
Secs. 4-33—4-39. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
82/414
Sec. 4-40. - Investigations; notice of classification as dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dogs.
(a)
Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within a dog control officer's
jurisdiction from any law enforcement agency, animal control agency, rabies control officer, or county board of
health, the dog control officer shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be
necessary to carry out the provisions of this division.
(b)
When a dog control officer classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog or reclassifies a
potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, the dog control officer shall notify the dog's owner in writing, as
specified in section 4-41 herein, by certified mail to the owner's last known address of such classification. Such
notice shall be complete upon its mailing.
(Ord. No. 88, § 21, 9-11-89)
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23.
Sec. 4-41. - Procedure for classification as dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; notice, hearing.
(a)
As applied to the owners of potentially dangerous dogs, the procedure provided for in this section must be
carried out as a necessary condition for the enforcement of the provisions of this division against such owners.
As applied to the owners of dangerous dogs, the procedure provided for in this section shall not be an essential
element of any crime provided for in this division.
(b)
When a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is classified as such, the dog control officer shall notify the
dog's owner of such classification.
(c)
The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements:
(1)
The notice shall be in writing and mailing by certified mail to the owner's last-known address;
(2)
The notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's
classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog.
(Ord. No. 88, § 22, 9-11-89)
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23.
Sec. 4-42. - Requirements for possessing dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs; registration, insurance, notice
to dog control officer, enforcement.
(a)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
83/414
It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within this city a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog without a
certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25.
(b)
Subject to the additional requirements of subsection (c) of this section for dangerous dogs, the dog control officer
shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of such dog if the owner presents to the dog control officer, or
the dog control officer otherwise finds sufficient evidence of:
(1)
A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; and
(2)
The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly
visible sign warning that there is a dangerous dog on the property and containing a symbol designed to inform
children of the presence of a dangerous dog. Such sign shall be in the shape of a diamond, similar to a standard
highway warning sign, composed of eight-tenths (.08) gauge aluminum sheeting and measuring twelve (12) by
twelve (12) inches. The circle will measure ten and three-quarter (10¾) inches in diameter. The figure of the
person shall measure five (5) inches from the top of the figure's finger to the bottom of the figure's feet. The top
of the dog's tail to the person's elbow shall measure six and three-quarter (6¾) inches. The word "DANGER"
shall measure one and one-eighth (1⅛) inches by six (6) inches. The sign will utilize two (2) colors; standard
yellow and black. The background of the sign will be in standard yellow. The circle, the figures of the person and
dog, and the word "DANGER" will be in black. (See Figure 1)
Figure 1
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
84/414
(c)
The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within fifteen (15) days after the date shown on the
notice, has the right to request a hearing on the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous
dog or potentially dangerous dog:
(1)
The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the animal control board;
(2)
The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a
dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes under this division on a date
specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and
(3)
The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the animal control board and shall provide specific
instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the agency.
(d)
When the animal control board receives a request for a hearing as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it
shall schedule such hearing within thirty (30) days after receiving the request. The board shall notify the dog
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
85/414
owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time, and place of hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the
dog owner at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be
given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and in addition thereto the board shall receive such other
evidence and hear such other testimony as the board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination
either to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's classification of the dog.
(e)
Within ten (10) days after the date of the hearing, the animal control board shall notify the dog owner in writing
by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a
potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective.
(f)
The owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer immediately
upon discovery if it is on the loose, unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If
the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the dog control officer with the name, address,
and telephone number of the new owner of the dog.
(g)
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer if the owner is
moving from the dog control officer's jurisdiction. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog
who is a new resident of the city shall register the dog as required in this section within thirty (30) days after
becoming a resident. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who moves from another
jurisdiction to this city shall register the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog in this city within ten (10)
days after becoming a resident.
(h)
Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the city does not warrant
or guarantee that the requirements specified in subsections (b) and (c) of this section are maintained by the owner
of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the
initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate.
(i)
A dog control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this division. The chief of police shall cooperate with dog control officers in enforcing the
provisions of this division.
(j)
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25, the dog control officer shall charge an additional fee of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) per year for registration of dangerous dogs and a registration fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
year for registration of potentially dangerous dogs. Such fees shall be in addition to all other fees normally
charged for the registration of dogs. Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time
of the annual renewal of a certificate of registration, a dog control officer shall require evidence from the owner
or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is
continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions
of this division.
(Ord. No. 88, § 23, 9-11-89)
Sec. 4-43. - Restrictions on permitting dangerous or potentially dangerous dog to be outside of proper enclosure.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
86/414
(a)
It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog
is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash not longer than six (6) feet and is under the physical
restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration, but will prevent it from biting any person.
(b)
It is unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure
unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash no longer than six (6) feet and is under the restraint of
a responsible person.
(Ord. No. 88, § 24, 9-11-89)
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-29.
Sec. 4-44. - Confiscation of dogs; grounds, disposition.
(a)
A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer or
by another person authorized by the dog control officer if the:
(1)
Owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or bond required by O.C.G.A. § 2-4-23(c)(1), (2);
(2)
Dog is not validly registered as required by section 4-42(a);
(3)
Dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or
(4)
Dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 4-42(b)(1).
(b)
A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if the dog is:
(1)
Not validly registered as required by section 4-42(a);
(2)
Not maintained in a proper enclosure; or
(3)
Outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 4-42(b)(1).
(c)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
87/414
Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be returned to
its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this division and upon the payment of reasonable
confiscation costs. The city or the animal control board shall not be liable for any injury to any animal picked up
in violation of this division. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within
twenty (20) days after the dog was confiscated, such dog shall be disposed of in an expeditious and recognized
humane manner by the animal control department.
(d)
The owner of the dog shall pay the city the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) as a confiscation fee, whether
the owner shall claim the dog or not.
(Ord. No. 88, § 25, 9-11-89)
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-30.
Sec. 4-45. - Violation; penalties.
(a)
The owner of a dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of section 4-41 or section 4-42 or whose
dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under subsection (a) of section 4-44 shall be incarcerated for a period of
up to sixty (60) days. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this
subsection, a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be imposed for the first conviction, a fine of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed for the second conviction, and the owner shall be punished under the
provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28(b) for the third conviction.
(b)
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of section 4-41 or section 4-42
or whose potentially dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under subsection (b) of section 4-44 shall be
incarcerated for a period of up to sixty (60) days. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a
conviction under this subsection, a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be imposed for the first
conviction, a fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be imposed for the second conviction, and a fine of
three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be imposed for the third conviction.
(c)
If an owner who has a previous conviction for a violation of this division knowingly and wilfully fails to comply
with the provisions of this division, charges against such owner shall be referred to the district attorney for
prosecution under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28(c) or (d) if the owner's dangerous dog attacks or bites a
human being under circumstances constituting another violation of this division.
(d)
In addition to the penalties for violation under subsection (c) of this section, the dangerous dog involved shall be
immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by law enforcement officers or another person authorized
by the dog control officer and placed in quarantine for the proper length of time as determined by the county
board of health, thereafter, the dangerous dog shall be disposed of in an expeditious and recognized humane
manner by the animal control department.
(Ord. No. 88, § 26, 9-11-89)
Sec. 4-46. - Exceptions.
(a)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
88/414
A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out
the law enforcement officer's official duties or is a guard-security dog or attack dog which is being used for guard
and/or security purposes shall not be a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this
division.
(b)
A dog shall not be a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this division if the
injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a wilful trespass or other
tort or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have
tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
(c)
No owner of a dangerous dog shall be held criminally liable under this division for injuries inflicted by such
owner's dog to any human being while on such owner's property and within the enclosure as described in section
4-1, if such injured person was a trespasser upon the land.
(Ord. No. 88, § 27, 9-11-89)
Cross reference— Impoundment of biting animal, § 4-10.
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(8) Charter reference— Building regulations, § 22; examinations of builders, etc., § 23; building inspections, §
24; condemnation of buildings, § 31.
(8) Cross reference— Noise limitations during construction, § 8-6(8); sewer compliance, §§ 9-44(c), 9-49;
building permit, App. A, § 9.020 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 5-1. - Adoption of codes.
(a)
For the purposes specified therein, the following codes are adopted by reference and incorporated herein as fully
as if set out at length herein:
(1)
Standard Amusement Device Code, 1985 edition.
(2)
Standard Building Code, 1994 edition.
(3)
Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, 1985 edition.
(4)
Standard Fire Prevention Code, 1994 edition.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
89/414
(5)
Standard Gas Code, 1994 edition.
(6)
Standard Housing Code, 1991 edition with 1992/1994 revisions.
(7)
Standard Mechanical Code, 1994 edition.
(8)
Standard Plumbing Code, 1994 edition.
(9)
Standard Swimming Pool Code, 1991 edition with 1993/1994 revisions.
(10)
Standard Existing Buildings Code, 1988 edition with 1991/1994 revisions.
(11)
Georgia State Minimum Standard Electrical Code, 1994 edition.
(12)
Georgia State Minimum Standard One and Two Family Dwelling Code, 1992 edition.
(13)
Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, first edition, volume 1, and all subsequent updates or revisions.
(14)
2006 International Property Maintenance Code.
(b)
Copies of such codes shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk.
(c)
Those sections, chapters, or other classifications as they pertain to boards of adjustment and appeals are
excluded. The mayor, council and building official may jointly appoint boards of adjustment and appeals as the
need requires. The enforcing and/or inspecting official is authorized to seek professional help to assist in
inspections when deemed necessary.
(d)
Within such codes when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, designated officials of
the city who have duties corresponding to those of the named officials in such codes shall be deemed to be the
responsible officials insofar as enforcing the provisions of the codes are concerned.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
90/414
(Ord. No. 70, §§ 1, 2, 4, 6-20-83; Ord. No. 119, § 1, 12-22-94; Ord. No. 167, § 1, 4-24-06; Ord. No. 210, 6-13-
11)
State law reference— State minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; adoption of codes by municipalities,
O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25.
Sec. 5-2. - Building contractors—Performance bond and insurance coverage required.
(a)
Every contractor, builder, electrician, plumber or mechanical contractor who shall make contracts for the
erection, construction or repair of buildings, or any portion thereof, for which a permit is required, and every
contractor or builder making such contracts and subletting such contracts, or any part thereof, [are required] to
do the following:
(1)
Execute and deposit with the planning and zoning department a bond in the sum of twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) for each commercial unit under construction and fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) for each
residential unit under construction, to be conditioned that all work performed by the contractor or under his
supervision shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other pertinent laws and
ordinances. The contractor will pay all fees and penalties properly imposed upon him for violations of the
provisions of this section.
(2)
Place on file in the planning and zoning department a certificate of insurance for public liability and property
damage for an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each person, and two
hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for each occurrence.
(3)
Place on file in the planning and zoning department a certificate of insurance for worker's compensation
insurance for an amount not less than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for each person employed.
(4)
Shall obtain proper licensing through the Georgia Secretary of State beginning January 1, 2008.
(b)
The maximum penalty for any violation of this section shall be a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), six (6) months in jail and twelve (12) months of probation. Each occurrence shall be deemed a
separate violation.
(Ord. No. 174, §§ 1, 2, 10-10-06)
Sec. 5-3. - Construction sites to be kept clean.
(a)
All construction sites located in the city limits of the City of Grovetown shall be kept clean of any and all
construction related debris such as paint buckets, remnant lumber, product packaging, etc. It will be the
responsibility of the builder or owner of the site to make sure the construction site is checked on a weekly basis
and any items that need to be removed from the construction site will be properly disposed of in a municipal
solid waste landfill.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
91/414
(b)
Port-o-let facilities must be maintained and pumped on a regular basis and must not contain any leaks. Any
repairs that are needed must be done in a timely manner. Once the port-o-let has been vacuumed, the port-o-let
contractor must dispose of the waste into a permitted disposal facility or municipal sewer.
(c)
Failure to keep the construction site free of construction related debris or failure to perform regular maintenance
of port-o-let facilities will be subject to enforcement and penalties as defined in sections 5-26 and 5-27 of the
City of Grovetown Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 184, §§ 1—3, 7-16-07)
Secs. 5-4—5-20. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL
FOOTNOTE(S):
(9) Editor's note— Ord. No. 205, §§ I—X, adopted June 14, 2010, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as
herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 5-21—5-28, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 140,
adopted June 25, 2001.
Sec. 5-21. - Title.
This article will be known as "Grovetown Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance."
(Ord. No. 205, § I, 6-14-10)
Sec. 5-22. - Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise
specifically stated:
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and
minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those
practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission
as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted.
Board: The board of natural resources.
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which
facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat.
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by
the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission.
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC).
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified
Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also
referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc.
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the
depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
92/414
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture,
landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion
and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment
Control, Inc.
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative.
District: The Columbia County Soil and Water Conservation District.
Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources.
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or
other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a
release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes.
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act,
O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit,
best management practices, and requirements in section 5-24(c) of this article.
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original
ground surface or an excavation.
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and
areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell
that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly
covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater, or equivalent permanent
stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used.
Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation
appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials
appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction.
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the
proposed design.
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting,
filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling.
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of
sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging,
grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in
section 5-23(5).
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct
construction activities are occurring under one (1) plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this
paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales
pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation
such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a
specific plot.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
93/414
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to
O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a).
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which
addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage
basins.
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling.
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques
for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used
to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present.
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit.
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit.
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications,
including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational
control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution
control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry
out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit
conditions.
Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or
site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water.
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article.
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate,
commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political
subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity.
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed
and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site.
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed.
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the
"Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water
Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and
amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal.
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible
material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by
intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled roadway consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or
without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side.
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been
moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion.
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind,
ice or gravity.
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan
approved in writing by the Columbia County Soil and Water Conservation District.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
94/414
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or
permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of
sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity.
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits
for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the
future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f).
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs,
wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the
boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single
individual, partnership, or corporation.
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or
sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the
surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of
structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or
outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the
publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia."
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources
Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality
Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at
www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining
population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which
there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First
order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs.
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sedimentproducing areas by covering the soil with:
a.
Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or
b.
Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or
c.
Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia."
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert,
drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has
a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of
overflow or floodwater.
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar
areas.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
95/414
(Ord. No. 205, § II, 6-14-10)
Sec. 5-23. - Exemptions.
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the
following:
(1)
Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968";
(2)
Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying;
(3)
Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance
work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion;
(4)
The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a
part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one
(1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such
residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For
single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone
between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the
Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed
between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action
from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal
feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at
least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet.
Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into
which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and
no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the
buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority;
(5)
Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of
products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for
use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and
rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing
plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and
apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds;
(6)
Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry
practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in
subsections 5-24(15) and (16), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management
practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period
of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices;
(7)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
96/414
Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
of the United States Department of Agriculture;
(8)
Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not
apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned
disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state
waters, and for purposes of this paragraph. "State waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have
water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water
in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1)
acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded
channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which
such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing
authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4),
(5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section;
(9)
Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the
Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any
road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however,
that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the State Road and Tollway
Authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. §
12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and
Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or
sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall
be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the
minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be
subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders;
(10)
Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system
or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the
regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in
O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation,
transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical
system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under
the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined
in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation,
transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan
of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce
compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and
violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and
(11)
Any public water system reservoir.
(Ord. No. 205, § III, 6-14-10)
Sec. 5-24. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management
practices.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
97/414
(a)
General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing
activities if requirements of the article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those
land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil
erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into
the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control
measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections 5-24(b) and (c). The
application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility
installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to
prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in
accordance with requirements of this ordinance and the NPDES general permit.
(b)
Minimum requirements/BMPs.
(1)
Best management practices as set forth in subsections 5-24(b) and (c) shall be required for all land-disturbing
activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete
defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this
subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued
pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the
terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design
specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. §
12-7-6(b).
(2)
A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly
designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a
local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f),
the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of
receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters
supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as
trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued
by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of singlefamily homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance
for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres.
(3)
Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any landdisturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division
pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure
occurs.
(4)
The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent
monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur.
(5)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
98/414
The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in (c)(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-
6(c).
(c)
The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the
purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as
the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices
to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent
than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the
Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing
activity was permitted, as well as the following:
(1)
Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to
minimize erosion;
(2)
Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum;
(3)
Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion
potential;
(4)
Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented;
(5)
The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum;
(6)
Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable;
(7)
Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development;
(8)
Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable;
(9)
To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins,
silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is
stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-
1 et seq.;
(10)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
99/414
Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or
the sloping of fills;
(11)
Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property;
(12)
Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect
other property owners;
(13)
Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are
not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum;
(14)
Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for
treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments
on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 5-24(b)(2);
(15)
Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a twenty-five-foot buffer along the
banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal
stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective
of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-
8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate
erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along
any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal
circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the
channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and
for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral
stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title
12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as
provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer:
a.
No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural,
undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the
final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective
vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient
quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family
residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy,
may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water
quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and
b.
The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as
measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a
width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
100/414
incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines;
or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and
(16)
There is established a fifty-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been
wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams"
pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway
drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout
streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a
twenty-five-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule
providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the
downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout
streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that
adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented.
The following requirements shall apply to such buffer:
a.
No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural,
undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once
the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a
protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in
sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a singlefamily residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own
occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to
protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the
stream bed; and
b.
The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as
measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a
width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are
incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines;
or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines.
(d)
Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and
regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum
requirements in subsections 5-24(b) and (c).
(e)
The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of
another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in
this article or the terms of the permit.
(f)
The City of Grovetown hereby adopts the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, First Edition, Volume 1 and
all subsequent updates or revisions in reference to soil erosion and sedimentation.
(Ord. No. 205, § IV, 6-14-10)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
101/414
Sec. 5-25. - Application/permit process.
(a)
General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before
submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and
the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision
ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or
permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing
authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit.
(b)
Application requirements.
(1)
No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of
Grovetown without first obtaining a permit from the City of Grovetown to perform such activity and providing a
copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable.
(2)
The application for a permit shall be submitted to the City of Grovetown and must include the applicant's
erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as
a minimum, the data specified in subsection 5-25(c) of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control
plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed
will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 5-24(b) and (c) of this article will be met.
Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three (3) copies of the applicant's erosion,
sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan
preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-
7-.10.
(3)
In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of
O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing
activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general
permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of
development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction
that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division;
except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10)
of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing
authority in the jurisdiction.
(4)
Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the
application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the
erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirtyfive (35) days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval
of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit
will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 5-24(c)
(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 5-25(b)(6), have
been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
102/414
agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without
referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall
approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing
authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the
revised plan submittal.
(5)
If a permit applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and
Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing the application under
consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application.
(6)
The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security,
cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars
($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the
applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing
authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to
stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply
unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any
determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations.
(c)
Plan requirements.
(1)
Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 5-24(b) and (c) of this article,
or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and
engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by
reference into this ordinance. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the
soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent
structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities,
local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of
the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction,
monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification
requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission
and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20.
(2)
Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation
and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which
the land-disturbing activity was permitted.
(3)
The City of Grovetown hereby adopts the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual First Edition, Volume 1 and
all subsequent updates or in reference to soil erosion and sedimentation.
(d)
Permits.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
103/414
(1)
Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after
receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained,
where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include
conditions under which the activity may be undertaken.
(2)
No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control
plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is
in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 5-24(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding
requirements, if necessary, as per section 5-25(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect
within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for
denial shall be furnished to the applicant.
(3)
Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this
article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division
shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority.
(4)
If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase.
(5)
The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the
land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the
approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this
article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected
by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit.
(6)
The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits
or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the
application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1).
(Ord. No. 205, § V, 6-14-10)
Sec. 5-26. - Inspection and enforcement.
(a)
The City of Grovetown will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have
been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures
required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall
regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary
permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary
permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and
maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing
activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is
conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in landdisturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
104/414
with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall
set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must
be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he
shall be deemed in violation of this article.
(b)
The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any
amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975.
(c)
The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out
duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or
private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities.
(d)
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the
commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents
appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in
the process of carrying out his official duties.
(e)
The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities
which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the
commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving
the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The
district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or
ineffective local program is found.
(f)
The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as
local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to,
review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance
with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the
governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not
administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement
entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or
municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90)
days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the
county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety (90) days after notification by the
division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority.
(Ord. No. 205, § VI, 6-14-10)
Sec. 5-27. - Penalties and incentives.
(a)
Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity
requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this ordinance without first obtaining said permit, the person
shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a
business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
105/414
(b)
Stop-work orders.
(1)
For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall
issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the
violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work
order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has
occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the
state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the
local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning;
(2)
For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate
stop-work order; and
(3)
All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary
corrective action or mitigation has occurred.
(4)
When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant
amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have
been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly
designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the
director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall
be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to
all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or
permanent erosion and sediment controls.
(c)
Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has
failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice
shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which
such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within
the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be
deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 5-25(b)
(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to
hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance.
(d)
Monetary penalties.
(1)
Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant
to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of
the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
106/414
any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to
exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law
as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court
of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved
under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply
continues shall be a separate violation.
(Ord. No. 205, § VII, 6-14-10)
Sec. 5-28. - Education and certification.
(a)
Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any
land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level
of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the
stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20.
(b)
For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary,
secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one (1) person
who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and
meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on
site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any
land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an
owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit.
(c)
Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified
personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article.
(d)
If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the
certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing
activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational
requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational
requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph.
(Ord. No. 205, § VIII, 6-14-10)
Sec. 5-29. - Administrative appeal judicial review.
(a)
Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the
local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and
pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of
any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the
Grovetown City Council within forty-five (45) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice
of appeal.
(b)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
107/414
Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his
administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Columbia County.
(Ord. No. 205, § IX, 6-14-10)
Sec. 5-30. - Effectivity.
(a)
Effective date. This article shall become effective on the 14th day of June, 2010.
(b)
Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held
unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article.
(c)
Liability.
(1)
Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this
article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed
by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property.
(2)
The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of
another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in
this article or the terms of the permit.
(3)
No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of
1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder
or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby.
(Ord. No. 205, § X, 6-14-10)
Secs. 5-31—5-39. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(10) Editor's note— Ord. No. 187, adopted Oct. 8, 2007, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out.
Former Art. III, §§ 5-40—5-58, pertained to similar subject matter.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 5-40. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives.
(a)
Authorization. Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
108/414
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.
(b)
Findings of fact.
(1)
The flood hazard areas of the City of Grovetown, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss
of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect
the public health, safety and general welfare.
(2)
These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are
inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect
of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
(c)
Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and
to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1)
Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood
damage at the time of initial construction;
(2)
Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or
which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion;
(3)
Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion;
(4)
Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may
increase flood hazards to other lands; and
(5)
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved
in the accommodation of floodwaters.
(d)
Objectives. The objectives of this article are:
(1)
To protect human life and health;
(2)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
109/414
To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer
lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(3)
To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a
manner as to minimize flood blight areas;
(4)
To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(5)
To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the
expense of the general public;
(6)
To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and
(7)
To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Ord. No. 187, 10-8-07)
Sec. 5-41. - General provisions.
(a)
Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the City of Grovetown, Georgia.
(b)
Basis for area of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated September 19, 2007, with accompanying maps
and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article.
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September
19, 2007, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for the City of
Grovetown, Georgia are hereby adopted by reference.
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through
standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS.
The repository for public inspection of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), accompanying maps and other
supporting data is located in the Grovetown City Hall, 103 Wrightsboro Road, Grovetown, Georgia.
(c)
Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities.
(d)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
110/414
Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
(e)
Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(f)
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: (1) considered as
minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit
nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(g)
Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can
and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that
land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
(Ord. No. 187, 10-8-07)
Sec. 5-42. - Penalties for violation.
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation.
Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than one hundred
eighty (180) days, twelve (12) months' probation, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses
involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
(Ord. No. 187, 10-8-07)
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 5-43. - Designation of ordinance administrator.
The director of planning and zoning, or his/her designee, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the
provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 187, 10-8-07)
Sec. 5-44. - Permit procedures.
Application for a development permit shall be made to the director of planning, or his/her designee, on forms
furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the
following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature,
location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or
equipment, and drainage facilities.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
111/414
Specifically, the following information is required:
(1)
Application stage.
(a)
Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all
proposed structures;
(b)
Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed;
(c)
Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of section 5-47(2);
(d)
Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed
development, and;
(2)
Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the
administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after
the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and
certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same.
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk.
The City of Grovetown shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by
such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being
allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be
cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
(Ord. No. 187, 10-8-07)
Sec. 5-45. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.
Duties of the director of planning and zoning, or his/her designee, shall include, but shall not be limited to:
(1)
Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied.
(2)
Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental
agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
112/414
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided
and maintained on file.
(3)
Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
(4)
When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 5-41(b),
then the director of planning and zoning, or his/her designee, shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the
provisions of division 3 of this article.
(5)
Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest
floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 5-44(2).
(6)
Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved
structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with section 5-44(2).
(7)
When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the director of planning and zoning, or his/her designee, shall
obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with
section 5-44(1)(c) and section 5-47(2) or section 5-49(2).
(8)
Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to
structures in flood hazard areas.
(9)
Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA).
(10)
For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA to
ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying
capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained.
(11)
Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the
director of planning and zoning, or his/her designee, shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in this article.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
113/414
(12)
All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the director of planning
and zoning, or his/her designee, and shall be open for public inspection.
(Ord. No. 187, 10-8-07)
DIVISION 3. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sec. 5-46. - General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required:
(1)
New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
(2)
New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and
utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
(3)
New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(4)
Elevated buildings - All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any
fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be
designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
(a)
Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or
meet the following minimum criteria:
(i)
Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
(ii)
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and
(iii)
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the
automatic flow of floodwater in both directions.
(b)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
114/414
So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only
be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises,
or entry to the elevated area; and
(c)
The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
(5)
All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation,
plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
(6)
Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring
may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces;
(7)
New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the system;
(8)
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
(9)
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding; and
(10)
Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions
of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced.
(Ord. No. 187, 10-8-07)
Sec. 5-47. - Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required:
(1)
New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new
construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation
perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic
forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 5-46(4),
"elevated buildings."
(a)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
115/414
All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation,
plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.
(2)
Non-residential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in
A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility
and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above
and in section 5-45(6).
(3)
Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available:
(a)
All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new
and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing
manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest
floor including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.
(b)
Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
may be elevated so that either:
(i)
The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the level of the base
flood elevation, or
(ii)
The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at
least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade.
(c)
All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. section 5-46(6))
(d)
All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
(i)
Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
(ii)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
116/414
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on
its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and
has no permanently attached structures or additions); or
(iii)
The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction," including the anchoring and
elevation requirements of section 5-47(3)(a)—(c).
(4)
Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 5-41(b) are areas designated as
floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion
potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base
flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
(a)
Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other
development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base
flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification
thereof.
(b)
Only if section 5-47(a)(4) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply
with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 3.
(Ord. No. 187, 10-8-07)
Sec. 5-48. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 5-41(b), where streams exist but no base
flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not
been delineated, the following provisions apply:
(1)
When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 5-41(b),
then the city engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation
and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
division 3. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall
apply:
(2)
No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the
stream or twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification
by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more
than a one (1) foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(3)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
117/414
In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements
of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no
less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to
be elevated one (1) foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study
has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be
provided in accordance with standards of section 5-46(4), "elevated buildings."
(a)
All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation,
plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent
grade at the building site.
The city engineer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of
the permit file.
(Ord. No. 187, 10-8-07)
Sec. 5-49. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones).
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 5-41(b) may include designated "AO" shallow flooding
areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined
channel. The following provisions apply:
(1)
All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including
basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 5-
46(4), "elevated buildings".
The city engineer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of
the permit file.
(2)
New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of
elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight
to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the
provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in sections
5-44(1)(c) and 5-44(2).
(3)
Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure.
(Ord. No. 187, 10-8-07)
Sec. 5-50. - Standards for subdivisions.
(1)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
118/414
All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2)
All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3)
All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards; and
(4)
For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less, base flood
elevation data shall be determined by a certified/registered engineer for subdivisions and all other proposed
development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data
adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a Conditional Letter of Map
Revision (CLOMR) or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon
completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to
obtain the final LOMR.
(Ord. No. 187, 10-8-07)
Sec. 5-51. - Standards for critical facilities.
(1)
Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain.
(2)
All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation.
(Ord. No. 187, 10-8-07)
Sec. 5-52. - Variances.
(a)
The flood damage prevention appeals board as established by the City of Grovetown shall hear and decide
requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article.
(b)
The board shall consist of three (3) designated members. The members will be designated as follows: One (1)
member shall be designated by the mayor and council of the City of Grovetown; One (1) member shall be
designated by the director of planning and zoning or his/her designee; and one (1) member shall be designated by
the appellant land owner.
(c)
The requirements to serve on the board will be as follows: Must be a resident of the City of Grovetown and live
within the city limits for no less than six (6) months prior to the hearing; must be at least twenty-one (21) years
of age; must not be a city employee or serve on any other city appointed board; must not be a party of interest.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
119/414
(d)
Payment for the board will be as follows: The members of the board will be compensated twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for each day of service. The fee for such service will be paid from the general fund.
(e)
The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination is made by the director of planning and zoning or his/her designee in the enforcement or
administration of this article.
(f)
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the flood damage prevention appeals board may appeal such decision to
the Superior Court of Columbia County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1.
(g)
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(h)
Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided
the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(i)
Variances will not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
(j)
In reviewing such requests, the flood damage prevention appeals board shall consider all technical evaluations,
relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article.
(Ord. No. 187, 10-8-07)
Sec. 5-53. - Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like.
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which
the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition,
which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be
considered "new construction."
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
120/414
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and
referenced in section 5-41(b).
Base flood, means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building, means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include:
(a)
Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive
materials;
(b)
Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be
sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events;
(c)
Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or
inoperative during flood and storm events; and
(d)
Generating plants and other principal points of utility lines.
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to,
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and
permanent storage of materials or equipment.
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or
shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood
event.
Existing construction. Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before June 1, 1976.
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads) is completed before June 1, 1976.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry
land areas from:
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
121/414
(a)
The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
(b)
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance
Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance
Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
Flood insurance study the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and
containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood.
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding.
Flood-proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to
structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain
management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action,
bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent
to the proposed foundation of a building.
Historic structure means any structure that is:
a.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of
Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
b.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance
of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district;
c.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
122/414
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
1.
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
2.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood
resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a
basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the
structure in violation of other provisions of this Code.
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred
eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for
establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD).
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for
establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or
after June 1, 1976, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure.
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after June 1, 1976.
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for
establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is:
a.
Built on a single chassis;
b.
Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
c.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
d.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
123/414
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit
date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of
slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and
includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted
structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure.) (NOTE:
accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or
liquid storage tank.
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure,
taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the
market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of
the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or
improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term
includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair work
performed.
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a
structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the
code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a
"historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure".
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of
the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner
otherwise prohibited by this article.
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such
time as that documentation is provided.
(Ord. No. 187, 10-8-07)
Secs. 5-54—5-70. - Reserved.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
124/414
ARTICLE IV. - WATER CONSERVATION RESTRICTIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(11) Editor's note— Ord. No. 101, §§ 1—6, adopted March 25, 1991, did not specifically amend the Code;
hence, inclusion herein as Art. IV, §§ 8-71—8-76, was at the discretion of the editor.
Sec. 5-71. - Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise
specifically stated.
Commercial means any type of building other than residential.
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its
repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the
replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing
building.
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a
hotel or motel.
(Ord. No. 101, § 1, 3-25-91)
Sec. 5-72. - Restrictions on residential building construction.
On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type
which:
(1)
Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer toilet that uses more than average of one and sixtenths (1.6) gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this paragraph shall not be applicable to one-piece
toilets until July 1, 1992.
(2)
Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of two and one-half (2.5) gallons of water per
minute at sixty (60) pounds per square inch of pressure;
(3)
Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one (1) gallon of water per flush;
(4)
Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two (2) gallons of
water per minute; or
(5)
Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two and one-half (2.5)
gallons of water per minute.
(Ord. No. 101, § 2, 3-25-91)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
125/414
Sec. 5-73. - Restriction on commercial building construction.
On or after July 1, 1992 there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for
any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subparagraphs (1) through (5) of
section 5-72 of this article.
(Ord. No. 101, § 3, 3-25-91)
Sec. 5-74. - Construction on existing structures.
The requirements of section 5-72 of this article shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1,
1991 and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of
or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building when
such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or
both.
(Ord. No. 101, § 4, 3-25-91)
Sec. 5-75. - Exemptions.
(a)
New construction and the repair or renovation of any existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of
sections 5-72—5-74 of this article when:
(1)
The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage
system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; or,
(2)
When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or
installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were
installed; or,
(3)
Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such
individual's personal residence; or,
(4)
Units to be installed are:
a.
Specifically designed for use by the handicapped,
b.
Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or,
c.
Toilets for juveniles.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
126/414
(b)
The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an
exemption as specified in subparagraph (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at
the office of the building inspector for the city. A fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be charged for the inspection
and issuance of such exemption.
(Ord. No. 101, § 5, 3-25-91)
Sec. 5-76. - Enforcement; penalty.
(a)
This article shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violations may be
issued by the chief building inspector of the city.
(b)
Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court
of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days.
(Ord. No. 101, § 6, 3-25-91)
Chapter 6 - FINANCE AND TAXATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(12) Charter reference— City treasurer, § 14; bonds of personnel, § 15; taxing power, § 18; improvement bonds,
§ 33.
(12) State Law reference— Establishing fiscal year, adoption of budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3 et seq.; use of
county tax valuation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-352.
Sec. 6-1. - Collection of delinquent sums due city—Issuance of executions.
Upon default in the payment of any tax, license, fine, assessment, penalty, or any sum due the city at the
expiration of the time allowed, the city clerk shall issue an execution for the collection of the sum and shall hand
such execution to the chief of police, who shall collect the same.
(Ord. No. 10, § 1, 8-29-60)
Charter reference— Executions, § 32.
Sec. 6-2. - Same—Form of executions.
All executions issued for collections of taxes due the city shall be in substantially the following form:
"THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF GROVETOWN.
Tax Fi. Fa., 20 ____________
STATE OF GEORGIA
Columbia County
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
127/414
City of Grovetown.
To All and Singular, the City Clerk and the chief of police of Grovetown, to Execute and Return:
By virtue of the authority conferred by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, we command you, that all
of the goods, chattels, lands and tenements of ____________ you cause to be made the several sums of money
hereinafter named, to-wit, the sum of ;$rule; dollars, the same being the amount due the Mayor and City Council
by said ____________ on property standing in ____________ name for taxes for the year ____________. Such
taxes were levied by an ordinance of the Mayor and City Council of Grovetown, and there was a default in the
payment of the same prior to this date, and contrary to the requirements of the ordinances of said Mayor and City
Council of Grovetown. The property on which the taxes are claimed to be due was (assessed) returned for
taxation pursuant to the ordinances of said Mayor and City Council of Grovetown, and was located in
Grovetown at the time such taxes were levied, and said ____________ was and is liable for the payment of said
taxes on said property as the owner or ____________ of said property. In addition to said taxes, you will cause to
be made the sum of ;$rule; dollars, being ten percent on said taxes as penalty for failing to pay the same within
the time prescribed by the ordinances of the Mayor and City Council of Grovetown; also the sum of one dollar
and fifty cents ($1.50) costs. And have you before the Mayor and City Council of Grovetown, at the regular
meeting to be held on ;daterule; the said sums of money, as well as this writ.
WITNESS, The Honorable ____________ Mayor of said City.
The ;#rule; day of ;daterule;, 20 ____________.
_____
City Clerk of Grovetown."
(Ord. No. 10, § 4, 8-29-60)
Sec. 6-3. - Same—Sale of personal property.
Personal property levied upon by an execution issued from the city council shall be sold at public outcry, after
posting in three (3) conspicuous places within the city, notice of the time and place of such sale, and the property
to be sold. Such sale shall be held on Monday at 12:00 next following ten (10) days' notice of such sale, and all
funds derived therefrom shall be turned over to the city treasurer by the chief of police.
(Ord. No. 10, § 2, 8-29-60)
Sec. 6-4. - Same—Sale of real property.
The time, place and manner of the sale of real property shall be the same as that provided by law for sheriffs'
sales for state and county taxes.
(Ord. No. 10, § 3, 8-29-60)
State law reference— Tax sales, O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq.
Chapter 7 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(13) Charter reference— Fire districts, § 22; fire preventive regulations, § 24; fire department, § 29.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
128/414
(13) State Law reference— False fire alarm, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1
et seq.
Sec. 7-1. - Fire prevention code.
The fire prevention code adopted in section 5-1 is hereby incorporated in and made a part of this chapter.
Reference to this section shall be deemed to refer to such code.
Sec. 7-2. - Burning of leaves, etc.
(a)
The controlled burning of leaves, limbs, branches, weeds, grass clippings, and like materials is authorized
providing it is burned in a pit, metal drum, or wire enclosure, during daylight hours on Mondays through
Saturdays.
(b)
If a pit is used for burning, it shall be deep enough to keep the fire below ground level, and a wire cover of not
more than two-inch by four-inch mesh shall be placed over the top of such pit during burning.
(c)
If a wire enclosure is used for burning, it shall be constructed of not more than two-inch by three-inch mesh,
shall be not more than three (3) feet in diameter and not more than five (5) feet high and will have a top, placed
over it during burning.
(d)
This section does not relieve the individual of responsibility for any damage caused by smoke or the fire to other
persons' property.
(Ord. No. 23, 9-28-64; Ord. No. 26, 10-9-64)
State law reference— Air pollution control, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq.
Sec. 7-3. - Fireworks.
(a)
Definitions.
(1)
Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or
article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration,
or detonation, including blank cartridges, balloons requiring fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers,
torpedos, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, sparklers, and other combustibles and explosives of like
construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices
containing an explosive substance.
(2)
Pyrotechnics means fireworks.
(b)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
129/414
The term "fireworks" shall not include:
(1)
Model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero
models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content averages 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture
per paper cap or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps; nor shall
the term "fireworks" include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes;
(2)
Wire or wood sparklers of one hundred (100) grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are
nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain seventy-five (75) grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total
of two hundred (200) grams or less for multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; trick noise makers which include
paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grains or less of
explosive mixture.
(c)
All fireworks are banned during times of the year when a burning ban has been placed in effect.
(Ord. No. 40, § 21, 8-26-68; Ord. No. 214, §§ 1—3, 10-10-11)
State law reference— Fireworks control, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.
Chapter 8 - HEALTH AND SANITATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(14) Charter reference— Authority as to health, § 30; abatement of nuisances, § 31.
(14) Cross reference— Sewer use regulations, § 9-40 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 8-1. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Former § 8-1 pertained to abandoned vehicles and appliances and has been deleted by the editor as having been
superseded by § 8-25 of Art. II herein; said former section originated from Ord. No. 47, adopted Sept. 22, 1974.
Sec. 8-2. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Brush means all vegetation detached from the land resulting from land clearing operations or other causes.
Garbage means every refuse accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attends the preparation, use,
cooking, dealing in or storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables and any other matter of any nature
whatsoever which is subject to decay, putrefaction and the generating of noxious gases or odors, or which during
or after decay may serve as breeding or feeding materials for flies or other germ-carrying insects; and any
bottles, cans, cartons or other containers.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
130/414
Garden trash means all accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings and other rubbish attending the care of
land, shrubbery, vines, trees, and tree limbs.
Litter means all waste material, rubbish, brush, garden trash, tin cans, bottles, sand, gravel, concrete, slag, refuse,
garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, or discarded materials of any and every kind and description.
Property owner shall mean any party with an equitable interest in the property in question. In the event the
property is owned by a corporation or company, the property owners shall included any officers listed with the
Secretary of State of the State of Georgia, the chief executive officer and the board of directors of any
corporation that own any parcel of property within the city limits. In the event the property is owned by a
partnership, any partner shall be deemed a property owner.
Public or private property shall be all-inclusive, such that no property in the city shall be exempt from the
regulation by this article.
Responsible party shall mean the owner of any property or the tenant of any property that is responsible for
maintaining the property. In the event the property is owned by a corporation or a company, the responsible party
shall include the chief executive office of the corporation or company. In the event the property is owned by a
partnership, the responsible party shall include any partner in the partnership. In the event the property is owned
by a trust, the responsible shall include the trustee of the trust.
Rubbish means accumulations of paper, excelsior, rags, wooden or paper boxes or containers, sweepings and all
other accumulations of a nature other than garbage which are usual to housekeeping and to the operations of
stores, offices and other business places, and such materials as metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, auto
bodies or parts, including automobile tires or tubes and wrecked or abandoned automobiles, and building
material rubble resulting from the construction or alteration of structures or parts of structures and other
materials or refuse not usual to housekeeping or the operation of stores and offices, stumps and any abandoned
appliances, including but not limited to washers, dryers and stoves.
Tenant shall mean party leasing a parcel of property within the city limits regardless whether such lease is in
writing. Additionally, parties squatting on a parcel of property shall be deemed to be a tenant of the property for
purposes of this ordinance.
Trash shall mean garden trash - see above.
(Ord. No. 68, § 2(Art. I), 11-10-80; Ord. No. 206, 9-13-10)
Sec. 8-3. - Declaration of policy.
It is the declared policy of the city that the pollution of the atmosphere by smoke, fly ash, products of complete
or incomplete combustion and certain other emissions into the atmosphere, the discharge of untreated or
inadequately treated sewage or sewerage effluent into the waters within the jurisdiction of the city or the
discarding of garden trash, garbage, rubbish or brush on the lands or waters within the city is a menace to the
welfare and comfort of the people of the city and a cause of extensive damage to health and property. The
necessity for legislative intervention by the enactment of the provisions of this article is for the purpose of
controlling and reducing atmospheric pollution and the pollution of the land and its adjacent waters.
(Ord. No. 68, § 2(Art. II), 11-10-80; Ord. No. 206, 9-13-10)
Cross reference— Refuse disposal service, § 9-110 et seq.; creating litter by tampering with containers, § 9-121;
accumulation in containers only, § 9-122.
State law reference— Littering, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-42 et seq., 40-6-249; Solid Waste Management Act,
O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.
Sec. 8-4. - Cleanliness of premises.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
131/414
(a)
Generally. For the purpose of promoting the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city, every owner or
tenant of a lot or parcel of land lying within forty (40) feet of any dwelling, house, place of business is required
to keep such land cleared of all brush, garbage, garden trash, rubbish, underbrush and debris, weeds and grass in
excess of ten (10) inches in height from the ground, and noxious material of any kind which tends to be a
breeding place for mosquitoes, or tends to be a breeding place or haven for snakes or vermin of any kind or
character, or which tends to create a fire hazard and endanger the lives and property of the citizens of the city, or
which tends to create a nuisance or other unsightly or unsanitary condition. The above forty (40) feet limitation
shall be exclusive of any public right-of-way.
(b)
Violations deemed public nuisances and prohibited. The following conditions are detrimental to the health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city, are therefore public nuisances, and are prohibited:
(1)
Any portion of a lot or parcel of land lying within forty (40) feet of any dwelling, institution or place of business
upon which are located brush, weeds, grass or underbrush in excess of ten (10) inches in height;
(2)
Any portion of a developed residential zoning lot which is planted in a lawn and the grass is in excess of ten (10)
inches in height;
(3)
Any portion of a lot or parcel of land upon which is located an accumulation of garbage, garden trash, debris or
rubbish, except as legally permitted in an industrial zoning district; and
(4)
Any building that is unfit for human habitation or in disrepair as per section 8-43 of the Code of Ordinances City
of Grovetown, Georgia.
(c)
Notice to correct conditions.
(1)
If it is determined that any of the conditions specified in subsection (b) of this section exist on any property
within the city, the director of the planning and zoning department shall notify in writing the owner, the tenant,
the owner's agent, or the property manager that the conditions exist and must be abated within fifteen (15) days.
Said notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, addressed to such owner or occupant, at such owner or
occupant's last known address. The director of the planning and zoning department shall have the authority to
grant an extension of the time limit provided that the responsible party develops a plan to abate the nuisance. The
property owner/tenant shall not have a right to an extension and any extension granted shall be at the discretion
of the director of the planning and zoning department.
(2)
If the conditions are not abated within the prescribed time, the director of the planning and zoning department or
his/her designee shall issue a summons to the owner, the tenant, the owner's agent, and/or the property manager.
The summons shall indicate that the property owner/tenant may subject to a criminal prosecution for a
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
132/414
misdemeanor offense in Municipal Court of Grovetown, Georgia and/or that the city may undertake the cleaning
up of the property with the city recovering the cost of the cleanup from the property owner/tenant. The summons
shall be served personally if the property owner/tenant can be found within the city limits of Grovetown,
Georgia. In the event the responsible party lives outside of Grovetown, Georgia, service shall be made by
personal service, by certified mail/registered mail, by publication or any of the means enumerated in section 8-45
of the Code of Ordinances City of Grovetown, Georgia. For companies and corporations, service shall be made
by serving the registered agent listed with the Secretary of State for the State of Georgia or by service upon the
secretary of state if no registered agent can be found within the State of Georgia. Service may also be perfected
through any means acceptable under the Civil Practice Act of The Official Code of Georgia Annotated.
(d)
Correction by city. If it is determined that any of the conditions specified in subsection (b) exist on any property
within the city, and if the owner, the tenant, the owner's agent or the property manager has been notified in
writing that the conditions exist, and if the conditions are not abated within fifteen (15) days after the receipt of
such notice, the director of the planning and zoning department may direct that the conditions be abated at city
expense.
(e)
Recovery of city expenses.
(1)
If any of the conditions specified in subsection (b) are abated at city expense as provided in subsection (d) of this
article, the city shall assess a lien against the property for the cost described in this section.
(2)
A letter shall be mailed by the city clerk to the owner of record by certified mail, return receipt requested, which
states the city's intention to file a lien and notifies that the owner has twenty (20) days from receipt of the letter to
either reimburse the city its expenses or file written objections to the reasonableness of the assessed cost. Should
there be any objections to the reasonableness of the cost, the director of the planning and zoning department shall
hear and determine the validity of such objections. The decision of the director of the planning and zoning
department may be appealed to the city council.
(3)
Upon final determination of the invalidity of the objections or on failure to file objections within twenty (20)
days, a lien in such form as the city attorney shall determine, shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior
court and recorded as other liens are recorded. A copy of the liens shall be kept in the office of the city clerk, and
a copy shall also be filed with the tax commissioner of the county.
(4)
The actual direct cost of abating the conditions, together with the necessary expenses for preparing, filing and
recording the lien, including any legal expenses, shall be assessed against the property and shall be collected by
the city clerk on November 1 next succeeding the date of filing of the lien, and, if not collected, shall thereafter
be subject to the penalties and interest to which ad valorem taxes would be subject, and collection may be
enforced.
(f)
Dumping, depositing on or in premises of another, streets, streams, lakes, including public or private property or
waters.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
133/414
(1)
It shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity in person or its agent or employees, to cast, dump, deposit,
accumulate, throw or leave, or to cause to permit the dumping, depositing, placing, accumulating, throwing or
leaving of litter, garbage, garden trash, brush or rubbish on any public or private property in the city or any
waters in the city unless:
a.
The property is designated by the city or by the county for the disposal of such materials and the person is
authorized by the proper public authority to use such property;
b.
The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or
c.
The person or legal entity is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained
consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the
owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare and city regulations.
(2)
Violation. Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(g)
Prima facie evidence as to rubbish thrown from motor vehicles.
(1)
Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle or other means of conveyance
in violation of this section, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this
section.
(2)
When litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this section is
discovered to contain any article, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writings which
display the name of a person in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs to such a person, it shall be
rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this section.
(3)
Violation. Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(h)
Burning or burying.
(1)
Garbage, rubbish, hydrocarbons and other restrictions. The burning of garbage, rubbish, automotive tires and
tubes, asphalt shingles, PVC pipe, insulation, treated lumber, adhesives, shale oil, nitro-cellulose, combustible
liquids and other products manufactured from derivatives of petroleum is prohibited. The use of hydrocarbons to
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
134/414
start or fuel a fire is prohibited. Only one (1) active burn site is permitted on any lot one (1) acre or less in size.
The burying of garbage or rubbish is prohibited except for burying in a designated landfill as approved by the
authority having jurisdiction. Controlled outdoor burning will not be permitted to continue if it becomes a public
nuisance or a health hazard.
(2)
Garden trash, yard debris or brush in small amounts. The burning of garden trash, yard debris and brush is
permitted in small amounts not exceeding seventy-five (75) cubic feet provided that there is compliance with
O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq., that authorization has been granted by the fire chief or his designated representative,
that proper safeguards have been taken to prevent spread of the fire, and that the fire is attended at all times until
it is fully extinguished. Fires must be fully extinguished by nightfall.
(3)
Brush in large quantities. The burning of brush in large quantities, (greater than seventy-five (75) cubic feet), is
not permitted, except for those special circumstances or occasions as noted in subsection (4).
(4)
Special events. For special occasions where outdoor cooking takes place in a manner other than the utilization of
an approved grill such as social functions which include campfires for cooking, luau, or any other similar type of
cooking activity, and for bonfires, campfires and similar activities, the person in charge of the activity must
obtain authorization through the office of the fire marshal.
(5)
Authorization for burning required. Authorization to perform outdoor burning is required for all outdoor burning
except for outdoor cooking on approved charcoal or gas grills. Each request to conduct outdoor burning shall be
made to the fire department in person or via communication acceptable to the department. The fire chief and the
fire marshal shall have reasonable discretion as to when outdoor burning is allowed based on existing or
forecasted weather conditions.
(6)
Monitoring and enforcement. The fire department will periodically monitor authorized burning to assess
compliance with safety and environmental requirements and will investigate complaints and reports of
violations. For any fires found not in compliance, fire department personnel may require the correction of the
deficiency(ies) or direct extinguishment of the fire, as they judge appropriate. In no case should burning be
allowed to continue if in the fire officer's judgment smoke or other particles of combustion have or are likely to
enter openings in someone's home, or become a hazard to someone's property, or if the fire is causing other
discernible adverse affects. Failure to be in compliance with any of the rules and regulations noted above may
result in revocation of any authorization to burn that has been issued, and a verbal warning, written warning, or
citation as appropriate. Citations may be issued by the fire chief, fire marshal, fire department operations officer,
code enforcement officers, and police officers.
(7)
Implementation. The fire chief is authorized to publish rules, regulations and procedures to implement the above
requirements for controlled burning.
(8)
Violation. Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
135/414
State law reference— Air quality control, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq.; illegal burning activities, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-
63.
(i)
Accumulation of brush. All accumulation of brush shall be removed or otherwise effaced from public view
within thirty (30) days of the start of the accumulation. Permitting brush to accumulate is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
(j)
Spilling of trash, sand, gravel, similar materials from vehicles.
(1)
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport upon any public roads within the city garbage, refuse, trash,
rubbish, sand, gravel, shell, rock, marl, limestone or asphalt in a vehicle which is not completely covered or
otherwise secured in such a manner to prevent the spilling of its contents on public roads.
(2)
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport upon any public roads within the city material or supplies other
than those enumerated in subsection (a) of this section in a vehicle which is not completely covered or otherwise
properly secured in such a manner as to prevent the spilling of its contents on public roads.
(3)
Any action in violation of subsection (j)(1) or (j)(2) is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(k)
Abandoned and operating wells.
(1)
Abandoned wells. All abandoned wells, i.e., wells no longer in use and unsecured, are hereby declared to be a
nuisance and shall be filled with dirt by the owner of the well, either within thirty (30) days of the enactment of
this ordinance [Ordinance No. 206] or at the time the well is abandoned, whichever occurs later.
(2)
Operating wells. All wells other than abandoned wells shall be completely covered and secured in a manner
approved by the director of the planning and zoning department which shall provide for the health, safety and
welfare of the public.
(l)
Penalty for creation of nuisance. It is hereby declared that a property owner/tenant that creates a nuisance,
including those listed in sections 8-1 to 8-46 of the Code of Ordinances City of Grovetown, Georgia, as well as
any other actions which may be deemed to be a nuisance under any other federal, state or local law or ordinance
and fails to correct the nuisance within time prescribed shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The maximum penalty
for violating this ordinance shall be twelve (12) months of probation and/or six (6) months in jail and/or a fine of
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) plus any applicable surcharges and restitution to the city for any clean up costs.
Each day that a nuisance continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense and said offenses shall not
merge for sentencing purposes.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
136/414
In the event that the nuisance is corrected prior to the arraignment in court for a violation of this ordinance and
where the defendant has not had any prior violations within the previous five (5) years of this ordinance, said
action may be dismissed upon a motion of the city attorney upon the property passing inspection by the city and
payment of an inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
(Ord. No. 68, § 2(Art. III), 11-10-80; Ord. No. 206, 9-13-10)
Sec. 8-5. - Unnecessary noise—Prohibited generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person to create or assist in creating any unreasonably loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noise in the city. Noise of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the public
health, welfare and peace is hereby prohibited.
Sec. 8-6. - Same—Prohibited specifically.
The following acts, among others, are hereby declared to create loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in
violation of this Code, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1)
The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a
danger signal, so as to create any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or the sounding of such device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
(2)
The playing of any radio or television, or phonograph or other musical instrument in such manner or with such
volume, particularly during hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of any person in any dwelling, hotel or other type of resident.
(3)
The keeping of any animal or bird, which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort
and repose of any person in the vicinity.
(4)
The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to create
loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
(5)
The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or
stop work or as a warning of danger.
(6)
The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or service station in any residential area so as to cause
loud or offensive noises to be emitted therefrom between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays or
on Sundays.
(7)
The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning or court while the
same are in session, or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any hospital, which unreasonably and unnecessarily
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
137/414
interferes with the working of such institutions, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets
indicating that such area is a school, court or hospital area.
(8)
Construction activity is allowed during the following times:
a.
Eastern Standard Time.
Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Sunday, no construction work of any kind shall be permitted
b.
Eastern Daylight Savings Time.
Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Sunday, no construction work of any kind shall be permitted
Any contractor or any employee of said contractor found to be violating the work times outlined in this
subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
The director of the planning and zoning department shall be authorized to grant a variance to said time
requirements upon a showing that a state of emergency exists or in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of
public safety and then only with a permit from the building inspector, which permit may be renewed for a period
of three (3) days or less while the emergency continues. Should the work constituted as an emergency exceed the
three-day permit, the contractor shall renew the permit for a period of no longer than (3) days at a time.
The maximum penalty for violation of this subsection is a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
monetary fine, six (6) months in jail and twelve (12) months probation or combination of any of the aforementioned penalties.
In addition to the penalties outlined above, the director of the planning and zoning department shall be
authorized to issue an order to prohibit any further work on the site in question until such time as this matter may
be heard in the Municipal Court of City of Grovetown, GA.
(9)
The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the quiet and peace of the
neighborhood.
(Ord. No. 211, 6-13-11)
Sec. 8-7. - Same—Tests and standards.
(a)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
138/414
Factors to consider: The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of sections 8-5
and 8-6 exists shall include but shall not be limited to the following:
(1)
The volume of the noise.
(2)
The intensity of the noise.
(3)
Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.
(4)
Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural.
(5)
The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any.
(6)
The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities.
(7)
The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates.
(8)
The density of inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates.
(9)
The time of day or night the noise occurs.
(10)
The duration of the noise.
(11)
Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.
(12)
Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity.
(b)
Tables:
TABLE I—LIMITING NOISE LEVELS FOR USE DISTRICTS
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
139/414
Maximum permissible sound pressure
(levels in decibels re 0.0002 microbars)
(Octave band
center frequency
cycles per second)
Residential Use district
Commercial
Manufacturing
Below 75 65 79 80
75—150 60 74 75
150—300 55 66 70
300—600 55 59 64
600—1200 45 53 58
1200—2400 45 47 53
2400—4800 40 41 49
Above 4800 40 49 46
If the noise is not smooth and continuous, one (1) or more of the corrections in Table II below shall be added to
or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given in Table I.
TABLE II—TYPE OF OPERATION IN CHARACTER OF NOISE
(Correction in Decibels)
Noise source operated less than 20% of any one-hour period; plus 5*.
Noise source operated less than 5% of any one-hour period; plus 10*.
Noise source operated less than 1% of any one-hour period; plus 15*.
Noise of impulsive character (hammering, etc.): minus 5.
Noise of periodic character (hum, screech, etc.): minus 5.
*Apply one (1) of these corrections only.
If the noise occurs between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday or at any time on
Sunday or a holiday, seven (7) shall be subtracted from each of the decibel levels given in Table I.
(c)
Motorized vehicles: It shall be unlawful to operate a motorized vehicle within the city limits which creates a
noise or sound which exceeds the noise level limits set out in Table III below.
TABLE III—LIMITING NOISE LEVELS FROM VEHICLES
Trucks and buses:
Over 10,000 pounds:
93 dB(A) measured at 50 feet—Maximum allowable limit
97 dB(A) measured at 25 feet—Maximum allowable limit
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
140/414
Under 10,000 pounds:
80 dB(A) measured at 50 feet—Maximum allowable limit
86 dB(A) measured at 25 feet—Maximum allowable limit
Passenger cars:
78 dB(A) measured at 50 feet—Maximum allowable limit
84 dB(A) measured at 25 feet—Maximum allowable limit
Motorcycles, including other vehicles:
87 dB(A) measured at 50 feet—Maximum allowable limit
93 dB(A) measured at 25 feet—Maximum allowable limit
Secs. 8-8—8-20. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(15) Editor's note— Nonamendatory Ord. No. 91, §§ 1—3.2, and 4—9, adopted Nov. 26, 1990, has been
codified herein by the editor as Art. II, §§ 8-21—8-31.
(15) Charter reference— Chief of police, § 13; abatement of nuisances, § 31.
(15) Cross reference— Animals and fowl, Ch. 4; prohibited parking, §§ 15-4, 15-5.
(15) State Law reference— Abandoned vehicle abatement procedure, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 8-21. - Authority.
The responsible authority of the city, namely the city attorney, chief of police, zoning administrator and any other
person designated by appointment of the mayor and council in order to protect the health and safety of the people
of this city is authorized and directed to implement and enforce the abatement of nuisances within the city and
the elimination of the parking of inoperative vehicles, junk vehicles and or appliances out-of-doors on any public
or private properties within the city.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1, 3-26-90)
Sec. 8-22. - Unlawful to create or maintain.
It shall be unlawful for any person to create and/or maintain a nuisance on public or private premises in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 41 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated.
(Ord. No. 91, § 3, 3-26-90)
Sec. 8-23. - Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
141/414
Nuisance: Whatever is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health and whatever renders or tends to render
soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome.
Person: A person, firm, corporation, society, association or municipality.
(Ord. No. 91, § 3.1, 3-26-90)
Sec. 8-24. - Specified; declared.
The following are specifically declared to be nuisances:
(1)
Toilets, other sanitary facilities, plumbing or sewers in bad repair.
(2)
Conditions conducive to the breeding of flies, mosquitoes or other insects.
(3)
Pollution of the air by gases, vapors, fumes, mists, dusts or smoke in quantities sufficient to be disagreeable,
discomforting or detrimental to health or well-being.
(4)
Trash, garbage, refuse or any foul, decaying or putrescent material kept or used in such a manner or place as to
be or become offensive, objectionable or detrimental to health or well-being.
(5)
Keeping of horses, mules, asses, cows, sheep, goats, hogs, dogs, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, chickens,
turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons or similar fowl or animals except under the following conditions:
a.
Any housing or enclosures used by such animals or fowl shall be well-drained, free from accumulations of
animal excrement and objectionable odors and otherwise clean and sanitary. Animal excrement shall be disposed
of in a manner approved by the health officer.
b.
In the case of bona fide licensed pet shops, veterinary hospitals, stockyards, poultry houses and similar
commercial establishments, the health officer may modify these requirements where undue hardship would result
from their strict enforcement.
(Ord. No. 91, § 3.2, 3-26-90)
Sec. 8-25. - Abandoned junk vehicles—Generally; appliances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, abandon or leave, or store or permit the placement, abandonment,
leaving, keeping or storage of inoperative of junk condition motor vehicles and/or appliances out-of-doors upon
any public or private land within the city.
(Ord. No. 91, § 4, 3-26-90)
Sec. 8-26. - Same—Undetermined owner; removal.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
142/414
In all instances where the owner of any abandoned or junk motor vehicle and/or trailer cannot be determined or
the owner of any junk or abandoned motor vehicle and/or trailer refuse to (give) consent to the city to remove
any junk or abandoned motor vehicle and/or trailer which has been determined to constitute a health hazard or
unsightly nuisance, such junk or abandoned motor vehicle and/or trailer shall be removed under the authority and
provisions of Chapter 40-11 of the Georgia Code Annotated.
(Ord. No. 91, § 5, 3-26-90)
Sec. 8-27. - Same—Conditions.
An inoperative or junk condition shall include but shall not be limited to any automobile, vehicle, trailer of any
kind or type or contrivance or a part thereof, the condition of which is one (1) or more of the following:
(1)
Wrecked.
(2)
Dismantled.
(3)
Partially dismantled.
(4)
Inoperative.
(5)
Abandoned.
(6)
Discarded.
(7)
Scrapped.
(8)
Does not have a license plate attached thereto.
(Ord. No. 91, § 6, 3-26-90)
Sec. 8-28. - Same—Supplemental nature of article.
This article shall not be the exclusive regulation of discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or junk
vehicles or contrivances within the incorporated limits of the city but shall be supplemental in addition to other
regulations and ordinances of the city and statutes or provisions of law heretofore and hereinafter enacted by the
city, county, state or other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 91, § 7, 3-26-90)
Sec. 8-29. - Same—Administration.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
143/414
This article shall be administered by the responsible authority. Whenever it shall appear to the responsible
authority that this article is being violated, he/she shall in writing notify the owner or tenant in possession of the
land on which the violation exists to abate such violation by removing the material or materials to a conforming
location or into an enclosed garage, barn or other building within thirty (30) days of the notice.
(Ord. No. 91, § 8, 3-26-90)
Sec. 8-30. - Violation.
Violation of any provision of this article is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished as provided by law.
(Ord. No. 91, § 2, 3-26-90)
Sec. 8-31. - Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or by imprisonment for not less than (5) days nor more than (30) days, and each
day's failure to comply with any such provision shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. No. 91, § 9, 3-26-90)
Secs. 8-32—8-40. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC OFFICER EXERCISING POWERS OF NUISANCE ABATEMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
(16) Editor's note— Ord. No. 111, § 1, adopted June 23, 1994, amended the Code by adding §§ 8-32—8-37. In
order to facilitate future supplementation, the editor has redesignated said provisions as §§ 8-41—8-46.
Sec. 8-41. - Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the term:
Closing means securing and causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated.
Dwellings, buildings or structures means any building, or structure or part thereof used or occupied or for human
habitation, commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and
appurtenants belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith, and also included any building or structure of any
design.
Governing body means the city council of Grovetown.
Municipality means city council of Grovetown.
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every security deed holder of record.
Parties in interest means persons in possession of said property and all individuals, associations, and
corporations who have interest of record in the county where the property is located in a dwelling, building, or
structure, including executors, administrators, guardians, and trustees.
(Ord. No. 111, § 1, 6-23-94)
Sec. 8-42. - Designation of public officer to exercise statutory nuisance abatement powers.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
144/414
The zoning administrator or chief inspector shall assume all duties and exercise such powers as may be
necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the abatement of nuisances, as set forth in this article,
pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 through § 41-2-17. The powers which may be exercised by the
zoning administrator or chief inspector, as the public officer contemplated by this article, in carrying out and
effectuating the purpose and provisions of this article, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 through §
41-2-17, include, without limitation, the following powers in addition to others granted in this chapter:
(1)
To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures
therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use;
(2)
To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence;
(3)
To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entry shall be
made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
(4)
To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the
purposes of the ordinances; and
(5)
To delegate any of his functions and powers under this division to such officers and agents as he may designate.
(Ord. No. 111, § 1, 6-23-94)
Sec. 8-43. - Determination by public officer that dwelling, building, or structure is unfit.
The zoning administrator or chief inspector, as the public officer contemplated by this article, pursuant to the
provisions of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 through § 41-2-17, may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling,
building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business
use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to
the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of the
neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residences of the city such conditions may include
the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing):
(1)
Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities;
(2)
Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities;
(3)
Dilapidation;
(4)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
145/414
Disrepair;
(5)
Structural defects;
(6)
Code violations; and
(7)
Uncleanliness.
(Ord. No. 111, § 1, 6-23-94)
Sec. 8-44. - Procedure for abatement of nuisances.
(a)
Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the city
charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or
business use, or whenever it appears to the public officer (on his own motion) that any dwelling, building, or
structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, the public
officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon
the owner of and any parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure a complaint stating the charges in
that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer (or his designated agent)
at a place within the city in which the property is located therein, fixed not less than ten (10) days nor more than
thirty (30) days after the serving of said complaint; that the owner and any parties in interest shall be given the
right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and
time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the public officer;
(b)
If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the dwelling, building, or structure under
consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, he
shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served
upon the owner thereof an order:
(1)
If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable
cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest,
within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure, so as to
render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial, or business use or to vacate and close the
dwelling, building, or structure as a human habitation; or
(2)
If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure cannot be made at a
reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner or parties in
interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building, or structure.
In no event shall the city council require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building, or structure except
upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration, or improvement thereof exceeds one-half (½) the value such
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
146/414
dwelling, building, or structure will have when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this law.
(c)
If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close or demolish the dwelling,
building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or
improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished; and that the public officer may cause to be posted on the
main entrance of any building, dwelling, or structure so closed a placard with the following words:
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use; the use or occupation of
this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use is prohibited and unlawful."
(d)
If the owner fails to comply with any order to remove or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public
officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be removed or demolished; provided, however, that the
duties of the public officer, set forth in paragraph (c) of this section and this paragraph, shall not be exercised
until the city council shall have by ordinance ordered the public officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of
O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 through § 41-2-17, with respect to the particular property or properties which the public
officer shall have found to be unfit for human habitation or unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or
business use, which property or properties shall be described in the ordinances.
(e)
The amount of the cost of such vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be a lien
against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Said lien shall attach to the real property upon the
payment of all costs of demolition by the city council and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of
said costs by the public officer in the office of the city clerk on a lien docket maintained by said clerk for said
purposes. If the dwelling, building, or structure is removed or demolished by the public officer he shall sell the
materials of such dwellings, buildings, or structures and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of
the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the public
officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to
the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to
cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise.
(f)
The city council may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal or demolition of
dwellings, buildings, or structures only in the following manner:
(1)
The owner or parties at interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city
council within thirty (30) days after the perfection of said lien, a sum of money equal to twenty-five (25) percent
of the total amount due and by further paying to city council the remaining balance due on such lien, together
with interest at the rate of seven (7) percent per annum, in three (3) equal annual payments, each of which shall
become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove prescribed;
(2)
Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred, or conveyed by the owner or parties
in interest at any time prior to the termination of the said three-year period, then the entire balance due on such
lien shall be due and payable to the city council; and
(3)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
147/414
Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of said three-year period,
or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subparagraph (f)(2) of this section, the city council
may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of
dwellings, buildings, or structures in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. 48-5-358 and other applicable
state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title or
interest in or lien upon said property, all as provided by Article 3 of Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the Official Code of
Georgia Annotated.
(Ord. No. 111, § 1, 6-23-94)
Sec. 8-45. - Service of complaints or orders upon parties in interest and owners of unfit buildings or structures.
(a)
Complaints or orders issued by the public officer pursuant to the provisions of this article shall, in all cases, be
served upon each person in possession of said property, each owner, and each party in interest; and the return of
service signed by the public officer or his agent or an affidavit of service executed by any citizen of this state,
reciting that a copy of such complaint or orders was served upon each person in possession of said property, each
owner, and each party in interest personally or by leaving such copy at the place of his residence, shall be
sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owner, and party in interest.
(b)
If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside outside the city limits of the city service shall be perfected
by causing a copy of such complaint or orders to be served upon such party or parties by the sheriff or any lawful
deputy of the county of the residence of such party or parties or such service may be made by any citizen; and
the return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen, that such party or parties were served
either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at the residence, shall be conclusive as to such
service.
(c)
Nonresidents of this state shall be served by publishing the same once each week for two (2) successive weeks in
a newspaper of general circulation within the city limits of the city. A copy of such complaint or orders shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or orders. Where the address of such
nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail.
(d)
In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under
disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or
personal representative resides outside the city limits of the city or is a nonresident, he shall be served as
provided for in section 8-45(c) or (d) in such cases. If such minor or insane person or person laboring under
disabilities has no guardian or personal representative or in the event such minor or insane person lives outside
the city limits of the city or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or insane person
personally or by leaving a copy at the place of his residence which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service
of such person or persons; in the case of other persons who live outside of the city or are nonresidents, service
shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located who
shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for
such person.
(e)
In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by
the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
148/414
effect, then the service of such complaint or order upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as
provided in subsection (c) of this section or service may be perfected upon any person, firm or corporation
holding itself out as an agent for the property involved.
(f)
A copy of such complaint or orders shall also be filed in the proper office or offices for the filing of lis pendens
notice in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located and such filing of the complaint or
orders shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Any such complaint or
orders or an appropriate lis pendens notice shall contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the
described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained on a lien docket maintained by the
city clerk.
(Ord. No. 111, § 1, 6-23-94)
Sec. 8-46. - Injunctions against order to repair, close, or demolish unfit buildings or structures.
Any person affected by an order issued by the public officer under this article, may petition to the superior court
for an injunction pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13.
(Ord. No. 111, § 1, 6-23-94)
Chapter 9 - MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AND SERVICES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(17) Charter reference— Sewers, § 26; waterworks, gas works, § 27; easements, § 28.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 9-1. - Stormwater maintenance, post construction and long term maintenance of detention ponds.
(a)
Ownership and maintenance of the detention ponds will remain with the owner/developer until the pond has been
accepted for ownership by the City of Grovetown. Any maintenance, cleaning, or repairs of the detention pond,
prior to acceptance by the City of Grovetown, will be at the cost of the owner/developer. After the city has
accepted ownership of the pond the city will be responsible for any cost incurred with the maintenance, cleaning,
repair of said pond.
(b)
Maintenance of the detention ponds, once accepted by the city, will include (but not be limited to) annual
inspection, clearing of any trash or debris located in the pond, clearing of any trees that may have grown in the
pond, clean out of silt accumulation from the pipes in the pond, and repairs/maintenance of any retrofit device in
the pond.
(c)
If a pond exists where the city does not possess ownership of the pond, the city will notify the owner of the pond
of the necessary maintenance that may be needed for the proper function of the pond. The owner will be notified
by certified return receipt mail and will be allowed thirty (30) days from receipt of notification in which to bring
the pond into compliance. If compliance is not met within the thirty-day period, the city will hire a licensed
contractor to perform the necessary maintenance until compliance is met. The city will invoice/bill the owner of
the pond, or place a lien on the property, until the city has been able to recover any costs that may have incurred
to bring the privately owned pond into compliance.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
149/414
(Ord. No. 182, §§ 1—3, 7-16-07)
Secs. 9-2—9-19. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE
Sec. 9-20. - Application for service; security deposits.
The consumer shall make application for water and sewer service, in person, at the city hall of the City of
Grovetown, Georgia and at the same time shall make a cash security deposit of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for
water service and an additional twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for sewer service.
(Ord. No. 77-B, § 2, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 159, § 2, 12-27-04)
Sec. 9-21. - Tapping without authority.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tap on to the water system or the sewer system of the city without due
authority from the governing body.
(Ord. No. 5, § 1, 1-12-60)
Cross reference— Sewer connection permit, § 9-81.
State law reference— Theft of services, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-5 et seq.
Sec. 9-22. - Charges for initial water and sewer service.
Each consumer, located inside the city limits, subscribing to use the water service of the City of Grovetown shall
pay a connection of seven hundred dollars ($700.00) times the connections desired for residential (¾-inch) water
service taps or seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) times the number of connections desired for residential
(one-inch) water service taps. Each consumer, located inside the city limits, subscribing to use the sewer service
of the city shall pay a connection of six hundred dollars ($600.00) times the number of connections desired for
residential sewer service taps.
Each consumer, located inside the city limits, subscribing to use the water service of the City of Grovetown shall
pay a connection of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) times the number of connections desired for
commercial (¾-inch) water service taps, eight hundred fifty dollars ($850.00) times the number of connections
desired for commercial (one-inch) water service taps, or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) times the number of
connections desired for commercial (two-inch) water service taps. Each consumer, located inside the city limits,
subscribing to use sewer service of the City of Grovetown shall pay a connection of seven hundred dollars
($700.00) times the connections desired for commercial sewer service taps.
Each consumer, located outside of the city limits, subscribing to use the water service the City of Grovetown
shall pay a connection of eight hundred fifty dollars ($850.00) times the number of connections desired for
residential (¾ inch) water service taps or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) times the number of connections
desired for residential (one-inch) water service taps.
(Ord. No. 77-B, § 3, 11-14-88; Ord. of 12-19-90; Ord. of 3-27-00; Ord. No. 159, § 3, 12-27-04)
Sec. 9-23. - Rate schedules.
From and after the passage of this ordinance [December 27, 2004], there be and is hereby adopted the following
water and sewer rate schedules for the city. The rate schedule will be reviewed at least annually by the director of
water and sewer and revised as needed to provide for the receipt of adequate revenues to meet the requirements
of debt service, operation and maintenance, and the establishment of required reserves. No free service or use of
the facilities will be permitted and all water service connections will be metered.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
150/414
(1)
Water rates schedule—Residential inside city limits.
a.
0—3,000 gallons or any portion thereof, for $9.00 (minimum consumption).
b.
3,001—10,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $3.00 per thousand gallons.
c.
10,001—20,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $3.05 per thousand gallons.
d.
20,001—30,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $3.10 per thousand gallons.
e.
30,001—50,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $3.15 per thousand gallons.
f.
50,001 and over gallons, or any portion thereof for $3.25 per thousand gallons.
(2)
Water rates schedule—Residential outside city limits.
a.
0—3,000 gallons or any portion thereof, for $14.10 (minimum consumption).
b.
3,001—10,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $4.70 per thousand gallons.
c.
10,001—20,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $4.75 per thousand gallons.
d.
20,001—30,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $4.80 per thousand gallons.
e.
30,001—50,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $4.85 per thousand gallons.
f.
50,001 and over gallons, or any portion thereof for $4.95 per thousand gallons.
(3)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
151/414
Water rates schedule—Commercial inside city limits.
a.
0—3,000 gallons or any portion thereof, for $14.10 (minimum consumption).
b.
3,001—10,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $4.70 per thousand gallons.
c.
10,001—20,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $4.75 per thousand gallons.
d.
20,001—30,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $4.80 per thousand gallons.
e.
30,001—50,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $4.85 per thousand gallons.
f.
50,001 and over gallons, or any portion thereof for $4.95 per thousand gallons.
(4)
Water rates schedule—Commercial outside city limits.
a.
0—3,000 gallons or any portion thereof, for $22.35 (minimum consumption).
b.
3,001—10,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $7.45 per thousand gallons.
c.
10,001—20,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $7.50 per thousand gallons.
d.
20,001—30,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $7.55 per thousand gallons.
e.
30,001—50,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $7.60 per thousand gallons.
f.
50,001 and over gallons, or any portion thereof for $7.70 per thousand gallons.
(5)
Sewer rates schedule—Residential inside city limits.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
152/414
a.
0—3,000 gallons or any portion thereof, for $7.50 (minimum consumption).
b.
3,001—10,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $2.50 per thousand gallons.
c.
10,001—20,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $2.55 per thousand gallons.
d.
20,001—30,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $2.60 per thousand gallons.
e.
30,001—50,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $2.75 per thousand gallons.
f.
50,001 and over gallons, or any portion thereof for $2.85 per thousand gallons.
(6)
Sewer rates schedule—Residential outside city limits.
a.
0—3,000 gallons or any portion thereof, for $11.70 (minimum consumption).
b.
3,001—10,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $3.90 per thousand gallons.
c.
10,001—20,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $3.95 per thousand gallons.
d.
20,001—30,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $4.00 per thousand gallons.
e.
30,001—50,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $4.05 per thousand gallons.
f.
50,001 and over gallons, or any portion thereof for $4.15 per thousand gallons.
(7)
Sewer rates schedule—Commercial inside city limits.
a.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
153/414
0—3,000 gallons or any portion thereof, for $11.70 (minimum consumption).
b.
3,001—10,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $3.90 per thousand gallons.
c.
10,001—20,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $3.95 per thousand gallons.
d.
20,001—30,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $4.00 per thousand gallons.
e.
30,001—50,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $4.05 per thousand gallons.
f.
50,001 and over gallons, or any portion thereof for $4.15 per thousand gallons.
(8)
Sewer rates schedule—Commercial outside city limits.
a.
0—3,000 gallons or any portion thereof, for $20.40 (minimum consumption).
b.
3,001—10,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $6.80 per thousand gallons.
c.
10,001—20,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $6.85 per thousand gallons.
d.
20,001—30,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $6.90 per thousand gallons.
e.
30,001—50,000 gallons, or any portion thereof for $6.95 per thousand gallons.
f.
50,001 and over gallons, or any portion thereof for $7.05 per thousand gallons.
(Ord. No. 77-B, § 3, 11-14-88; Ord. of 12-19-90; Ord. No. 159, § 1, 12-27-04)
Sec. 9-24. - Minimum charges.
The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be made for such connection subscribed for. Water
furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection, the City of Grovetown shall
not under any condition furnish water free of charge to anyone.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
154/414
(Ord. No. 77-B, § 4, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 159, § 4, 12-27-04)
Sec. 9-25. - City's responsibility and liability.
The City of Grovetown shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the
distribution line exists or is to be constructed and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be
served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in section 9-22 above will be made for a ⅝ ×
¾-inch meter.
(1)
It shall be mandatory for all existing residences, businesses and industries whose property line is within two
hundred (200) feet of the sewer service, which have indoor plumbing facilities, to connect to and use the central
sewer system within ninety (90) days after service is available. All new single-family dwellings, multi-family
dwellings including trailer parks, commercial facilities and industries must utilize the central sewer service.
(2)
The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable
costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service.
(3)
The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property
within three (3) feet of the property line.
(4)
The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or piping are installed in such a manner
as to prevent cross connections or back flow.
(5)
Under normal conditions, the city will notify the consumer of any anticipated interruptions of service.
(Ord. No. 77-B, § 5, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 159, § 5, 12-27-04)
Sec. 9-26. - Consumer's responsibility and liability.
The consumer, members of his household and employees shall use water furnished by the City of Grovetown for
consumption only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use said
water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, car washing, or other purposes, except when water is available in
sufficient quantity without interfering with regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this
rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service.
(1)
The consumer shall provide a suitable place where meter or meter boxes is placed on the premises of a
consumer, therefore, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader.
(2)
The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the consumer's side of the meter.
(3)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
155/414
The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's
expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health
department.
(4)
In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants
must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the
city's water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city covenant and agree that so long as they
continue to be consumers of the city, they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to
the city's water system.
(Ord. No. 77-B, § 6, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 159, § 6, 12-27-04)
Sec. 9-27. - Access to premises and extensions of system.
(a)
Duly authorized agents for the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose
of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or facilities, and the sewer
service and its facilities.
(b)
Extension to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted
or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and
sewer lines.
(Ord. No. 77-B, § 7, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 159, § 7, 12-27-04)
Sec. 9-28. - Change of occupancy.
Not less than three (3) business days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the city hall to discontinue
water and sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed
up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant
shall apply for water service within forty-eight (48) hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will
make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading.
(Ord. No. 77-B, § 8, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 159, § 8, 12-27-04)
Sec. 9-29. - Meter reading; billings; collecting.
Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be
desirable to the city. Bills shall be paid at the city hall and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent
such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of the same.
The failure of water/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the
following penalties:
(1)
Nonpayment within ten (10) days after the due date (5th
 of each month) will be subject to a ten (10) percent
penalty being added to the delinquent account.
(2)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
156/414
Nonpayment within fifteen (15) days from the due date (5th
 of each month) will result in the water being shut off
from the water user's property.
(3)
Nonpayment for thirty (30) days after original due date (5th
 of each month) will allow the city, in addition to all
other rights and remedies, to terminate agreement, and in such event, the water user shall not be entitled to
receive, nor the city obligated to supply, any water under this agreement.
Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full such security
deposit as may be required by the mayor and city council is made, and a service charge of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) is paid for each meter reconnected.
(Ord. No. 77-B, § 9, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 159, § 9, 12-27-04)
Sec. 9-30. - Suspension of service.
When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the
consumer by the city.
(1)
Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the city will apply the security deposit toward the
settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is
insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for
collection of debts.
(2)
The city reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons:
a.
To prevent fraud or abuse.
b.
Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules.
c.
Emergency repair.
d.
Insufficient water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control.
e.
Legal processes.
f.
Direction of public authorities.
g.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
157/414
Strike, riot, fire, floods, unavoidable accident.
(Ord. No. 77-B, § 10, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 126, § 1, 12-23-96; Ord. No. 159, § 10, 12-27-04)
Sec. 9-31. - Complaints; adjustments.
If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill
becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in
preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and
such payment shall not prejudice his claim.
(1)
The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee of ten dollars ($10.00)
provided; however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was over read, no charge will be made.
(2)
Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making
the test provided; however, that if the meter is found to over register beyond three (3) percent of the correct
volume, no charge will be made.
(3)
If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is
topped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from record of his previous bills and/or from
other proper data.
(Ord. No. 77-B, § 11, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 159, § 11, 12-27-04)
Sec. 9-32. - Meters belong to city.
All water meters connected into the water system in the city shall be and remain the property of the city.
(Ord. No. 63, § 2, 2-26-79)
Sec. 9-33. - Tampering with or damaging meters, pipes or other apparatus; diverting water; penalty.
Whoever intentionally and without authority injures or destroys any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, post, lamp or
other apparatus belonging to a company engaged in the manufacture or sale of public services, gas, power, water
or communication or intentionally and without authority prevents a meter from duly registering the quantity of
services supplied or in any way interferes with the proper action or just registration or without the consent of the
company intentionally diverts any services of such company or otherwise intentionally and without authority
uses or causes to be used without the consent of such company any services manufactured or distributed by such
company shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person
receiving the benefit of the service without proper charge as a result of such tampering with a meter or such
diversion of services shall be presumed to be responsible for such acts of tampering or diversion.
(Ord. No. 40, § 8, 8-26-68; Ord. of 1-8-90)
State law reference— Theft of services, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-5 et seq.
Sec. 9-34. - Water conservation.
(a)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
158/414
The state regulation of toilets, shower heads and faucets (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1), and the Soil and Water
Conservation Act (O.C.G.A. § 2-6-20 et seq.) is adopted and made an integral part of this article by reference.
(b)
Priority uses as follows:
(1)
High priority use: Health maintenance including food preparation, sanitation and body cleanliness are excluded
from water use restrictions, in addition, public safety and fire protection.
(2)
Low priority use: Restricted uses during declared emergencies.
a.
No outside watering of any kind including street flushing, public water fountains, park irrigation, watering lawns,
gardens, shrubbery, etc.
b.
No commercial and/or public water use as swimming pools, motor vehicle washing of any kind, commercial car
washes and public swimming pools to close.
c.
No commercial and home laundry except during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
(c)
Enforcement action on this section shall be taken on those users not complying with this section in the following
manner. Duly authorized officers bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement and testing in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
(1)
Any person found to be violating the provisions of this section shall be served written notice stating the nature of
the violation and shall be issued a warning ticket for this violation.
(2)
On second violation, water services will be terminated and a minimum reconnect fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will
be charged.
(3)
All such subsequent violations shall be charged a minimum reconnect fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for
each violation.
(4)
The governing body may in its good judgment raise the herein stated penalties by resolution.
(Ord. No. 81, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-87)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
159/414
Secs. 9-35—9-39. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - USE OF SEWERS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 9-40. - Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under EPA approved laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in
milligrams per liter.
Building drain: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from
soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of buildings and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning
five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
Building sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called
house connection or service connection.
City: This city, including all its wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
Combined sewer: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
Customer: Every person who is responsible for contracting, expressly or implicitly, with the city in obtaining,
having or using sewer connections with, or sewer tap to, the sewer system of the city and in obtaining, having or
using water and other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater and
sewage through such system. Such term shall include the occupants of each unit of a multiple-family dwelling
unit building or trailer park as a separate and distinct customer.
Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
Floatable oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by
treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
Flush toilet: The common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement.
Garbage: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of
foods.
Health officer: The senior sanitarian of the county or other person designated as such sanitarian's representative.
Industrial wastes: The wastewater from industrial processes as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
Infiltration/inflow: Groundwater and surface water which leaks into the sewers through cracked pipes, joints,
manholes or other openings.
Municipality: The governmental body having jurisdiction over the maintenance and operations of the water and
sanitary sewer systems within the city and adjacent areas of the county.
Natural outlet: Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.
Normal wastewater: Wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewers in which the average concentration of total
suspended solids is not more than three hundred fifty (350) milligrams per liter (mg/l), BOD 5
is not more than
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
160/414
three hundred (300) mg/l, total phosphorous is not more than fifteen (15) mg/l, total Kjeldahl nitrogen is not
more than twenty (20) mg/l, and the total flow is not more than twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.
Pit privy: A shored, vertical pit in the earth completely covered with a flytight slab on which is securely located a
flytight riser covered with hinged flytight seat and lid.
Properly shredded garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been
shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any dimension.
Public sewer: A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility.
Sanitary sewer: A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not
intentionally admitted.
Septic tank: A subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes
together with:
(1)
A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing
stub out; and
(2)
A subsurface system of trenches, piping and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the
tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered.
Sewage: The spent water of a community. The equivalent term is "wastewater."
Sewage works: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
Sewer: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater.
Sewerage: The system of pipes or conduits that collect and transport wastewater.
Slug: Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of
flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system
and/or performance of the wastewater facilities.
Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer): A drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface
water or unpolluted water from any source and excluding sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.
Superintendent: The utilities superintendent or the superintendent's authorized deputy, agent or representative.
Suspended solids: Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water,
wastewater or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtration by EPA approved laboratory
procedures and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
Unpolluted water: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not
cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
161/414
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the
liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present.
Wastewater facilities: The structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic
and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent.
Watercourse: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. No. 85, §§ 2.1—2.36, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-41. - Prohibited discharges to natural outlets, etc.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area within the service area of the
city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, including septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow to any open
drain or well-penetrating, water-bearing formation, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 85, § 3.3, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-42. - Use of septic tanks, etc., restricted.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
(Ord. No. 85, § 3.4, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-43. - Toilets required.
(a)
All premises shall be provided, by the owner thereof, with at least one (1) toilet. All toilets shall be kept clean
and in a sanitary working condition.
(b)
No person shall dispose of human excrement except in a toilet.
(Ord. No. 85, §§ 3.1, 3.2, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-44. - Connection to public sewers—Toilet facilities.
(a)
The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other
purposes situated within the city jurisdiction and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is
now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby required at the owners'
expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public
sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within sixty (60) days after date of official notice to do so,
provided that such public sewer is within two hundred (200) feet of the property line.
(b)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
162/414
For properties outside the city, a malfunctioning septic tank as determined by the health officer shall be cause for
connection to the city sewer system where the city sewer is located within two hundred (200) feet of the property
line.
(c)
The developers of subdivisions constructed after May 11, 1987, and located within five hundred (500) feet of the
city sewers shall provide sewerage within the subdivision and shall connect to the city sewer system.
(d)
Every flush toilet shall be connected to a public sewer where available or to a septic tank. Flush toilets shall be
provided at all times with sufficient running water under pressure to flush the toilet clean after each use.
(Ord. No. 85, §§ 3.5, 4.9, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-45. - Same—Sinks.
All sinks, dishwashing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines and
similar plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the public sewer; provided, that where no sewer is
available, septic tanks or other private subsurface disposal facilities approved by the health officer may be used.
(Ord. No. 85, § 3.6, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-46. - Same—Premises with private water systems not to connect to public sewerage.
Premises with private water systems shall not be connected with the public sewerage.
(Ord. No. 85, § 4.13, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-47. - Malicious damage.
No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(Ord. No. 85, § 7.1, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-48. - Powers and authority of inspectors.
(a)
Duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted
to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to
discharge to the public sewerage system in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(b)
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to herein, the authorized employees or
agents of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the
company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the employees, and the city shall indemnify the company
against loss or damage to its property by such employees or agents and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company, except as such may be caused by negligence or
failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required by this article.
(c)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
163/414
Duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted
to enter all private properties through which the city holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater
facilities lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement, shall be done in
full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. No. 85, § 8.3, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-49. - Compliance with regulatory requirements.
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed as alleviating compliance with applicable state and federal
regulations. Specific user charge and industrial cost recovery requirements, promulgated pursuant to Public Law
92-500, shall be considered as a part of this article upon official adoption. All nonresidential users will be
required to comply with pretreatment standards as outlined in Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part
403.
(Ord. No. 85, § 9.1, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-50. - Violations.
(a)
Violations of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable under the laws of the state and the ordinances of the
city. Each day of continuing violation shall be considered a separate offense. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this article shall become liable to the municipality for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the
city by reason of violation.
(b)
In the event of violation of this article, the health officer or authorized employees may verbally instruct the
owner as to the necessary corrective action. If the owner fails to carry out verbal instructions in a timely manner
or if a serious violation or hazard to public health exists, the health officer or the city may issue to the owner a
written order stating the nature of the violation, the corrective action, and the time limit for completing the
corrective action. The record of the mailing of such notice or order shall be prima facie evidence thereof and
failure of such owner to receive same shall in no way affect the validity of any proceedings conducted pursuant
to this article.
(c)
Failure to comply with any written order duly issued by the health officer or the city pursuant to this article will
constitute a separate misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided by the laws of
the state and the ordinances of this city; provided further, that compliance with this article is required
notwithstanding the fact that a written order might not have been issued.
(d)
The violation of any provisions of this article, as now existing or as may be hereafter amended, may be enjoined
by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Any
public nuisance which is injurious to the public health, safety or comfort may be abated by instituting
appropriate proceedings for injunction in the court of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be
maintained notwithstanding the fact that such violation also constitutes a crime, and notwithstanding that other
adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the municipality.
(e)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
164/414
Upon the receipt of a notice of a violation of this article and/or an order of the city requiring an act or thing to be
done or to cease, the owners of any premises then in question may, in writing, demand a hearing before the
municipality, to present the evidence challenging the validity of the city's order. The owner may appear in
person, by agent or by attorney. Such demand must be filed with the city clerk and be made within five (5) days
from the receipt of the order being challenged. Upon receipt of a demand for a hearing, the city will set a date,
time and place for such hearing, to be not less than twenty-one (21) days from the date of filing of such demand.
(f)
The hearing as provided herein shall apply to any customer's complaint, dispute or challenge of the
municipality's rules, regulations, resolutions, ordinances or policies. Upon a customer's written complaint filed
with the clerk, the municipality shall set a hearing as provided herein or at a time agreed upon by the parties.
(g)
Evidence before the municipality of any hearing conducted pursuant to subsection (e) of this section shall be
admitted in accordance with the rules of evidence of the superior courts of the state; provided, however, the
municipality may take official notice of any order, rule, regulation or any other document, record or entry
contained in its official record or minutes for evidentiary purposes.
(h)
For the purposes of this article, the decisions of the municipality will prevail in any instance in which there is a
conflict between it and the health officer on any issue of sanitation, or the lack of it, and its effect on human
health or well being.
(Ord. No. 85, §§ 10.1—10.7, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-51. - Service charges.
It is hereby determined necessary to fix and collect sewer service charges from customers. Such charges shall be
published separate from this article and the revenue received shall be used for operation, maintenance, debt
retirement and other authorized expenses.
(Ord. No. 85, § 11.1, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-52. - Authority to disconnect service.
(a)
The municipality reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal services and disconnect a
customer from the system when:
(1)
Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released into the public sewer causing rapid
deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; or
(2)
A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a
quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is discharging wastewater
into the public sewer that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as
normal domestic treatment; or
(3)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
165/414
The customer:
a.
Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; or
b.
Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the
wastewater treatment process; or
c.
Fails to pay monthly bills for sanitary sewer service when due; or
d.
Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers.
(b)
Notification processes for discontinuance of service are presented in section 9-107
(Ord. No. 85, §§ 12.1, 12.2, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-53. - More restrictive ordinance controls.
In the event a wastewater discharge is made to a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) under the jurisdiction
of an approved sewer use ordinance for another governing authority, the more restrictive requirement shall
prevail.
(Ord. No. 85, § 13.3, 5-11-87)
Secs. 9-54—9-59. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL
Sec. 9-60. - Authorized upon compliance where public sewer not available.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of this article, the building sewer shall be
connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of the health officer and the
state department of human resources.
(Ord. No. 85, § 4.1, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-61. - Prohibited where public sewer available.
No septic tank or other subsurface disposal facility shall be installed where a public sewer is accessible to the
premises involved, nor in any place where the health officer deems the use of same to be a menace to human
health or well being.
(Ord. No. 85, § 4.5, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-62. - Septic tank construction, etc.
Septic tanks shall be constructed, repaired, altered, enlarged and maintained in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the health officer. Septic tanks shall be maintained in sanitary working order.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
166/414
(Ord. No. 85, § 4.2, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-63. - Septic tank permit.
No person shall construct, repair, alter or enlarge any septic tank unless such person shall hold a valid permit for
such work issued by the health officer. The health officer may withhold the issuance of such a permit pending the
inspection and approval by the health officer of the site and location of the proposed work. Before any septic
tank or any part thereof may be covered after it has been constructed, repaired, altered or enlarged, it shall be
inspected and approved by the health officer.
(Ord. No. 85, § 4.3, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-64. - Specifications; minimum land area; discharge to natural outlet.
(a)
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all
recommendations of the department of human resources of the state.
(b)
No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption
facilities where the area of the lot is less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
(c)
No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
(Ord. No. 85, § 4.4, 5-11-87)
Cross reference— Similar square footage requirement, App. A, § 2.010.
Sec. 9-65. - Maintenance.
The owners shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times,
at no expense to the city.
(Ord. No. 85, § 4.7, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-66. - Subsurface facilities prohibited unless approved.
No subsurface disposal facilities shall be installed in any place where the health officer deems the use of such
facilities to be a menace to human health or well being.
(Ord. No. 85, § 4.8, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-67. - Pit privies.
No pit privy shall be installed in the following locations:
(1)
Where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved; or,
(2)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
167/414
In areas where the health officer deems the use of pit privies to constitute a nuisance or menace to the public
health; or,
(3)
Where a pit privy may pollute any water supply; or,
(4)
Where the use of pit privies is not in keeping with the standard of sanitation in adjacent areas.
(Ord. No. 85, § 4.10, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-68. - Discharge of septic tanks in sewer system.
It shall be unlawful to empty, dump, throw or otherwise discharge, into any manhole, catch basin or other
opening, into the city sewer system, or any system connected with and discharging into the sewer system, the
contents of any septic tank: sludge, sewage, or other similar matter or material.
(Ord. No. 85, § 4.11, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-69. - Correction of malfunctioning system.
Any premises that has a septic tank, privy or any other sewage, industrial waste or liquid disposal system,
located thereon that does not function in a sanitary manner shall be corrected within thirty (30) days from the
receipt of written notification from the health officer that such system is not functioning in a sanitary manner, and
that such system is ordered to be corrected.
(Ord. No. 85, § 4.12, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-70. - Time for connection to public sewer; filling septic tanks, etc.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a
direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within sixty (60) days after notice. Any septic tanks,
cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall then be cleaned of sludge and filled with
suitable material.
(Ord. No. 85, § 4.6, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-71. - Additional regulations.
No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may
be imposed by the health officer.
(Ord. No. 85, § 4.14, 5-11-87)
Secs. 9-72—9-79. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
Sec. 9-80. - Defining sewer availability and costs.
The municipality will define the availability of sewers and any costs associated with sewer permits or
construction.
(Ord. No. 85, § 5.11, 5-11-87)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
168/414
Sec. 9-81. - Permit for work—Required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any
public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
(Ord. No. 85, § 5.1, 5-11-87)
Cross reference— Tapping without authority, § 9-21.
Sec. 9-82. - Same—Application.
The owner or the owner's agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee as specified elsewhere shall be paid at the time the
application is filed.
(Ord. No. 85, § 5.2, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-83. - Bearing of costs; indemnification of city.
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
(Ord. No. 85, § 5.3, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-84. - Separate and independent building sewer.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except that, where one (1)
building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot such as a trailer park and no separate sewer is available,
the front building sewer may be extended to the other buildings and the whole considered as a private collecting
sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or
resulting from any such single connection aforementioned.
(Ord. No. 85, § 5.4, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-85. - Old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination
and test by city personnel, to meet all requirements of this article.
(Ord. No. 85, § 5.5, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-86. - Specifications; work and materials.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in
construction shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes and other applicable rules
and regulations of the city and county. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials
and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)
and Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. Additionally, the
following materials and methods shall apply to building sewers within the city's supervision:
(1)
The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM Specification A74, latest revision, or equal; ductile iron
pipe, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Specification A21.51, latest revision, or equal; ASTM C200
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
169/414
extra strength clay pipe; or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe Schedule 40, ASTM Specification D3034, latest
revision. All joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten (10)
feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe; ductile iron pipe with bolted mechanical
joints may be required by the superintendent where the sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in
filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that plastic pipe may be
acceptable if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the superintendent.
(2)
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event
shall the diameter be less than four (4) inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighthinch per foot. Furthermore, the appropriate requirements of the Occupational Health and Safety Act (OSHA)
shall be followed.
(3)
The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade
and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved
pipe and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed in the same trench with water service lines. A cleanout plug
shall be provided at the building and at each ninety-degree turn outside the building. Ninety-degree turns shall be
made by using two (2) one-eighth bends or a long sweep ell.
(4)
An excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise
approved by the superintendent. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM
Specification C12, latest revision, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and
approved.
(5)
All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
a.
Push-on joints for cast iron soil pipe shall have neoprene gaskets in accordance with the requirements of ASTM
C-564.
b.
Push-on joints for ductile iron pipe shall also have neoprene gaskets and be installed according to the
manufacturer's recommendations.
c.
Vitrified clay pipe joints shall conform to ASTM C425 using material having resilient properties; Type III, O
ring gasket. Gaskets shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
d.
PVC pipe joint material shall be of the bell and spigot type, sealed with a rubber "O" ring gasket, having a
composition and texture which is resistant to the common ingredients of sewage, industrial wastes (including
oils), and groundwater, and which will endure permanently under the conditions likely to be imposed by this use.
Installation of gasket shall be done in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's instructions using all the
necessary materials, lubricants, and equipment recommended by the manufacturer.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
170/414
e.
Other jointing materials may be used only when approved by the city. Connection of pipe of different materials
shall be made by using appropriate adaptors approved by the city.
(6)
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such a branch is
available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is twelve (12) inches in diameter or less, and no properly
located "Y" branch is available, the city shall, at the owner's expense, cut a neat hole into the public sewer, with
entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about forty-five (45) degrees, and install a forty-five-degree
elbow with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the
building sewer at the point of connection shall be at an elevation of at least one-tenth-foot above the invert of the
public sewer. A neat smooth joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement
in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the city.
(Ord. No. 85, § 5.6, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-87. - Building sewer elevations; lifts.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor.
No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three (3) feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be
weakened. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the
building sewer.
(Ord. No. 85, § 5.7, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-88. - Downspouts, etc., not to be connected.
No person shall make connections of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of
surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved for purposes of disposal of polluted
surface drainage.
(Ord. No. 85, § 5.8, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-89. - Notice of inspection and connection readiness; testing.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of
the superintendent or the superintendent's representative.
(Ord. No. 85, § 5.9, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-90. - Excavations.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(Ord. No. 85, § 5.10, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-91. - Code compliance.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
171/414
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and
plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made
gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation.
(Ord. No. 85, § 5.12, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-92. - Remedial action by city.
If any house sewer permits the "infiltration" or "inflow," the city may:
(1)
Require the owner to repair the house sewer.
(2)
Require the owner to disconnect such owner's sewer from the city sewer system.
(Ord. No. 85, § 5.13, 5-11-87)
Secs. 9-93—9-95. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - RESTRICTED USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS
Sec. 9-96. - Discharge of unpolluted water.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Direct
discharges to waters of the state are prohibited without first obtaining a national pollutant discharge elimination
system (NPDES) permit from the environmental protection division.
(Ord. No. 85, § 6.1, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-97. - Discharge of sanitary wastewater to storm sewer.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sanitary wastewater into a storm sewer system.
(Ord. No. 85, § 6.2, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-98. - Prohibited discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water or wastes to any public
sewers:
(1)
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(2)
Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to damage or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater
treatment plant.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
172/414
(3)
Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or greater than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater works.
(4)
Solid or viscous substances in quantities of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or
other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole
blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or
ground by garbage grinders.
(Ord. No. 85, § 6.3, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-99. - Limited discharges.
The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal
systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or
equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb or
public property, or constitute a nuisance. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or
wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the city are as
follows:
(1)
Wastewater having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (65;deg; C) or
wastewater which will elevate the temperature of the influent to the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) to
one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit (40;deg; C) or higher.
(2)
Wastewater containing more than twenty-five (25) milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable
cutting oils or product of mineral oil origin.
(3)
Wastewater containing more than one hundred (100) milligrams per liter of oils, fat, grease or wax, whether
emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between
thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit (0;deg; C) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (65;deg; C).
(4)
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from
homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage
originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when
served by caterers.
(5)
All industrial discharges to the city sewer system must comply with the Federal Industrial Pretreatment
Standards (40 CFR Part 403) and those industrial pretreatment standards developed by the state environmental
protection division.
(6)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
173/414
Any waters or wastes containing taste-producing or odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be
established by the city.
(7)
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentrations as may exceed limits established in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(8)
Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug" as defined in section 9-40
(9)
Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater
treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment
plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving
waters.
(10)
Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release
obnoxious gases, form solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to
structures and treatment processes.
(11)
Materials which exert or cause:
a.
Any unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and
lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
b.
Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
c.
Unusual BOD (above three hundred (300) mg/l), chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine demand in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters
contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated above and which, in the judgment of the city,
may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the municipality may:
(1)
Reject the wastes,
(2)
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers,
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
174/414
(3)
Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or
(4)
Require surcharge payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastes.
(Ord. No. 85, § 6.5, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-100. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
(a)
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, sand or other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintenance of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible
for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of
the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the city. Any removal and hauling of the
collected materials not performed by owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal
firms.
(b)
Any hauling and removal of the collected materials must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal
firms. Said firms shall be a registered transporter and shall be listed as such by Georgia Environmental Protection
Division (EPD). Said transporter shall provide documentation upon request stating compliance as a registered
transporter.
(c)
Any and all hauling and removal of the collected materials shall be done in a manner which meets the
specifications and approval from Georgia EPD.
(d)
Said transporter shall provide customer with a pumping manifest for the business location in which the service
was performed/rendered. Said manifest shall be retained on sight and shall be made available upon request by the
designated City of Grovetown official/inspector. Said designated official/inspector shall produce identification to
business owner/operator/manager at the time of inspection and/or upon manifest request.
(e)
The use of additives, chemicals, enzymes, solvents, emulsifiers, demulsifiers, bacteria, etc. is hereby prohibited
for use in any FOG interceptor, oil water separator, sand interceptor, and food water grinders in the city,
including, but not limited to, churches, schools, daycares, restaurants, grocery stores, butcher shops, convenience
stores, coffee shops, ice cream stores, bakeries, delicatessens, cafeterias, motels, hotels, car washes, detail shops,
automotive repair/maintenance shops, etc.
(f)
All FOG interceptors, oil water separators, sand interceptors and other similar devices designed to control FOG
shall be shown in detail on all building plans, new construction or remodel/renovation, and said plans shall be
submitted to the city. All submitted plans shall include the design, size, make, manufacturer and location of said
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
175/414
interceptor/separator. All FOG interceptors, oil water separators, and sand interceptors must be approved by the
city prior to building permit issuance.
(g)
Any and all fats, oils, grease, and sand interceptors that are located under a sink shall be pumped and maintained,
at a minimum, on a monthly basis. If inspection shows that pumping and maintenance on said interceptor is
insufficient in the given time frame, the inspector shall/will require interceptor to be pumped/maintained on a
more frequent basis. Said pumping and maintenance shall be performed by a licensed/registered transporter.
(h)
Any and all fats, oils, grease, and sand interceptors that are located in ground shall be pumped and maintained, at
a minimum, once every three (3) months. If inspection shows that pumping and maintenance on said interceptor
is insufficient in the given time frame, the inspector shall/will require interceptor to be pumped/maintained on a
more frequent basis. Said pumping and maintenance shall be performed by a licensed/registered transporter.
(i)
Failure to comply with this section in whole or in part shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable
by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), six (6) months in jail, and, or twelve (12) months'
probation. Additionally the city and any party aggrieved by a violation of this section shall have the right to seek
restitution for any damages resulting from a violation of this section including the cost of cleaning the sewer
system in the affected area.
(Ord. No. 85, § 6.6, 5-11-87; Ord. No. 200, 7-27-09; Ord. No. 202, 9-28-09)
Sec. 9-101. - Facilities for observation, sampling and measurement.
When required by the municipality, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with approved plans. The
structure shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be
safe and accessible at all times. This requirement will be on a case-by-case basis.
(Ord. No. 85, § 6.7, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-102. - Measurement, etc. guidelines.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in
this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest federal guidelines establishing test procedures for
the analysis of pollutants (40 CFR Part 136). Sampling methods, location times, durations and frequencies are to
be determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by the city.
(Ord. No. 85, § 6.10, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-103. - Information from industrial users.
The industrial users may be required to provide information needed to determine compliance with this article.
These requirements may include:
(1)
Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period;
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
176/414
(2)
Chemical analyses of wastewaters;
(3)
Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting wastewater volume and quality;
(4)
Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important to sewer use control;
(5)
A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location;
(6)
Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; and
(7)
Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the public sewer.
(Ord. No. 85, § 6.8, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-104. - Special agreements and arrangements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the city for treatment. However, in no case shall the waste discharge to the city system exceed
federal categorical pretreatment standards or any additional requirements from the environmental protection
agency or the state environmental protection division.
(Ord. No. 85, § 6.9, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-105. - Pretreatment of wastes.
(a)
Persons discharging industrial wastes into the sewer system may be required to pretreat such wastes. Plans for all
pretreatment facilities shall be approved by the superintendent or the state environmental protection division
prior to construction. At the time written plans are submitted for approval, written maintenance plans shall also
be submitted and approved by the superintendent. The facilities shall be allowed to operate only as long as they
are maintained in accordance with the approved maintenance plans. Pretreatment requirements shall be
determined on a case-by-case basis and shall include the following facilities as a minimum:
(1)
Neutralization: If plans are submitted for the neutralization of strong acid or alkaline wastes, the plans shall
include the necessary instrumentation and controls to assure compliance with the above regulations at all times.
(2)
Equalization: Holding tanks or equalization basins shall be required ahead of the receiving manhole of the city
sewer system when deemed necessary by the superintendent to prevent peak flows that exceed the capacity of the
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
177/414
system or that result in operational problems.
(b)
All pretreatment facilities shall be operated and maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation
by the owner at the owner's expense.
(Ord. No. 85, § 6.11, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-106. - Waiver of requirements.
(a)
There shall be no provision for the granting of variances for discharge of incompatible wastes. If a user begins to
violate any of the provision of this division, it shall be the user's responsibility to apply to the municipality who
can issue a temporary permit along with a compliance schedule for planning and construction of necessary
treatment or pretreatment works. Each case will be carefully evaluated with respect to its effect on the
wastewater treatment system and the environment prior to issuance of a temporary permit and compliance
schedule.
(b)
Any dilution of the wastewater by the user for the purpose of decreasing the concentrations of toxic materials
shall be considered as a violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 85, § 6.12, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-107. - Discontinuance of service for failure to comply.
Failure to comply with the provisions of this division shall be cause for the discontinuance of sewer or water
service to the offending person. The procedure shall be as follows: A written notice, signed by the city, shall be
delivered personally to the person then responsible for the offending use, outlining the conditions of the wastes
which violate the city ordinances. In the event that the person in charge will not accept the notice, it shall be
conveyed by certified or registered mail to the responsible person. The person notified shall have twenty-four
(24) hours from the time of receipt of the notice, either personally delivered or received by certified or registered
mail, to correct the offending conditions. If correction is not made or a request for extension is not received by
the city within twenty-four (24) hours, it shall be mandatory that water or sewer service shall be discontinued to
the offending person without further notice. If a request for an extension of time is received by the city within
twenty-four (24) hours of the above notice and if circumstances are such that, in the opinion of the
superintendent, the best interest of the city would be served by extending the time for correction of the offending
condition, then the superintendent may grant an extension of time up to a maximum limit of thirty (30) days.
(Ord. No. 85, § 6.13, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-108. - Responsibilities of the person discharging waste.
It shall be the responsibility of the person discharging industrial waste into the city sewer system to:
(1)
Build a control structure in the discharge line from such person's premises, immediately prior to the entrance of
the discharge line into the city sewer system, suitable for the sampling and measuring of wastes. Plans for this
structure must be approved by the city. This requirement may be waived if deemed unnecessary by the city. In
the event that no special manhole is required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
178/414
(2)
Contact the superintendent prior to operation changes which will materially alter the characteristics of the waste
from the last prior sampling.
(3)
Make timely, periodic payments to the city of surcharges for excessive loadings as detailed in the city user
charge system.
(Ord. No. 85, § 6.14, 5-11-87)
Sec. 9-109. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
FOOTNOTE(S):
(18) Cross reference— Abandoning motor vehicles and appliances, § 8-1; littering, § 8-3 et seq.
(18) State Law reference— Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; disposal of dead animals,
O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; littering, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-42 et seq., 40-6-249.
Sec. 9-110. - Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the respective meanings ascribed to
them:
Commercial solid waste. All types of solid waste generated by stores offices, restaurants, warehouses and other
non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes.
Composting. The controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus.
Leachate collection system. A system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the
waste and into the soils surroundings the landfill.
Municipal solid waste. Any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in
septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels,
bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and
commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvacultural operations or
industrial processes or operations.
Municipal solid waste disposal facility. Any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of
municipal waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including
but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills.
Municipal solid waste landfill. A disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not
mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator
hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon.
Premises: Land, buildings or other structures, vehicles, watercraft or parts thereof, upon or in which refuse is
stored for collection.
Refuse: All solid wastes of a community, including garbage, ashes, rubbish, dead animals, street cleanings, and
solid market and industrial wastes, but not including body wastes.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
179/414
Responsible authority: The legally designated person of the city who shall be authorized and directed to
implement and enforce the provisions of this article, or such person's authorized representative.
Yard trimmings. Leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and
greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and
maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvacultural operations.
(Ord. No. 47, § 1, 9-22-74; Ord. No. 125, § 1, 9-23-96)
Sec. 9-111. - Functions of the responsible authority.
(a)
The responsible authority, in order to protect the health and safety of the people of the city, is authorized and
directed, by implementing and enforcing the provisions of this article, to control the storage, collection and
disposal of refuse within the city, to provide a public refuse collection and refuse disposal service from
designated sites and/or premises within the city so that the type and usual quantity of refuse can be safely and
expeditiously handled by such public refuse collection and disposal service and/or to approve and regulate the
establishment, maintenance and operation of private refuse-collection systems and refuse-disposal methods and
sites.
(b)
This article shall be administered by the responsible authority. Whenever it shall appear to the responsible
authority that this article is being violated, such authority shall, in writing, notify the owner or tenant in
possession of the land on which the violation exists to abate such violation by removing the materials to a
conforming location or into an enclosed garage, barn or other building within ten (10) days of the notice.
(Ord. No. 47, §§ 2, 10(a)(2), 9-22-74)
Sec. 9-112. - Inspections.
The city council shall devise a method to periodically inspect each premises within the city in such a manner as
to systematically locate existing nonfunctioning motor vehicles and/or appliances and require the abatement
thereof as provided in section 9-111(b).
(Ord. No. 47, § 10(a)(3), 9-22-74)
Sec. 9-113. - Funds; appropriation, borrowing, other means.
(a)
The city council is authorized to make funds available by appropriation, by borrowing or by other means, in
accordance with the laws and procedures of this city, for equipment for the collection or disposal of refuse, and
for the establishment, maintenance and operation of refuse collection systems and refuse disposal methods and
sites.
(b)
Refuse service charges within the city, for the purpose of financing the establishment, maintenance and operation
of refuse collection systems or refuse disposal methods and sites, are hereby levied in accordance with the
following schedules:
(1)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
180/414
The rate of charge to each household dwelling for the collection and disposal of refuse shall be in accordance
with the schedule as determined and announced by the city council.
(2)
The rate of charge to each institution, business and industrial establishment for collection and disposal of refuse
shall be in accordance with the schedule as determined and announced by the city council.
(c)
Refuse service charges shall be payable monthly, by separate billing in conjunction with the water bill. Such
refuse service charges shall be collected by the responsible authority.
(Ord. No. 47, § 3, 9-22-74)
Sec. 9-114. - Private responsibility.
The owner or the owner's agent, or the occupant, of any premises within the city shall be responsible for the
sanitary condition of the premises occupied by such person, and it shall be unlawful for any person to place,
deposit or allow to be placed or deposited on such person's premises any refuse except as designated by the terms
of this article.
(Ord. No. 47, § 5, 9-22-74)
Sec. 9-115. - Service of notices and orders; hearings.
(a)
Whenever the responsible authority determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a
violation of any provision of this article, such authority shall give notice of such alleged violation to the persons
responsible therefor, as hereinafter provided.
(1)
Such notice shall:
a.
Be put into writing;
b.
Include a statement of reasons why it is being issued;
c.
Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
d.
Be served upon the owner or the owner's agent or the occupant of such premises within the city; provided, that
such notice shall be deemed to have been properly served when a copy thereof has been served personally, or in
accordance with any other method authorized under the laws of this state.
(2)
Such notice may:
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
181/414
a.
Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this article;
b.
State that, unless conditions or practices described in such notice which violate this article, are corrected within
the reasonable time specified in such notice, refuse collection will be terminated.
(b)
Any person who is affected by any notice issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this
article may request, and shall be granted, a hearing on the matter before the city council; provided, that such
person shall file, in the office of the responsible authority, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting
forth a brief statement of the ground therefor, within ten (10) days after the day of the notice was served. Upon
receipt of such petition, the responsible authority shall set a time and place for such a hearing, the petitioner shall
be given an opportunity to be heard. The hearing shall be commenced not later than ten (10) days after the day
on which the petition was filed; provided, that upon application of the petitioner, the responsible authority may
postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period when, in such authority's
judgment, the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement.
(c)
After such hearing, the city council shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon its finding
based on such hearing as to whether or not the provisions of this article and of the regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with. If the city council sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an
order. Any notice shall automatically become an order if written petition for hearing has not been filed in the
office of the responsible authority within ten (10) days after such notice was served.
(d)
The proceedings at such hearing, including the finding and decision of the city council, shall be summarized,
reduced to writing, and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the responsible authority. Such record
shall include, also, a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by
the decision of the city council may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by
the laws of this state.
(e)
Whenever the city council finds that an emergency exists involving a serious health hazard which requires
immediate action to protect the public health, it may, without notice or hearing, issue a written order reciting the
existence of such an emergency and the conditions violating this article which require corrective action to
remove such health hazard. If such corrective action is not taken, the city council may take such action as may be
necessary to protect the public health. Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, such order shall be
effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon
petition to the city council shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible, but in any case not later than three (3)
days after the petition was filed. After such hearing, depending upon the finding as to whether or not the
provisions of this article and of the regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the city
council shall continue such order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it.
(Ord. No. 47, § 6, 9-22-74)
Sec. 9-116. - Inspection.
The responsible authority, after exhibiting official identification, shall have the power to enter at reasonable times
upon private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
182/414
enforcement of the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 47, § 7, 9-22-74)
Sec. 9-117. - Refuse acceptable for collection by the city.
The following refuse shall be considered to be acceptable for collection by the city:
(1)
Garbage: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and/or
consumption of foods.
(2)
Ashes: The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials.
(3)
Rubbish: Nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery, metals and similar materials.
(4)
Dead animals: Small, dead animals, not exceeding seventy-five (75) pounds each in weight, which die in the
normal course of community activity excluding condemned animals, animals from a slaughter house or other
animals normally considered industrial refuse shall be removed by the city upon request.
(Ord. No. 47, § 8, 9-22-74)
Sec. 9-118. - Refuse not acceptable for collection by the city.
The following refuse shall not be considered to be acceptable for collection by the city:
(1)
Dangerous materials or substances, such as poisons, acids, caustics, infected materials and explosives.
(2)
Unusual quantities of materials resulting from the repair, excavation or construction of buildings or structures,
such as earth, plaster, mortar and roofing material.
(3)
Materials which have not been prepared for collection in accordance with these regulations.
(4)
The solid wastes resulting from industrial processes.
(Ord. No. 47, § 9, 9-22-74)
Sec. 9-119. - Containers.
(a)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
183/414
All other refuse shall be stored in containers provided by the city.
(b)
Containers shall be placed at street-side no earlier than 8:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled collection day and
shall be removed from street-side no later than 9:00 p.m. on the day of collection. Violators shall be notified in
writing to forthwith remove the garbage container. The offending party shall have forty-eight (48) hours after
receiving the notice to remove the garbage container. Any party failing to remove the garbage container from
street-side within the specified time after receiving the notice shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 47, § 10(c), 9-22-74; Ord. No. 110, § 1, 4-25-94)
Sec. 9-120. - Preparation of refuse for collection.
(a)
Bulky rubbish such as trees, weeds and large cardboard boxes, may be bundled so as not to exceed four (4) feet
in length nor fifty (50) pounds in weight.
(b)
Ashes containing hot embers shall not be placed in containers for collection.
(Ord. No. 47, § 10(b), (f), 9-22-74)
Sec. 9-121. - Tampering with containers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, remove covers, overturn or otherwise damage receptacles or
create litter or health problems.
(Ord. No. 47, § 10(g), 9-22-74)
Sec. 9-122. - Deposit in containers only.
It shall be unlawful to permit refuse, except bulky rubbish, to accumulate on any premises except in containers
which are approved by the city council, in accordance with the specifications contained in this article.
(Ord. No. 47, § 10(e), 9-22-74)
Cross reference— Removal of trash, § 8-3.
Sec. 9-123. - Collection days.
(a)
All household refuse shall be collected by the city as scheduled and announced by the city council.
(b)
All institutional, business and industrial refuse shall be collected by the city as scheduled and announced by the
city council.
(c)
Collections shall not be made on the following holidays unless otherwise specified by the city council: All legal
holidays.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
184/414
(d)
The city council shall make known to the public the days on which refuse pick-up will be provided to each
section of the community. Also, any major changes to the schedule will be made known at least three (3) weeks
in advance of the proposed change.
(Ord. No. 47, § 12, 9-22-74)
Sec. 9-124. - Place of collection.
All refuse to be collected by the city shall be placed not more than one hundred (100) feet from property line
abutting the main street. All rubbish such as yard clippings and bulky items shall be placed at curb in suitable
containers. If alley pick-up is used in some areas of the city, the above requirements shall apply as to the alley
used by the collection vehicle.
(Ord. No. 47, § 13, 9-22-74)
Sec. 9-125. - Refuse disposal.
(a)
All disposal of refuse shall be by methods in accordance with requirements of state and local law, and shall
include the maximum practicable rodent, insect and nuisance control at the places of disposal.
(b)
There shall be no burning at any public disposal site within the city. Any fires at these sites which are started
accidentally, intentionally or by spontaneous combustion will be extinguished immediately.
(c)
Animal offal and carcasses of dead animals shall be buried or cremated as directed by the city council or shall be
rendered at forty (40) pounds per square inch of steam pressure or higher, or shall be heated by equivalent
cooking.
(d)
It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city.
(e)
Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate
collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city.
(Ord. No. 47, § 14, 9-22-74; Ord. No. 125, § 1, 9-23-96)
Sec. 9-126. - Vehicle equipment.
(a)
All public or private vehicles used for the collection or disposal of refuse shall have enclosed bodies, or suitable
provision for covering the body. Provision and use of a tarpaulin or canvas cover to enclose open bodies of
collection vehicles may be permitted when specifically approved by the city council.
(b)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
185/414
Vehicles used for the collection or disposal of garbage, or of refuse containing garbage, shall have watertight,
metal bodies of easily cleanable construction, shall be cleaned at sufficient frequency to prevent nuisance or
insect breeding, and shall be maintained in good repair.
(Ord. No. 47, § 15, 9-22-74)
Sec. 9-127. - Refuse acceptable from non-residents.
(a)
Refuse acceptable from non-residents shall be limited to recyclable items delivered to approved recycle sites in
the city.
(b)
It shall be unlawful for non-residents to deposit any refuse at curbside on in any residential on commercial
container in the city.
(Ord. of 7-28-97, § 1)
Sec. 9-128. - Sorting, storing, composting and collecting yard trimmings.
Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored in the following manner:
(1)
Naturalized, low-maintenance landscaping requiring little or no cutting.
(2)
Grass cycling by mowing it high and letting it lie.
(3)
Stacking branches into brush piles for use as wildlife habitats and for gradual decomposition into the soil.
(4)
Composting on the site where the material was grown, followed by incorporation of the finished compost into
the soil at that site.
(5)
Chipping woody material on the site where such material was generated.
(6)
Collecting yard trimmings and transporting them to another site to be chipped or composted for later use; and
(7)
Chipping woody material for later use as fiber fuel.
(Ord. No. 125, § 1, 9-23-96)
Chapter 10 - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
186/414
FOOTNOTE(S):
(19) Charter reference— Business licenses, § 19.
(19) Cross reference— Alcoholic beverage licenses, § 3-5 et seq.; kennel licenses, § 4-26.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
FOOTNOTE(S):
(20) Editor's note— Ord. No. 117, §§ 1—26, adopted December 12, 1994, did not specifically amend the Code;
hence, the editor has included said provisions as §§ 10-1—10-26, superseding former §§ 10-1—10-23. Former
§§ 10-1—10-23 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 59, adopted May 9, 1977; and
Ord. No. 74, adopted December 21, 1983.
Sec. 10-1. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in the city.
(a)
For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or
occupation in the city, whether with a location in Grovetown or in the case of any out-of-state business with no
location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an
occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall
be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in
Grovetown, Georgia. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in Grovetown, Georgia such business
tax registration shall be shown to the clerk's office or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of Grovetown,
Georgia, upon request.
(Ord. No. 117, § 1, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-2. - Construction of terms; definitions.
(a)
Wherever the term "city" is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean Grovetown, Georgia; wherever the
term Grovetown is used herein, it shall be construed to mean Grovetown, Georgia.
(b)
As used in this ordinance, the term:
(1)
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling
and processing the occupation tax.
(2)
Location of office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project.
(3)
Occupation tax means tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an
occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
187/414
(4)
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are
required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an
occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the
actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee.
Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land
development are not regulatory fees.
(5)
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is
derived from.
(6)
Person shall be held to include proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business
organization.
(7)
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such
profession or occupation.
(8)
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if
the business pays an occupation tax.
(9)
Employee means the number of employees of a given business is the average number employed during the fourth
period of the calendar year. The fractional working times of a part-time employee will be combined and rounded
off to the lower number if less than one-half (½) or more to the higher number. The owner and any family
members working for the business, whether paid or not, should be included in this amount.
(Ord. No. 117, § 2, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-3. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure—Occupation tax structure.
A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be required on all business
and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts.
(Ord. No. 117, § 3, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 193, § 1, 10-27-08)
Sec. 10-4. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions.
(a)
An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with
one (1) or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state
businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria:
(1)
The number of employees of the business or practitioner.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
188/414
(b)
Occupation tax schedule.
(1)
Number of employees. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession or
occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the city clerk's office.
Employees     Tax Liability
Per Employee .....$ 25.00
(c)
(1) No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupational tax for each of its locations.
(2)
No occupational tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents or real estate companies
whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 117, § 4, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 193, § 2, 10-27-08)
Sec. 10-5. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia.
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of
professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia if the business's largest dollar volume of business in
Georgia is in Grovetown and the business or practitioner.
(1)
Has one (1) or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of Grovetown for
the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or
(2)
Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of
Grovetown.
(Ord. No. 117, § 5, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-6. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration.
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that
the business conducts.
(Ord. No. 117, § 6, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-7. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in Grovetown.
Where a person conducts business at more than one (1) fixed location, each location or place shall be considered
a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax.
(Ord. No. 117, § 7, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-8. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18).
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
189/414
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire
occupation tax one (1) of the following:
(1)
The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 10-4 of this article.
(2)
A fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid
at practitioner's office or location. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as
a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework.
(3)
This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by November 1 of each year.
(Ord. No. 117, § 8, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-9. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government.
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United
States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or
municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that
practice.
(Ord. No. 117, § 9, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-10. - Purpose and scope of tax.
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the
payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The
occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of
O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 to § 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local
government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance.
An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with
one (1) or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state
businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7.
(Ord. No. 117, § 10, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-11. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent.
(a)
Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless
otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and
shall, if not paid by March 31 each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On
any new profession, trade or call begun in Grovetown in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and
tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten (10) percent penalty
imposed.
(b)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
190/414
In addition to the above remedies, the marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for
tax executions.
(Ord. No. 117, § 11, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-12. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose.
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said
registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless one hundred (100)
percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose.
(Ord. No. 117, § 12, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-13. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed.
(a)
Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place
of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid.
(Ord. No. 117, § 13, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-14. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable.
(a)
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or
any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such
requirements have been met.
(Ord. No. 117, § 14, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-15. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain.
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary
registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for
or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a
registration. Every person commencing business in Grovetown after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain
the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to
transact in Grovetown, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so
obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof.
(Ord. No. 117, § 15, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-16. - Businesses not covered by this article.
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax
or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by local law:
(1)
Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission.
(2)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
191/414
Those electrical services businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia
Annotated.
(3)
Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including
agribusiness.
(4)
Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105.
(5)
Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, et seq.
(6)
Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15.
(7)
Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats,
meal, flour, bran cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.)
(8)
Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356.
(9)
Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.
(10)
Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55.
(Ord. No. 117, § 16, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-17. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses.
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax the business shall pay on number of employees as set forth in
section 10-4 and an administrative fee as set forth in section 10-3(a).
(Ord. No. 117, § 17, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-18. - More than one place or line of business.
Where a business is operated at more than one (1) place or where the business includes more than one (1) line,
said business will pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the
dominant line at each location.
(Ord. No. 117, § 18, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-19. - Suspension of occupation tax.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
192/414
The mayor and council shall have the right to suspend any occupation tax receipt issued under this article
whenever a person, firm, or corporation doing business shall deviate from the normal operation for which the
occupation tax receipt was purchased or fails in performance to meet the required regulations and code as set
forth by the comprehensive zoning ordinance and building code of the City of Grovetown, Georgia, the
Grovetown police department, the Columbia County health department, or violate any law or ordinance of the
United States, or the State of Georgia, or the City of Grovetown, in pursuant of such business conducted under
such occupation tax, or when it shall be proven before the office of the city clerk that there is violation of the
nuisance law, or when the health, morals, interests and convenience of the public demand the suspension of such
occupation tax receipt. The office of the city clerk shall report the suspension of such occupation tax receipt to
the next regular meeting of the Grovetown city council, then said occupation receipt shall be revoked, or
otherwise it shall be restored and remain in full force.
(Ord. No. 117, § 19, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-20. - Transfer of occupation tax receipt.
The occupation tax receipt issued under this article is not transferable to any other person, firm, or corporation
doing business in the city.
(Ord. No. 117, § 20, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-21. - Application of provisions to prior ordinances.
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such
prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter
passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such
ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees
provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall
continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid.
(Ord. No. 117, § 21, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-22. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing body.
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the council. All
provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes
have been paid in full.
(Ord. No. 117, § 22, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-23. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase.
After January 1, 1996 the council shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing before adopting any ordinance or
resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article.
(Ord. No. 117, § 23, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-24. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax.
The council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax
to one (1) or more types of business or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic
development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or
professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious and the reasons
shall be set forth in the minutes of governing authority.
(Ord. No. 117, § 24, 12-12-94)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
193/414
Sec. 10-25. - Occupation appeals board.
The occupation tax appeals board is hereby established, effective January 1, 1995. Said board shall consist of
five (5) persons who are residents of said city and are twenty-one (21) years of age or older. The five (5)
members initially appointed shall be selected by the mayor and council with one (1) being appointed for one (1)
year, one (1) for two (2) years, one (1) for three (3) years, one (1) for four (4) years, and one (1) for five (5)
years, respectively; and thereafter, the term of office for each member shall be for five (5) years, with the terms
expiring December 31.
The occupational tax appeals board shall elect its own chairman and secretary and shall meet from time to time
as is necessary to handle appeals which shall be presented by the city clerk when a complaint originates. The
complaining party shall be notified by the city clerk as to the time, date and place the appeals board will hear the
complaints of the taxpayer. Said appeals board shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, and the secretary
shall keep a record of its transactions, findings, and determinations which record shall be filed at the office of the
city clerk so that it shall be public record.
(Ord. No. 117, § 25, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-26. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions.
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention
hereof that the specific shall control.
(Ord. No. 117, § 26, 12-12-94)
Sec. 10-27. - Transient vendor license.
(a)
Transient vendor defined. Transient vendor shall mean anyone who does not possess an occupation license for a
permanent or regular place of business within the city limits of the City of Grovetown and who sells for profit,
articles or goods, including but not limited to, produce, prepackage foods, prepared foods, furniture, clothing and
accessories, and arts and crafts in a residential or commercial location. Any person selling articles or goods
pursuant to the granting of a yard sale license by the city shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
(b)
Application for transient vendor license. Any person, firm or corporation who does business in the city limits of
the City of Grovetown, as a transient vendor shall, before engaging in such business, obtain a transient vendor
license from the city. Any transient vendor selling produce, prepackaged foods or prepared foods shall, at time of
application, submit a current approved food service permit from the Columbia County Health Department or
State of Georgia Department of Agriculture and a current business license from a county located within the State
of Georgia. Any transient vendor selling furniture, clothing and accessories, and arts and crafts shall, at time of
application, submit a current business license from a county located within the State of Georgia. No transient
vendor shall be granted a transient vendor license without having first made application for the same.
Application shall state the name of the vendor, the name of the business owner, a current and working telephone
number for the business owner, a complete and accurate list of items to be sold, which list shall be signed by the
owner of the business and said list shall be verified under oath by the applicant.
(c)
Bond; transient vendor license. The application and list shall be accompanied by a good and sufficient bond in
the penal amount of five thousand ($5,000.00) payable to the City of Grovetown and conditioned to pay the City
of Grovetown or anyone else suing in its name for injuries or damages arising from the selling of such product or
item and from any dishonest or fraudulent conduct in the administration of the business.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
194/414
(d)
Regulatory fee; transient vendor license. A regulatory fee for a transient vendor license shall be in the amount of
one hundred dollars ($100.00). The regulatory fee for a transient vendor license shall be paid on an annual basis
to the City of Grovetown. The transient vendor license shall be renewed no later than March 31 of each year.
Upon renewal, current food service permit or approval from the department of agriculture, business license, and
bond shall be submitted to the city. The transient vendor license will not be renewed until all previously
mentioned items have been submitted and verified. The regulatory fee for a transient vendor license is subject to
increase upon approval by mayor and city council of the City of Grovetown.
(e)
Suspension of transient vendor license. The city shall have the right to immediately suspend, for cause, any
transient vendor license issued under the jurisdiction of the city whenever a person, firm, or corporation doing
business shall deviate from the normal operation for which the transient vendor license was obtained or fails in
performance to meet the required regulations and code as set forth by the City of Grovetown, Public Safety,
Health Department or State of Georgia Department of Agriculture or when the health, morals, safety, and
interests of the public demand the suspension of such transient vendor license.
(f)
Procedure for suspension/revocation of transient vendor licenses. The suspension of such transient vendor
license shall be made in the form of a report defining the reason for suspension to the city administrator or city
clerk and shall be presented before the mayor and council at a regular scheduled or called meeting. The city
administrator or city clerk shall provide the licensee with at least three (3) days' notice of said meeting, at which
meeting, the licensee may make such showing, as he/she may deem proper. After a hearing before the mayor and
council, the mayor and council, shall either continue the suspension, place the licensee on probation,
permanently revoke the license, or restore the license such that it remains in full force.
(g)
Penalty for violation. All persons, firms, or corporations failing to comply with the mandatory provisions of this
section or doing any act prohibited by this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be
subject to a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine, six (6) months in jail, or both.
(Ord. No. 201, §§ I—VII, 9-14-09)
Secs. 10-28—10-29. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - INSURANCE BUSINESS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(21) Editor's note— Ord. No. 212, §§ 1—6, adopted Dec. 27, 2011, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as
herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 10-30—10-35, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No.
142, §§ 1—6, adopted Nov. 26, 2001.
Sec. 10-30. - Insurers' license fees.
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer
doing business within the city in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). For each separate business location
in excess of one not covered by section 10-31, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there
is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). For the purposes of this ordinance,
the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance
designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
195/414
(Ord. No. 212, § 1, 12-27-11)
Sec. 10-31. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations.
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by
a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term
financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a
licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of twenty-six and
25/100 dollars ($26.25) per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter.
(Ord. No. 212, § 2, 12-27-11)
Sec. 10-32. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers.
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct
premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an
amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in
accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct
premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees
imposed by section 10-30 of this article.
(Ord. No. 212, § 3, 12-27-11)
Sec. 10-33. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers.
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct
premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in
O.C.G.A § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half percent
(2.5%) of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. §
33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. §
33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 10-30.
(Ord. No. 212, § 4, 12-27-11)
Sec. 10-34. - Due date for license fees.
License fees imposed in sections 10-30 and 10-31 shall be due and payable on the first day of 2012 and on the
first day of each subsequent year.
(Ord. No. 212, § 5, 12-27-11)
Sec. 10-35. - Administrative provisions.
The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of the ordinance from which this article derives
to the Insurance Commissioner of the State of Georgia within forty-five (45) days of its enactment.
(Ord. No. 212, § 6, 12-27-11)
Secs. 10-36—10-39. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - SECONDHAND JEWELRY AND PRECIOUS METALS
Sec. 10-40. - Definition.
As used in this article, the term "broker in gold and silver" means any person engaged in whole or in part, in the
business of buying or selling coins, jewelry, gold, silver, precious metals, etc., or of making loans with such
property as security, of any description from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
196/414
(Ord. No. 69, § 1(b), 2-9-81)
Sec. 10-41. - License application—Filing.
Any person within the city shall, before engaging, in whole or in part, in the business of buying or selling coins,
jewelry, gold, silver, precious metals, etc., or of making loans with such property as security, for persons or
sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers, file with the city clerk an application for a business license
to conduct and carry on such business as a broker in gold and silver.
(Ord. No. 69, § 1(c), 2-9-81)
Sec. 10-42. - Same—Contents.
The application for such business shall be signed and dated by the applicant, and contain answers to the
following questions:
(1)
What is the kind of business to be operated?
(2)
What is the name of the business?
(3)
What is the location where such business is proposed to be carried on and the telephone number of such
location?
(4)
What is the name of the applicant for the license, and the home address and telephone number of the applicant?
(5)
Where has applicant resided for the six (6) months preceding the date of this application?
(6)
What was the applicant's previous home address, and how long was applicant a resident there?
(7)
What is the social security number of the applicant?
(8)
Applicant intends to do business as:
( ) Individual
( ) Partnership
( ) Corporation for profit
( ) Corporation not for profit
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
197/414
(9)
Personnel of applicant: If the applicant is an individual, name the individual applying; if a partnership, name all
the members of the partnership; if a corporation, name the president, vice-president, secretary and treasurer, as
well as the members of the board of directors, the stockholders and list all employees:
Name Title
(Individual,
Partner or
Officer)
Age Residence
Address
;daterule; ;daterule; ;daterule; ;daterule;
;daterule; ;daterule; ;daterule; ;daterule;
;daterule; ;daterule; ;daterule; ;daterule;
;daterule; ;daterule; ;daterule; ;daterule;
(10)
Who is the landlord or owner of the location, and what is the address and telephone number of such landlord or
owner?
(11)
Has the applicant or any person connected with, employed by or having any interest in such business:
a.
Been charged or convicted of any violation of law (other than minor traffic violations) in any locality?
b.
Served time in prison, or other correctional institution?
(12)
If the answer to "a" of question (11) is "yes," state circumstances in detail. Information must be complete as to
dates, charges, court jurisdiction and disposition for each person. If the answer to "b" of question (11) is "yes,"
state circumstances in detail. Information must be complete as to charge on which convicted, name of prison or
correctional institution, length of time served, date of release from prison or correctional institution, whether
sentence has been completed, or whether on probate or parole, and the terms thereof.
(13)
Give the name, home address and telephone number and place of employment of two (2) persons who are
residents of this county, who are familiar with your character and reputation.
(Ord. No. 69, § 1(e), 2-9-81)
Sec. 10-43. - Restrictions on license issuance.
No such license shall be issued to:
(1)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
198/414
A person who is not a resident of Columbia County, Richmond County, or McDuffie County, Georgia, and who
has not been a resident for six (6) months before the date of the application;
(2)
A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community;
(3)
A person who has been convicted of a felony or crime opposed to decency and morality;
(4)
A person whose license under this article has been revoked for cause;
(5)
A person, who at the time of the application for renewal of any license issued hereunder, would not be eligible
for such license under first application;
(6)
A partnership unless one (1) of the members of such partnership owning not less than five (5) percent interest
therein shall be qualified to obtain such a license;
(7)
A corporation if any officer, manager or director thereof, of any stockholder or stockholders owning in the
aggregate of more than five (5) percent of the stock in such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than residence within the county;
(8)
A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent possesses
the same qualifications required of the licensee.
(Ord. No. 69, § 1(d), 2-9-81)
Sec. 10-44. - Oath.
The following oath shall be required on the application:
All of the foregoing information is hereby given and all of the foregoing statements are hereby made on oath,
wilfully, knowingly and absolutely, and the same is hereby sworn to be true under penalty for false swearing, as
provided by law.
_____
Applicant's Signature
Sworn to and subscribed before me, this ;#rule; day of ;daterule;, 19 ____________.
_____
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
199/414
(Ord. No. 69, § 1(f), 2-9-81)
Sec. 10-45. - Granting or denying license; suspension or revocation.
The city council shall have the right and privilege of granting or declining, within sixty (60) days of the date of
application, a business license to conduct such business, and if the same shall be granted, it shall be subject,
however, to suspension or revocation for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing and upon three (3)
days prior written notice to holder of such receipt, the time, place and purpose of such hearing, and a statement
of the charges upon which such hearing shall be held. "Due cause" for the suspension or revocation of such
business license shall consist of a violation of any state or federal law by the person or any officer, agent,
representative or employee of the person.
(Ord. No. 69, § 1(g), 2-9-81)
Sec. 10-46. - License nontransferable; expiration date; renewable.
Such business license shall not be transferable, shall expire at the end of each calendar year and may be
renewable only in the manner provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 69, § 1(g), 2-9-81)
Sec. 10-47. - License rate.
The business license rate under this article shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each permanently
established location and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each week at each location for businesses operating at
a temporary location such as a motel room.
(Ord. No. 69, § 1(h), 2-9-81)
Sec. 10-48. - Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations are hereby established, and shall govern the conduct and operation of every
such place of business, and every person owning and operating such place of business:
(1)
Every person shall maintain a book, in permanent form, in which shall be entered in legible English at the time
of each purchase or sale the following information:
a.
The date of transaction;
b.
The name of the person conducting the transaction;
c.
The name and address of the customer, a description of the general appearance of the customer, and the number
from the customer's valid driver's license;
d.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
200/414
An identification and description of the purchased goods, or sold goods, including, if reasonably available, the
serial, model or other number, and all identifying marks inscribed thereon;
e.
The price paid;
f.
The number of the check issued for the purchase price;
g.
The signature of the customer.
(2)
Entries shall appear in chronological order in ink. No blank lines may be left between entries. No alterations or
erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying
its legibility. The book shall be open to the inspection of any officer of the police department or representative of
the city clerk during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time.
(3)
The record of each purchase or sale transaction, as herein provided, shall be maintained for a period of not less
than two (2) years.
(4)
All merchandise purchased shall be maintained for inspection by an officer of the police department or
representative of the city clerk for a period of not less than ten (10) days after the date of purchase.
(5)
No merchandise shall be purchased from any individual under eighteen (18) years of age.
(6)
Each person shall be required to furnish an updated list to the police department of all new employees, whether
temporary or permanent. All employees shall be subject to a thorough police check along the same standards as
set forth for the licensee, except for residency.
(7)
Each person operating with a business license to conduct the business described herein from any location may be
required by the mayor to have an off-duty city police officer or some other person approved by the mayor located
on or at such premises during all hours that the business is open. In any event, the chief of police or the mayor
may designate an individual, at any time, to inspect the premises, merchandise being bought or dealt in and may
require this person to be present during transactions.
(8)
Each person shall furnish a bond in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) in a form acceptable
by the city council to indemnify any person from loss on goods the dealer should not have purchased and which
did not belong to the seller thereof, to be deposited with the city clerk.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
201/414
(Ord. No. 69, § 1(i), 2-9-81)
Secs. 10-49, 10-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - BILLIARD AND POOL ROOMS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(22) Editor's note— Ord. No. 104, §§ 1—6, adopted September 14, 1992 did not specifically amend this Code;
hence, inclusion herein as Art. IV, §§ 10-51—10-56 was at the discretion of the editor.
Sec. 10-51. - License required.
Each person operating a billiard/pool room must first obtain a license at a cost of seventy-five dollars ($75.00)
plus ten dollars ($10.00) for each table.
(Ord. No. 104, § 1, 9-14-92)
Sec. 10-52. - Hours of operation.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or manager of any billiard/pool room to allow the establishment to be
open for business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
(Ord. No. 104, § 2, 9-14-92)
Sec. 10-53. - Age restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person having charge or control of any billiard/pool room open to the public to admit
anyone under the age of thirteen (13) whether for the purpose of playing billiards or not.
(Ord. No. 104, § 3, 9-14-92)
Sec. 10-54. - Obstructions.
It shall be unlawful to have any screens, partitions or separate room blocking the view of any billiard/pool table
from view through the windows or doors of the establishment where the tables are kept.
(Ord. No. 104, § 4, 9-14-92)
Sec. 10-55. - Lock restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for the doors of the billiard/pool room to be locked during hours of operation or when any
person other than the proprietor or his authorized agent is present.
(Ord. No. 104, § 5, 9-14-92)
Sec. 10-56. - Penalty.
Violation of this article or any part of this article will be considered a misdemeanor and will be tried as such.
(Ord. No. 104, § 6, 9-14-92)
Secs. 10-57—10-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - WRECKER AND TOWING COMPANIES
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
202/414
FOOTNOTE(S):
(23) Editor's note— Ord. No. 106, §§ 1—5, adopted August 9, 1993, did not specifically amend the Code;
hence, inclusion herein as Art. V, §§ 10-61—10-66, was at the discretion of the editor.
Sec. 10-61. - Wrecker and towing company to be on wrecker list.
In order for a wrecker or towing company to operate in the city for the purpose of towing vehicles at the request
of the Grovetown police department, they must be on the wrecker list maintained by the Grovetown police
department.
(Ord. No. 106, § 1, 8-9-93)
Sec. 10-62. - Requirements for wrecker list.
In order to be on the wrecker list for the Grovetown police department the company must:
(1)
Have a valid business license from the city.
(2)
Maintain a liability insurance policy in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00).
(3)
Have a secure storage lot with a minimum eight-foot high security fence.
(4)
Be within a ten-mile radius of the city limits of Grovetown.
(5)
Be available twenty-four (24) hours a day seven (7) days a week.
(Ord. No. 106, § 2, 8-9-93)
Sec. 10-63. - Maximum fees.
The maximum fee that can be charged for towing anywhere in the city limits of Grovetown or to the company's
storage lot is forty dollars ($40.00) and the maximum storage fee is seven dollars ($7.00) a day.
(Ord. No. 106, § 3, 8-9-93)
Sec. 10-64. - Soliciting business at any scene prohibited; exception.
It shall be illegal for any wrecker or towing company to respond to any scene involving the Grovetown police
department for the purpose of soliciting business unless said company is requested by the police department or
the owner/driver of a vehicle.
(Ord. No. 106, § 4, 8-9-93)
Sec. 10-65. - Wreckers at scene of accident required.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
203/414
Any wrecker responding to the scene of an accident will be required to clean up and remove any debris from the
vehicles involved.
(Ord. No. 106, § 5, 8-9-93)
Sec. 10-66. - Violations.
Any violations of sections 10-64 or 10-65 of this article will be considered a misdemeanor and will be tried as
such in the municipal court of Grovetown.
(Ord. No. 106, § 5, 8-9-93)
Secs. 10-67—10-84. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - ADULT BOOKSTORES/ENTERTAINMENT
Sec. 10-85. - Findings; public purpose.
Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas and
Garden Grove, California, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problem faced by the City of
Grovetown, Georgia; and based on the documentary evidence and oral testimony presented by a law enforcement
professional and an expert in economic development, both of whom are familiar with conditions resulting in
other localities, at the city council's hearing on May 14 and June 14, 2004; and based on the evidence and
testimony of persons who appeared before members of the city council on other occasions including the public
hearing conducted on May 14 and June 14, 2004 and on documentary evidence submitted to the city council, the
city council takes note of the well-known and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the
commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within
our country.
It is the finding of the City Council of Grovetown that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain
circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in
establishments offering live nude entertainment or "adult entertainment," (whether such alcoholic beverages are
sold on the premises or not) begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In
the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or video graphic adult entertainment have the same
deleterious effects on the community.
Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with the commercial combination of live nudity and
alcohol, live commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or video graphic adult entertainment are
disorderly conduct, prostitution, public solicitation, public indecency, drug use and drug trafficking. Among the
undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with the commercial combination of live
nudity and alcohol, commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or video graphic adult entertainment are
depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increase
allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on
the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described. The city council finds it is
reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in the City of
Grovetown, as well.
Furthermore, it is the finding of the city council that other forms of adult entertainment including, but not limited
to, adult book stores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, adult theaters, and massage parlors
have an adverse effect upon the quality of life surrounding communities.
The city council finds that the negative secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments upon the city are
similar whether the adult entertainment establishment features live nude dancing or sells video tapes depicting
sexual activities.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
204/414
The City Council of Grovetown, Georgia therefore finds it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety
and morals of the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools,
residential areas, public parks and children's day care facilities to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult
entertainment establishments. Therefore, the city council finds that licensing and regulations promote public
welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including but not limited to, reducing
criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions and further finds that
such will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To that end,
this article is hereby adopted.
(Ord. No. 158, § 1, 7-12-04)
Sec. 10-86. - Definitions.
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this article shall be as defined in the most recent edition
of the New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the above
book shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within
the context of the sentence and section in which they occur.
Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which more than twenty (20) square feet of floor space
is used for the display or offer for sale of any book or publication, film, or other medium which depicts sexually
explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who exposes his or her
"specified anatomical areas," as defined herein. For the purposes of this section, adult entertainers include
employees as well as independent contractors.
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on depiction, display or the
featuring of "specified anatomical areas."
Adult entertainment establishment shall be defined to include the following types of business:
(1)
Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity in the sale or service of
beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, so as to expose any
portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein.
(2)
Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such
attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or
where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities," as
defined herein;
(3)
Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows, any contest, promotion, special night,
event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of
the conduct described in sections (1) and (2) herein;
(4)
Any commercial establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock trade, books, magazines or
other periodicals, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" as
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
205/414
defined herein or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or having a segment or section comprising more
than ten (10) square feet of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives
more than ten (10) percent of its net sales from the sale or rental of such material. Further, said items shall not be
displayed in a public fashion and shall only be displayed in a separate room from the main part of the business
with access granted only to persons over the age of eighteen (18) and shall at all times be out of the reach of
small children;
(5)
Any commercial establishment utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used
for cinematographic or video graphic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as
defined herein, for observation by patrons therein;
(6)
Any adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult bookstore,
adult video store, adult hotel, as defined herein;
(7)
The definition of "adult entertainment establishment" shall not include traditional or live theater (mainstream
theater) which means theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution or similar establishment which
regularly features live performances which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
depiction, display, or description or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities"
in that depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance.
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas."
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than twenty-five (25)
persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or
relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted to be invited wherein paper
currency, coin- or slug-operated or electronically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per
machine at any one time and where images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of twenty-five (25) or more persons,
used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video
tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by and
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas," or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising ten (10) percent of its total floor space, devoted
to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than ten (10) percent of its net sales from videos
which are characterized or distinguished or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas."
Children's day care facility shall be defined as a structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and
supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day on a
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
206/414
regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this article the term "children's day care facility" shall include
but not limited to the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten,"
"play school," or "pre-school."
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment.
Owner means any individual or entity holding more than a twenty (20) percent interest in an adult entertainment
establishment.
Premises mean the defined, closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein adult
entertainment is performed.
Specified sexual activities shall be defined to mean and include any of the following:
(1)
Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct
physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use
of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or
conduct, anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism,
sapphism, zooerasty;
(2)
Use of human or animal ejaculations, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation;
(3)
Fondling or other erotic touching or nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast;
(4)
Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or
(5)
Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being.
Specified anatomical areas shall include the following:
(1)
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, cleft of the buttocks, or female
breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or
(2)
Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
(Ord. No. 158, § 2, 7-12-04)
Sec. 10-87. - License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, or corporation to operate, engage in, conduct, or
carry on, in or upon any premises within the incorporated area of the City of Grovetown an adult entertainment
establishment as defined in this article without first procuring an annual license to do so except as provided in
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
207/414
section 10-90 when the licensing and revenue manager fails to approve or deny an application for an adult
entertainment license within sixty (60) days as required by this article. The issuance of such an annual license
shall not be deemed to authorize, condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or
unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. No annual license for an adult entertainment
establishment shall be issued by the city if the premises to be used hold a license to sell alcoholic beverages or
malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. Any premises licensed as an adult entertainment
establishment shall not be eligible to apply at any time for a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages
and wine for consumption on the premises. There shall be an annual regulatory fee for each adult entertainment
establishment licensed within the city in the amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). Said license fee shall
increase dollar for dollar with any increases in the liquor license fees. The annual regulatory fee must be paid to
the licensing and revenue manager of the city within ten (10) days after the licensing and revenue manager
approves initial application for an adult entertainment establishment license or a renewal thereof.
(Ord. No. 158, § 3, 7-12-04)
Sec. 10-88. - License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, or corporation to operate, engage in, conduct, or
carry on, in or upon any premises within the incorporated area of the City of Grovetown an adult entertainment
establishment as defined in this article without first procuring an annual license to do so except as provided in
section 18-301(b) when the licensing and revenue manager fails to approve or deny an application for an adult
entertainment license within sixty (60) days as required by this article. The issuance of such an annual license
shall not be deemed to authorize, condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or
unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. No annual license for an adult entertainment
establishment shall be issued by the city if the premises to be used also holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages
or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. Any premises licensed as an adult entertainment
establishment shall not be eligible to apply at any time for a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages
and wine for consumption on the premises. There shall be an annual regulatory fee for each adult entertainment
establishment licensed within the City of Grovetown in the amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). Said
license fee shall increase dollar for dollar with any increase in the liquor license fees. The annual regulatory fee
must be paid to the licensing and revenue manager of the city within ten (10) days after the licensing and revenue
manager approves the initial application for an adult entertainment establishment license or a renewal thereof. In
the event, no adult entertainment establishment license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the most recent
annual regulatory fee has been paid. All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 or each year.
Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file an application with the licensing and revenue manager on
the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before
November 30 of each year. Any renewal application received after November 30 shall pay, in addition to said
annual regulatory fee, a late charge of twenty (20) percent. If a license renewal application is received after
January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply
with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license has been held. If a license
application is received after January 1, investigative and administrative costs as hereinafter set forth in this
article will be assessed. All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full annual
regulatory fee must be paid for a license renewal application. Any person renewing any license issued hereunder
who shall pay the annual regulatory fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to said
regulatory fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by
the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes.
(Ord. No. 158, § 3, 7-12-04)
Sec. 10-89. - On-premises operator required.
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person(s) to serve as an on-premises operator. The
operator(s) shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all
operating hours.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
208/414
(Ord. No. 158, § 4, 7-12-04)
Sec. 10-90. - Application process and qualifications.
(a)
Process. Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in,
conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment in the city shall make application to the licensing and
revenue manager of the City of Grovetown. Such application shall be made on forms furnished by the city, shall
be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment by an applicant who is a natural person and an
agent of the adult entertainment establishment and shall include the name(s) of the operator(s) as defined herein
and of the owner(s) as defined herein. If the adult entertainment establishment is a corporation, then the agent for
purposes of making application for a license hereunder shall be an officer of the corporation. If the adult
entertainment establishment is a partnership, the agent for such purposes shall be a general partner. At the time of
submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee payable in cash or by certified check in the amount of three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00) shall be paid to the licensing and revenue manager to defray, in part, the cost of
investigation and report required by this article. The licensing and revenue manager shall issue a receipt showing
that such application fee had been paid. The application for license does not authorize the operation of, engaging
in, conduct or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment.
(b)
Contents. Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following
information:
(1)
The full true name and any other names used by the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s);
(2)
The present address and telephone number of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s);
(3)
The previous addresses of the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), if any, for a period of five (5) years
immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each;
(4)
Acceptable written proof that the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s) are at least eighteen (18) years of
age;
(5)
The operator(s)' height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth;
(6)
Two (2) photographs of the operator(s) at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches taken within the last six (6)
months;
(7)
The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s) for the five (5)
years immediately preceding the date of application;
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
209/414
(8)
The business license history of the adult entertainment establishment seeking a license and whether such
establishment, in previous operations in this or any other location under license, had had such license or permit
for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the
business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of revocation or suspension;
(9)
If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the name of the corporation, exactly as shown in its articles
of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation. If the application is on behalf of a
limited partnership, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership filed with the city or county clerk shall be
provided. If one (1) or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to
corporations shall apply;
(10)
The names and addresses of the owner and leaser of the real property upon which the adult entertainment
establishment is to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on and a copy of the lease or rental agreement;
(11)
With respect to the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), all convictions, (excluding misdemeanor traffic
violations unrelated to driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol) within the past five (5) years, including a
complete description of the crime or violation, the date of the crime or violation, date of conviction (including
plea of guilty or nolo contendere), jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and
whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. Each person required to disclose convictions
hereunder shall also provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime
Information Center, authorizing the release of his or her criminal records to the permits unit of the City of
Grovetown police department;
(12)
A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and the operator(s);
(13)
If the person or business entity on whose behalf application for a license is doing business under a trade name, a
copy of the trade name as properly recorded. If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, a copy of its
authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last
annual report, if any;
(14)
At least five (5) character references for the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s) from individuals who are in
no way related to the applicant or any operator(s) or owner(s) and who will not benefit financially in any way
from the application if the license is granted. Further, none of the references may be related to each other and
each must be a resident of the City of Grovetown. The city shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of
this subsection for the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s), who shall submit all character references on such
forms;
(15)
The address of the premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in,
conducted, or carried on;
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
210/414
(16)
A plat by a registered engineer or a registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing the location of the
proposed premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted or
carried on in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any residential area, church,
school, public park or children's day care facility, establishment selling alcoholic beverages or malt beverages
and wine or other adult entertainment establishment;
(17)
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath
to be true and correct by:
a.
If the application is made on behalf of an individual, the individual;
b.
If application is made on behalf of a partnership, by a general partner;
c.
If application is made on behalf of a corporation, by the president of the corporation;
d.
If application is made on behalf of any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official.
(c)
Appearance by applicant. The applicant shall personally appear before the licensing and revenue manager and
produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, in the amount established by resolution of the city council,
has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information.
(d)
Investigation; standards for granting a license. The city shall have sixty (60) days from the date of actual receipt
of the application to investigate the facts provided in the application and the background of the applicant, the
operator(s) and owner(s). The licensing and revenue manager of the city shall stamp the date of actual receipt of
each application on the first page thereof and notify the applicant of the actual receipt of the application within
five (5) business days of actual receipt of such application. The licensing and revenue manager of the City of
Grovetown shall approve or deny any application for an adult entertainment establishment license within sixty
(60) days of actual receipt of such application. The application for an adult entertainment establishment license
shall be granted if the licensing and revenue manager finds:
(1)
The required three thousand dollar ($3,000.00) investigative fee has been paid;
(2)
The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application;
(3)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
211/414
Neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of
nolo contendere to any crime involving keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency,
prostitution, sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, masturbation for hire, sexual battery, rape, child molestation,
enticing a child for indecent purposes, or any other offense included in the definition of a "criminal offense
against a victim who is a minor" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 within a period of five (5) years. For purposes
of this article, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the
applicant was allowed to avail himself of the Georgia First Offender Act unless the applicant is later adjudicated
guilty having violated the terms of his first offender treatment;
(4)
Neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has had an adult entertainment establishment license
or other similar license or permit revoked for cause by the city or any other county or municipality or any other
governmental entity located in or out of this state prior to the date of application within the preceding five (5)
years;
(5)
The building, structure, equipment and location of the premises of the adult entertainment establishment as
proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning,
distance, fire and safety requirements and standards;
(6)
The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
(7)
On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be an
operator(s) as defined herein on the premises at all times during which the business is open;
(8)
The proposed premises will be located at least the minimum distances set forth in this article from any residential
use, church, school, public park or children's daycare facility or establishment licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises, or another adult entertainment
establishment; and
(9)
The grant of such license will not cause a violation of and will not be in conflict with this article or any other law,
ordinance or regulation, of the City of Grovetown, the State of Georgia or the United States.
The licensing and revenue manager or the city shall deny the application for an adult entertainment establishment
if the application fails to meet any requirement contained in the City of Grovetown's ordinance regulating adult
entertainment establishments.
(Ord. No. 158, § 5, 7-12-04)
Sec. 10-91. - Regulation of adult entertainment establishments.
(a)
Location. No adult entertainment establishment shall be located:
(1)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
212/414
Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land which is used for residential uses or purposes ("residential
area");
(2)
Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land on which a church, school, college campus, municipal or
city or county or state owned building, public park, public or private playground, or children's day care facility is
located or any business that is for or directly targeted at children;
(3)
Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment authorized to sell alcoholic
beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises is located;
(4)
In any zoning district other than C-2 or C-3 commercial district; or
(5)
Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment
regulated or defined hereunder is located.
For purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest points
on the property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land
capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit.
(b)
Adult entertainment establishment employees.
(1)
Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than eighteen (18) years of
age. No employee employed as an adult entertainer shall have been convicted of an offense described in section
10-90(d)(3) of this article within five (5) years immediately preceding the proposed employment at or by an adult
entertainment establishment. Any adult entertainer who is convicted of any such crimes while employed as an
adult entertainer shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five (5) years from the date of
such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "licensed
premises" shall mean the premises where an adult entertainment establishment for which a license is obtained
pursuant to this article operates, conducts or carries on its business. The term "convicted" shall include an
adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime in a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(2)
Permit for employment. Before any person may work as an adult entertainer on licensed premises, as defined in
subsection (1), he or she shall file a notice with the city police permits unit of his or her intended employment on
forms supplied by the city police permits unit and shall receive a permit for such employment from the city
police permits unit. The prospective employee shall supply a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed
by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of his or her criminal records to the city police
department. The prospective employee shall also provide a list of all of his or her convictions of offenses
described in section 10-90 of this article (including pleas of nolo contendere) within the past five (5) years. The
city police permits unit shall approve or deny the permit within fifteen (15) days of the application. If the
prospective employee is found to meet the requirements of this subsection (b), then upon payment of the permit
fee, the city police department shall issue a permit approving such employment within forty-eight (48) hours. If
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
213/414
such permit is not issued within forty-eight (48) hours of such finding, the employee seeking the permit may
commence work at the adult entertainment establishment which is the subject of the permit application without
such a permit. Upon receipt of a permit, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval
is denied and the prospective employee may, within ten (10) days of said denial, appeal to the city council, which
shall uphold or reverse the decision within sixty (60) days of such appeal. The annual permit fee shall be three
hundred sixty-five dollars ($365.00).
(3)
Suspension or revocation of permit; procedure. Violation by an adult entertainer of the provisions of this article
and/or conviction of an offense described in section 10-90(d)(3) of this article shall subject an adult entertainer to
suspension or revocation of the permit for employment. Whenever the licensing and revenue manager finds that
reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a permit for employment issued hereunder, the licensing and
revenue manager shall schedule a hearing before the alcohol license and permit appeal board to consider such
action and shall notify the employee at least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing of the time and place of the
hearing and the proposed action and grounds therefor. The employee shall be entitled to present evidence and
cross-examine witnesses with or without legal counsel. The alcohol license and permit appeal board shall make
its decision within ten (10) days of the hearing and shall notify the employee promptly in writing. In the event
that a permit for employment is suspended or revoked by the city council, a five hundred dollar ($500.00) appeal
cost shall be assessed against the permit holder.
(4)
Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors working as adult entertainers
shall be considered as employees and shall be required to satisfy the provisions of this article relating to
employees of adult entertainment establishments, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or
licensee of any adult entertainment establishment.
(c)
Hours of operation. An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
11:59 p.m.
d)
Display of licenses. An adult entertainment establishment license shall conspicuously display the license
required by this article.
(e)
Performance area. All dancing by adult entertainers at adult entertainment establishments shall occur on a
platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least eighteen (18) inches from the level of the floor.
(f)
Lighting. All areas of an adult entertainment establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times
patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 foot-candles per square foot.
(g)
Covering of windows and doors. All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this article shall be
carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside
cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building.
(h)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
214/414
Parking lot and surrounding area. All adult entertainment establishments shall maintain a well illuminated
parking lot and area surrounding the building.
(i)
Any property annexed into the city limits of Grovetown, Georgia shall have sixty (60) days from the date of
annexation to comply with these provisions or to cease operating.
(Ord. No. 158, § 6, 7-12-04)
Sec. 10-92. - Conduct or activities prohibited.
(a)
Advertising without license. No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be
advertised as adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued
pursuant to this article.
(b)
Employment of minors or unpermitted persons. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or
contract with a person under the age of eighteen (18) years or as adult entertainer who has not obtained a permit
pursuant to this article.
(c)
Sale, consumption of alcohol. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer
the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine or controlled substance upon
the premises of the licensee.
(d)
Contact between patrons, employees. No dancing or other performance by an adult entertainer at an adult
entertainment establishment shall occur closer than four (4) feet to any patron. No patron, customer or guest shall
be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of or any part of the body or clothing of any
adult entertainer. No patrol shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any adult entertainer. No adult entertainer
shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
(e)
Engaging in specified sexual activities prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at
an adult entertainment establishment shall be allowed to engage in any specified sexual activity as defined herein
on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment.
(f)
Public indecency prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult
entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the
offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8.
(Ord. No. 158, § 7, 7-12-04)
Sec. 10-93. - Penalty for violation.
Any person violating any of the provisions of section 10-92 of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or by imprisonment for a
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
215/414
period not to exceed six (6) months and probation for a period to not exceed twelve (12) months, or all of the
above. Each day of operation in violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 158, § 1, 7-12-04)
Sec. 10-94. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance.
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to
or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceedings for abatement,
removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It may take such other steps and shall apply to
such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment
establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on an adult
entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 158, § 1, 7-12-04)
Sec. 10-95. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment.
(a)
Cleaning of licensed premises. All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition,
and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city, county, and the state.
(b)
Inspection of licensed premises. The city fire marshal shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult
entertainment establishments, to determine compliance with and enforce all applicable fire, health and other
codes of the city and county.
(c)
Inspection for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The city police department shall have the authority to
periodically inspect all provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws.
(Ord. No. 158, § 1, 7-12-04)
Sec. 10-96. - Denial, suspension or revocation of license; hearing.
(a)
Grounds.
(1)
A license may be denied to persons or entities that have submitted an incomplete application or that have failed
to satisfy any of the requirements of the city's ordinance regulating adult entertainment establishments found at
sections 10-86 through 10-91 of this Code.
(2)
Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license:
a.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
216/414
The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which is material and is later found
to be false;
b.
Violation of any of the regulations or prohibitions of this article;
c.
With respect to the applicant, operator(s) and owner(s), conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to
any of the crimes which would make such person or adult entertainment establishment ineligible to hold a
license under section 10-90(d) above.
(b)
Denial; procedure. Within sixty (60) days of actual receipt of an application for an adult entertainment
establishment license, the licensing and revenue manager shall either approve or deny the application. In no
event shall the licensing and revenue manager's decision whether to approve or deny the adult entertainment
establishment license application be withheld for more than sixty (60) days after actual receipt of the application.
In the event that such an application is held without decision for a period of more than sixty (60) days, however,
the license application shall be deemed approved, and expressive conduct may begin immediately
notwithstanding the fact that no license has been issued. The director of the city's finance department shall issue
an adult entertainment establishment license to an applicant who informs the director of finance of the fact that
an application has been submitted, but no decision has been made thereon for a period of more than sixty (60)
days following actual receipt of the application. Notwithstanding the fact that the license provided by this
sentence shall not be a prerequisite to the commencement of business operations contemplated by the
application, the director of the city's finance department shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license
under such circumstances within ten (10) business days of actual receipt of written notice by the applicant of
such circumstances. In the event that the licensing and revenue manager denies an application for an adult
entertainment establishment license, notice of such denial shall be delivered to the applicant in person or by
certified mail within five (5) business days of such denial. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city, its
officials, employees or agents, pursuant to this article, may seek review of such decision by first filing an appeal
to the city council and then filing an appropriate pleading in the superior court of the county or any other court of
competent jurisdiction including, but not limited to, a mandamus petition pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 9-6-20—9-6-
28.
(c)
Suspension or revocation; procedure. Whenever the alcohol license and permit appeal board finds reasonable
grounds exist to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the board shall schedule a hearing, notify the
licensee of the time and date of the hearing and the proposed action and the grounds therefor. The license shall
be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine any witnesses at the hearing, with or without legal counsel.
The alcohol license and permit appeal board shall make its decision within ten (10) days of the hearing and shall
notify the licensee in writing within five (5) business days of the decision.
(Ord. No. 158, § 11, 7-12-04)
Sec. 10-97. - Miscellaneous.
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is
otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under applicable code, regulation or statute which provides any
prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by
this article shall only by allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such
prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
217/414
The use of peep shows as well as private showings shall be prohibited.
(Ord. No. 158, § 12, 7-12-04)
Sec. 10-98. - Severability.
If any portion or subsection of this article or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected.
(Ord. No. 158, § 1, 7-12-04)
Sec. 10-99. - Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse.
Any holder of any license hereunder who shall for a period of three (3) consecutive months after the license has
been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall after said threemonth period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action.
(Ord. No. 158, § 14, 7-12-04)
Sec. 10-100. - Physical layout of establishment.
Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room, or
cubicle for the private viewing of adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements:
(1)
Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of
establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view obstructing
devices or materials.
(2)
Construction. Every room shall meet the following construction requirements:
a.
Each room shall be separated from adjacent rooms and any nonpublic areas by a wall.
b.
Have at least one (1) side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of
anyone occupying same.
c.
All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six (6) feet and
be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable.
d.
The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned.
e.
The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten candles at all times,
as measured from the floor.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
218/414
f.
The building must be constructed or be remolded or retrofitted in such a manner as to be handicapped accessible
and comply with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act and all subsequent amendments of said Act.
g.
No booth or cubicles shall be permitted.
(3)
Occupants. Only one (1) individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall
engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No
individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle.
(Ord. No. 158, § 15, 7-12-04)
Chapter 11 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(24) Charter reference— Abatement of lewd houses, gambling houses and disorderly houses, § 31; preventing
idleness and loitering, § 41.
Sec. 11-1. - Alcoholic beverages—Consuming on city property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on any city-owned property.
(Ord. No. 64, § 1, 4-9-79)
Sec. 11-2. - Same—Public drunkenness.
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear on the streets of the city or in any other public place therein while
such person is in a drunken or intoxicated condition through the use of, or indulgence in, alcoholic spirits, wine,
liquor, whiskey, beer, drugs or marijuana.
(Ord. No. 40, § 4, 8-26-68)
State law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41.
Sec. 11-3. - Possession of drugs or marijuana.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, compound, mix, cultivate, grow or otherwise prepare or
produce, sell, barter, smoke, exchange, give away, dispense, distribute, leave with, dispose of, deliver,
administer, prescribe or offer to do any of them, possess or have under his control any marijuana, except bona
fide medical or scientific purposes, or for the bona fide purpose of applying marijuana for such medical or
scientific purposes.
(b)
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, compound, smoke, mix, cultivate, grow or otherwise prepare
or produce, or possess or have under his control any marijuana on or near grounds of any school, college or other
educational institution, or any prison, jail, reformatory or other penal or corrective institution, or to sell, barter,
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
219/414
exchange, give away, dispense, distribute, leave with, dispose of, deliver, administer, prescribe or offer to do any
of them, any marijuana to any person attending any school, college or other educational institution, or to any
inmate of any prison, jail, reformatory or other penal or corrective institution.
(c)
The provisions of this section shall not apply to common carriers or to warehousemen, while engaged in lawfully
transacting their business as such, or to any employee of the same acting within the scope of his employment; or
to public officers or their employees in the performance of their official duties requiring possession or control of
marijuana; or to temporary incidental possession by employees or agents of persons lawfully entitled to
possession, or by persons whose possession is for the purpose of aiding public officers in performing their
official duties.
(d)
The following words and phrases, as used in this section, shall have the following meanings, unless the context
otherwise requires:
(1)
Marijuana includes the following substances, by whatever names they may be designated:
a.
The dried, flowering or fruiting tops of the pistillate plant Cannabis Sativa L.,
b.
The resin extracted from such tops; and
c.
Every compound, manufacture, salt derivative, mixture of preparation of such resin, or such tops from which
resin has not been extracted.
(2)
Medical purposes include only such uses as may be prescribed or authorized in the course of his professional
practice by a person:
a.
Authorized by law to practice medicine, dentistry or veterinary medicine, or by any other person authorized by
law to treat sick or injured human beings or animals.
(3)
Person includes any corporation, association, copartnership or one (1) or more individuals.
(4)
Scientific purposes include any such use for research, instruction or analysis.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in such person's possession, or to use, within the city any amount of
any portion of the vegetable plant Cannabis Sativa L., commonly known as marijuana, or any habit forming
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
220/414
narcotic drug. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to make legal the possession of legitimate medical
drugs, which have in fact been appropriately prescribed and dispensed by physicians and pharmacists.
(Ord. No. 40, § 5, 8-26-68; Ord. No. 167-02, § 1, 7-11-05)
State law reference— Municipal court jurisdiction of marijuana cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6; controlled
substances, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-1 et seq.
Sec. 11-4. - Foul, etc., language and writing.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, display or write words of foul, dirty, obscene, indecent or offensive
nature upon any wall or other public place within the city.
(Ord. No. 40, § 6, 8-26-68)
State law reference— Profane and vulgar language, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39; distributing obscene materials,
O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80.
Sec. 11-5. - Firearms.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a peace officer in the performance of official duty, or any person in
the lawful defense of person or property, to discharge any firearm.
(Ord. No. 40, § 21, 8-26-68)
State law reference— Possession of weapons, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-120 et seq.
Sec. 11-6. - Air rifles; air pistols.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge an air rifle, air pistol or BB gun within the city or to allow or
permit such person's child to so act.
(Ord. No. 40, § 24, 8-26-68)
Sec. 11-7. - Definitions.
The following words shall have the following meanings as described to them herein for the purposes of sections
11-7—11-7.2.
Artifice: An artful device or strategy, or trickery.
Assemble: To bring or gather into a group.
Befoul: To soil or make dirty.
Brawl: A noisy argument or fight.
Congregate: To bring or come together in a crowd.
Damage: Impair or injure the usefulness or value of person or property.
Device: A plan or scheme.
Endanger: To expose to danger or harm.
Epithets: A derogatory or abusive word or phrase used as a descriptive substitute for the name or title of a person
or thing.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
221/414
Fighting words: Words used in an argument or quarrel which are assertive or combative.
Fraudulent scheme: A deliberate plan, deception, or trick practiced so as to secure an unfair or unlawful gain
over someone.
Gaming: Gambling, or betting money on the outcome of a game or contest, or to play a game of chance for
stakes.
Hazardous: Dangerous.
Lawful occupation: Any regular employment which is allowed, established, sanctioned or recognized by the law.
Lawful pursuits: Any activity regularly engaged in which is allowed, established, sanctioned or recognized by
the law.
Obscene: Offensive to accepted standards of decency, or offensive or repulsive to the senses.
Physically offensive: Disagreeable to the senses.
Provoke: To cause someone or something to take action.
Public property: Any property which is maintained for or used by the people or community.
Riotous conduct: Unrestrained, disorderly, or uncontrolled behavior which causes a disturbance of the public
peace.
Trick: An indirect, often deceptive or fraudulent means of achieving an end.
Tumultuous: Confusedly or violently agitated so as to cause commotion, noise, or a great disturbance.
Turmoil: Utter confusion or agitation.
Unlawful activities: Any activity engaged in which is not allowed, established, sanctioned or recognized by the
law.
Utters: To express by means of speech.
Violent: Characterized or caused by great physical force or rough action.
(Ord. No. 100, § 1, 1-4-91)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 100, § 1, adopted January 4, 1991, deleted § 11-7 and added new §§ 11-7—11-7.2. Former § 11-7
pertained to disturbing the peace, and derived from Ord. No. 2, adopted January 12, 1960.
Sec. 11-7.1. - Disorderly conduct.
Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following in the city shall be guilty of disorderly conduct:
(1)
Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in
danger of safety of his life, limb, or health.
(2)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
222/414
Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property
of another person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged.
(3)
Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence or threats of bodily harm.
(4)
Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life,
limb, health, or property of another or public property.
(5)
Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and cause, provoke or engage in any fight
or brawl.
(6)
Any person who shall collect in bodies or in crowds and engage in unlawful activities.
(7)
Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and engage or attempt to engage in gaming.
(8)
Any person who shall frequent any public place and obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent
scheme, trick, artifice, or device, or attempt to do so.
(9)
Any person who assembles with another or others and engages in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to
obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person, or attempts to do so.
(10)
Any person who utters, in a public place or any place open to the public, any obscene words or epithets.
(11)
Any person who frequents any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or
narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated.
(12)
Any person who shall use fighting words directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates
turmoil.
(13)
Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and do bodily harm to another.
(14)
Any person who shall, by acts of violence, interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
223/414
(15)
Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or
other person having authority.
(16)
Any person, who damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a
hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition.
(17)
Any person, not a student or officer or employee of any public school within the city and not required by his
employment to be on the campus of any such school, who enters any such campus when it reasonably appears to
the security officer of such school that such person is committing any act likely to interfere with the peaceful
conduct of the activities of the campus, or has entered the campus for the purpose of committing such act and
fails or refuses to leave such campus when directed to do so by said security officer.
(18)
Any person loitering or prowling within the city generally. For purposes of this subsection, loitering or prowling
means being in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that
warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the
fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself or
manifestly conceals himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it
impracticable, law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this Code subsection, afford
the person the opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by
requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of
an offense under this subsection if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or
if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or
immediate concern.
(19)
Any person loitering within the city for certain purposes, including for the purpose of begging, unlawful
gambling with cards, dice or other gambling paraphernalia, engaging or soliciting another person to engage in
prostitution, with the intent to interfere with or disrupt a school program or with intent to interfere with or
endanger school children, in a school building or on school grounds or within two hundred (200) feet of school
grounds when persons under the age of eighteen (18) are present in the building or on the grounds, not having
any reason or relationship involving custody or responsibility for a pupil or other specific, legitimate reason for
being there, and having been asked to leave by a school administrator or his representative or by a law
enforcement officer. The term loiter as used herein shall mean to be dilatory, to stand idly around, to linger, delay
or wander about, or to remain, abide, or tarry in a public place within the city. It shall be an affirmative defense
to a violation of this section that the defendant's acts were lawful and he was exercising his rights of lawful
assembly as a part of peaceful and orderly petition for the redress of grievances, either in the course of labor
disputes or otherwise.
(20)
Any person loitering within the city in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose to engage in
drug related activity contrary to any provisions of Chapter 13 of Title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia
Annotated. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is
manifested are:
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
224/414
a.
Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller. For purposes of this section, a known unlawful
drug user, possessor or seller is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted
in any court within this state of any violation involving the use, possession or sale of any substances defined as
controlled substances or dangerous drugs in Chapter 13 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or such
person has been convicted of any violation of any of the provisions of said chapters of the Official Code of
Georgia Annotated or substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or of any political
subdivision of this state or of any other state; or a person who displays physical characteristics of drug
intoxication or usage, such as needle tracks; or a person who possesses drug related objects as defined in
O.C.G.A. § 16-13-32.
b.
Such person is currently subject to an order prohibiting his/her presence in a high drug activity geographic area.
c.
Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is
then engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity, including by way of example only, such person acting as a
lookout.
d.
Such person is physically identified by the officer as a member of a gang, or association which has as its purpose
illegal drug activity.
e.
Such person transfers small objects or packages for currency in a furtive fashion.
f.
Such person takes flight upon the appearance of law enforcement officer.
g.
Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object which reasonably could be
involved in an unlawful drug-related activity.
h.
The area involved is by public repute known to be an area of unlawful drug use and trafficking.
i.
The premises involved are known to have been reported to law enforcement as a place suspected of drug activity.
(21)
Any person who shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any
private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which intoxicated
condition, is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or
unbecoming language.
(Ord. No. 100, § 1, 1-4-91; Ord. No. 168-02, § 1, 7-11-05)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
225/414
State law reference— Offenses against public order, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-30 et seq.
Sec. 11-7.2. - Failure to comply.
Any person or persons failing to comply with the lawful provisions hereof or doing any acts prohibited hereby or
failing to do any act mandated hereby shall be guilty of an offense, and upon trial as a misdemeanor and
conviction shall be punished by a fine in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or
imprisonment in the Grovetown Detention Center for a period not to exceed six (6) months.
(Ord. No. 100, § 1, 1-4-91; Ord. No. 168-02, § 2, 7-11-05)
Sec. 11-8. - Loitering; curfew for minors.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18), in the incorporated area of Grovetown, Georgia
to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other
public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusements, eating places, vacant lots or any place
unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on
any week day and 5:00 a.m. on the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the effective
hours are between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. on the following day; and provided further that the provisions
of this section shall not apply in the following instances:
(1)
When a minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and
custody of the minor;
(2)
When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person
having the lawful care and custody of such minor;
(3)
When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above
referenced places during the proscribed period of time;
(4)
When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment
rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion.
(b)
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any child under the age
of eighteen (18) years to permit, or by insufficient control to allow such child to be in or upon the public streets
or other places listed in subsection (a) above within the incorporated area of the city between the hours of 11:00
p.m. on any weekday and 5:00 a.m. the following day or on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following day except in circumstances set out in subsections (1) through (4) of said
subsection (a).
(c)
Any person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be charged with such violation and if found guilty in
the municipal court of the city, such person shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
226/414
dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment in the city jail for a period not in excess of sixty (60) days; provided,
however, that any such person under the age of seventeen (17) years who is charged with a violation of this
section shall be referred to juvenile court for disposition pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 15-11-36.
(Ord. No. 40, § 23, 8-26-68; Ord. No. 115, §§ 1—3, 8-22-94)
State law reference— Loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36.
Sec. 11-9. - Destruction of city property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully destroy any city owned property. In addition to punishment, such
person shall be liable for repairs to damaged property.
(Ord. No. 64, § 2, 4-9-79)
Cross reference— Damaging water meters, § 9-33; damaging wastewater facilities, § 9-47.
State law reference— Criminal damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq.
Sec. 11-10. - Performances harmful to minors.
(a)
It shall be unlawful to knowingly admit minors under the age of eighteen (18) years to performances conducted
in or on any property within the city in which live sexually explicit presentations of the following nature which
are harmful to minors are rendered or to sell tickets to such minors for such performances:
(1)
Nudity involving the showing of male or female genitals or buttocks or nipples of female breasts; or
(2)
Simulations of acts of sexual intercourse or masturbation or the showing of erections of the male penis regardless
of whether or not performers making such simulations and showings are clothed or unclothed; or
(3)
Pictures or models in conjunction with performances for the purpose of portraying sexual organs or sexual
conduct prohibited in the foregoing paragraphs; or
(4)
Portrayals of sadomasochistic abuse involving torture or whipping or other assault of one (1) person upon
another, particularly where one (1) or both or all parties are clad in undergarments or other thin attire or masks or
costumes or where the victim is physically restrained in any manner.
(b)
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit himself or herself to an audience attended by minors under the age
of eighteen (18) years in the manner forbidden in the foregoing section or to actively use before such audiences
objects or pictures or language forbidden by the foregoing section, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
direct or manage or promote a presentation forbidden by subsection (a) of this section before such audiences.
(c)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
227/414
The term "harmful to minors" means that quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, or
nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse, when it:
(1)
Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of minors, and
(2)
As patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
material for minors, and
(3)
Is utterly without redeeming social importance for minors.
(Ord. No. 87, §§ 1—3, 5-8-89)
Sec. 11-11. - Smoking in publicly-owned buildings prohibited.
(a)
Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
Public building is defined as any enclosed building, structure or indoor facility owned, operated, leased or
managed by the city which are used by or open to the public.
Smoking shall mean inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant or other
combustible substance in any manner or in any form.
(b)
No person shall smoke in any public building with the exceptions of the above stated areas.
(c)
Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed, interpreted, or construed to permit smoking in any public place or
area where smoking is prohibited or restricted by any other applicable law.
(d)
"No Smoking" signs with letters of not less than one (1) inch in height shall be conspicuously posted in every
building, structure or facility or other place.
(e)
If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any person or circumstances are held to be invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this section which can be given effect without
the valid provisions or application, and to this end, the provisions of this section are severable.
(f)
Any person violating this section shall be tried in the city court of Grovetown, Georgia. Upon conviction, a
violation of this section may be punished by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both.
(Ord. No. 120, §§ 1—6, 7-10-95)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
228/414
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 120, §§ 1—6, adopted July 10, 1995, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as §
11-11 was at the discretion of the editor.
Sec. 11-12. - Misconduct by companies which provide services to city.
Any company who shall fail to maintain services with the city due to willful misconduct will not be allowed to
conduct business with the city for a period of one (1) year. The year will begin at the date of which the city
deems the services to be discontinued due to willful misconduct.
(Ord. No. 156, 4-12-04)
Sec. 11-13. - Prostitution; transporting for purpose of prostitution or sodomy prohibited.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to commit or offer or agree to commit an act of prostitution or
to knowingly aid, abet or participate in an act of prostitution.
(b)
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, procure, offer to procure, arrange or agree to arrange a
meeting of two (2) or more persons for the purpose of engaging in prostitution, to aid, abet, entice or coerce
another person into committing an act of prostitution, to solicit a person to engage in any act of prostitution, or to
receive anything of value from a person engaged in prostitution in return for any act defined as unlawful under
this section.
(c)
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly transport a person into or within the city for the purpose of
promoting that person's engaging in prostitution, sodomy for hire, masturbation for hire, or pandering.
(d)
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly receive, offer or agree to receive another into any place or building
for the purpose of performing an act of prostitution, sodomy for hire, masturbation for hire, or pandering, or
knowingly to permit others to remain there for either such purpose.
(e)
Any person who, while a pedestrian or in a motor vehicle, in or near any thoroughfare or place open to the
public, attempts to induce, entice, solicit or procure another to commit an act of prostitution, sodomy for hire,
masturbation for hire, or pandering shall be guilty of idling and loitering for the purpose of committing an illicit
sexual act.
(f)
For the purpose of subsection (e), any person shall also include panderers or solicitors of sexual acts, commonly
referred to as johns or tricks, who loiter in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of
participating in, procuring, purchasing or soliciting and sexual acts for hire made illegal by state law. Among the
circumstances which may be considered in determining whether this purpose is manifested are that such person,
while a pedestrian or in a motor vehicle, repeatedly beckons to, attempts to stop, engages or attempts to stop,
engages or attempts to engage in conversation with any person by hailing, waiving of arms or bodily gesture for
the purpose of inducting, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution, sodomy for
hire, masturbation for hire, or pandering.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
229/414
(Ord. No. 165-02, § 1, 7-11-05)
Sec. 11-14. - Disorderly house.
(a)
A person who keeps and maintains, either by himself or others, a common, ill governed, and disorderly house, to
the encouragement of gaming, drinking, or other misbehavior, or to the common disturbance of the
neighborhood or orderly citizens is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(b)
An "ill governed or disorderly house" shall be deemed to include any place or residence or business, wherein any
person or persons engage in gaming, drinking or other misbehavior so as to disturb, annoy or interfere with the
rights of others.
(Ord. No. 166-02, § 1, 7-11-05)
Sec. 11-15. - Vagrancy.
(a)
Vagrant is any able bodied person who has no visible means of supporting himself and is not engaged in the
pursuit of some business or occupation calculated to maintain and support himself, and who shall remain within
the city after being warned to depart there from by the mayor or the Grovetown Department of Public Safety,
shall be punished as provided herein.
(b)
Any person who shall knowingly and willingly bring or introduce, or cause to be brought or introduced, into the
city, any pauper, vagrant or any person not having property to support him, and who is unable or unwilling to
work or otherwise support himself, with intent to make such pauper or vagrant or person chargeable upon the
charity of the city, or the citizens thereof, shall be punished as provided herein.
(Ord. No. 166-02, § 2, 7-11-05)
Sec. 11-16. - Children—Duty of public safety department to report truants.
Every child of school age found upon the streets of the city during regular school hours, holidays excepted, by
any officer of the Grovetown Public Safety Department, shall be stopped and examined by such officer as to the
reason for being out of school and upon the streets, and such officer shall make a written report upon a form to
be provided by the board of education of the county, which form shall contain a space for the child's name, age,
the names of his parents or guardian, his address, together with the child's reasons for being out of school at the
time. Such officer shall turn in such report to his superior officers at the Grovetown Department of Public Safety
in the same manner as other reports are handled. It shall be the duty of the Grovetown Department of Public
Safety to immediately turn over such reports to the superintendent of schools of the county, daily. The authority
of the Grovetown Department of Public Safety shall not extend further than to make such report as required
above. No arrests shall be made for failure by such child to explain why he was out of school during school
hours.
(Ord. No. 164-02, § 1, 7-11-05)
Sec. 11-17. - Officers of the Grovetown Department of Public Safety—Assaulting, interfering with, etc.,
prohibited.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
230/414
It shall be unlawful for any person to assault, strike or in any way oppose, molest, interfere with, interrupt or
abuse, by word or act, any officer of the Grovetown Department of Public Safety in the execution of his duty.
(Ord. No. 164-02, § 2, 7-11-05)
Sec. 11-18. - Impersonation of law enforcement officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate or attempt to impersonate or otherwise pass himself off as a
law enforcement officer or other person invested by the State of Georgia with the authority of a law enforcement
officer.
(Ord. No. 164-02, § 3, 7-11-05)
Sec. 11-19. - Lewdness, indecent exposure, obscene language.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, on any street or public place, including hotels, apartment
houses and boardinghouses, to engage in any indecent, lewd or immoral act or behavior, or make any indecent
exposure of his person, or who shall use obscene, vulgar or profane language.
(Ord. No. 170-02, § 1, 7-11-05)
Sec. 11-20. - Trespassing prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(a)
Enter or remain upon land or premises of another in defiance of a legal request or order by the owner or some
other authorized person;
(b)
Enter into or upon land or a building that is posted, locked, or otherwise fenced or enclosed in such a manner that
a reasonably prudent person would understand that the owner does not want any such person on the land or in
the building;
(c)
Climb on any vehicle, building or other structure belonging to the city or under the possession and control of the
city that is fenced or otherwise designed to exclude intruders or is posted with signs that forbid entry without
having first obtained authorization from the Grovetown City Council or the Grovetown Department of Public
Safety.
(Ord. No. 170-02, § 1, 7-11-05)
Chapter 12 - PERSONNEL
FOOTNOTE(S):
(25) Charter reference— Employees generally, § 11.
Sec. 12-1. - Workers' compensation for volunteer firefighters.
In compliance with the workers' compensation statute of the state, firefighters who make up the Grovetown
Volunteer Fire Department are hereby classified as municipality employees to the extent that in the event an
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
231/414
accident occurs while engaged in firefighting activities on behalf of the city, they will be covered with workers'
compensation self insurance fund.
(Ord. No. 72, 9-26-83)
State law reference— Workers' compensation, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq.
Sec. 12-2. - Retirement system—Adoption.
A retirement plan is adopted pursuant to the laws of the state on behalf of those members named in such plan
specifically and those added by law so as to provide continuous coverage to the beneficiaries of same and to
readopt any plan previously adopted by council in regular session, by ordinance or otherwise, so that the plan
contracted between the joint municipal employees benefit system and the city dated May 1, 1987, has become a
part of those ordinances adopted for the general welfare of the general public and those named therein
specifically and by implication.
(Ord. No. 84, 5-11-87)
State law reference— Retirement system, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq.
Sec. 12-3. - Same—Amendments of 1988.
(a)
An ordinance establishing a retirement plan for the employees of the city and setting forth the joint trust
agreement and the contract for the administration of such plan between the city and the joint municipal
employees benefit system as provided by O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq., is hereby amended by striking paragraph "b"
from Article III, section 3, and substituting in lieu thereof, a new paragraph "b," to read as follows:
"b. Each full-time employee hired after the effective date of the plan shall be eligible to participate in the plan as
a new employee on the first day of the month immediately following or coinciding with the date such employee
completes one (1) year of continuous service subsequent to such employee's most recent employment date. Each
employee who, as of May 1, 1988, was previously excluded from participation in the plan because such
employee was over the plan's maximum entry age, shall be eligible to participate in the plan on the later of: May
1, 1988, or the first day of the month immediately following or coinciding with the date he completes one (1)
year of continuous service. An employee who was previously excluded from participation because of age shall
receive credit for all service, including service prior to May 1, 1988."
(b)
Such ordinance is further amended by striking section 2 from Article IV, and substituting in lieu thereof a new
section 2, to read as follows:
"Section 2. Normal retirement date.
a. The normal retirement date of a participant who is a full-time employee shall be the first day of the month
coinciding with or next following the date such employee has attained age sixty-five (65) and has completed five
(5) years of total credited service.
b. The normal retirement date of a participant who is an elected or appointed member of the governing authority
shall be the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the date such person has attained age sixtyfive (65)."
(c)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
232/414
Such ordinance is further amended by striking subparagraph (1) from Article V, section 1b, and substituting in
lieu thereof a new subparagraph (1), to read as follows:
"(1) Credited past service shall be as defined in Article II, section 25, except, however, that any eligible
employee or any elected or appointed member of the governing authority who does not elect to become a
participant as of the date such person is first qualified to do so may elect to become a participant on the first day
of any succeeding month; provided, however, that the credited past service of such participant shall not include
the period of service from the date such participant was first qualified to become a participant to the date such
participant elects to become a participant, or any creditable past service due such participant on the date such
participant was first qualified to become a participant under the plan."
(d)
Such ordinance is further amended by striking section 1 from Article VII, and substituting in lieu thereof, a new
section 1 to read as follows:
"Section 1. Death prior to retirement.
a. Upon becoming eligible for participation in accordance with Article III, a participant may designate one (1)
and only one (1) beneficiary on a form provided for that purpose. In so doing, such participant specifically
provides thereby that in the event the participant's employment or term of office is terminated by reason of such
participant's death, there shall be paid to such participant's designated beneficiary a monthly death benefit
actuarially equivalent to the reserve required for the participant's anticipated normal retirement benefit. In
calculating the normal retirement benefit under the provisions of this section, the following assumptions shall be
used:
(1)
The participant's age at the time of such participant's death is sixty-five (65), or such participant attained age if
such participant's attained age is greater than sixty-five (65); and,
(2)
Total credited service shall include the amount of credited service accrued prior to the date of the participant's
death plus one-half of the service between such date of death and what would otherwise have been the
participant's normal retirement date. In no event shall the amount of total credited service exceed the sum of the
actual service performed plus ten (10) calendar years. The death benefit under this section shall be calculated in
accordance with Article VIII, section 5
b. Designation of a beneficiary may be changed by the participant in writing on a form provided for that purpose
at any time prior to actual retirement. Only the last such designation of a beneficiary prior to retirement shall
have effect and any new designation of a beneficiary invalidates, supersedes and revokes any prior designation."
(e)
Such ordinance is further amended by striking section 5 and section 6 from Article VIII, and substituting in lieu
thereof, a new section 5, section 6 and section 7, to read as follows:
"Section 5. Life annuity factors to be used for computing benefits in the event of death prior to retirement.
Age Factor Age Factor
21 12.5773 43 11.4236
22 12.5567 44 11.3274
23 12.5337 45 11.2264
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
233/414
24 12.5082 46 11.1207
25 12.4804 47 11.0102
26 12.4501 48 10.8952
27 12.4170 49 10.7755
28 12.3809 50 10.6509
29 12.3416 51 10.5213
30 12.2994 52 10.3869
31 12.2541 53 10.2479
32 12.2056 54 10.1041
33 12.1535 55 9.9552
34 12.0976 56 9.8010
35 12.0383 57 9.6415
36 11.9754 58 9.4769
37 11.9088 59 9.3076
38 11.8384 60 9.1331
39 11.7640 61 8.9537
40 11.6855 62 8.7698
41 11.6026 63 8.5818
42 11.5154 64 8.3903
65 8.1958
"Section 6. Other annuity forms. Conversion factors for other annuity forms shall be computed by an enrolled
actuary on an actuarially equivalent basis assuming that the participant is retiring at age sixty-five (65) and using
the UP-1984 Mortality Table without age setback with interest at eight (8) percent, regardless of the actual age
and sex of any participant or beneficiary. If appropriate, such factors may vary by the difference between the
participant's age and the beneficiary's age.
"Section 7. Other forms of payment. Other forms of benefit payment made upon plan termination or, if required
for compliance with section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code, shall be computed on the basis of the actual
age of the participant and/or beneficiary at the time of distribution and under the following actuarial assumptions:
a. Interest: Rates that would be used to value the benefits for a Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation trusteed
single-employer plan which terminates on the first day of the plan year in which the distribution is made.
b. Mortality: The mortality basis in use at the time of payment by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation for
male retirees regardless of the actual sex of any participant or beneficiary.
c. Age at which payments begin: The greater of normal retirement date or the age at time of distribution of the
participant and/or beneficiary."
(f)
The rights and obligations under the plan with respect to persons whose employment or term of office with the
city was terminated for any reason whatsoever prior to the effective date of this amendment are fixed and shall
be governed by such plan as existed and was in effect at the time of such termination.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
234/414
(g)
The effective date of these amendments shall be November 1, 1988.
(Ord. of 10-24-88, §§ 1—6)
Sec. 12-4. - Same—Amendments of 1989.
(a)
An ordinance establishing a retirement plan for the employees of the city and setting forth the joint trust
agreement and the contract for the administration of such plan between the city and the joint municipal
employees benefit system as provided by O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq., is hereby amended by adding to the end of
article II, a new section 46, section 47, and section 48, to read as follows:
"Section 46. "Disability" shall mean a physical or mental disability of a participant who because of such
disability becomes entitled to receive disability insurance benefits under the federal social security act, as
amended."
"Section 47. "Disability retirement" shall mean termination of employment as a result of a disability with a
disability benefit granted under the provisions of the plan."
"Section 48. "Disability retirement date" shall mean the first day of the first calendar month in which a
participant becomes entitled to receive disability insurance benefits under the federal social security act, as
amended, as provided in article IV, section 1 and section 5. However, in no event shall such disability retirement
date be earlier than one (1) calendar month following participant's termination of employment as a result of a
disability."
(b)
Such ordinance is further amended by striking paragraph "a" from article IV, section 1, and substituting in lieu
thereof, a new paragraph "a," to read as follows:
"a.
The retirement prerequisites of a participant under this plan are contingent upon the method of retirement
selected by such participant; that is, normal retirement, early retirement, delayed retirement, or disability
retirement; and whether or not such participant is a full-time employee. The prerequisites associated with each
retirement method or employment status shall be as specified below in pertinent provisions of sections 2, 3, 4,
and 5, respectively, of this article IV."
(c)
Such ordinance is further amended by adding to the end of article IV, a new section 5, to read as follows:
"Section 5. Disability retirement date. A participant may retire under the provisions of the plan on the first day
of the first calendar month in which a participant becomes entitled to receive disability insurance benefits under
the federal social security act regardless of any age or service restrictions otherwise contained herein. Upon
actual retirement, such participant shall receive the disability retirement benefit provided in article V, section 4,
or any other retirement benefit granted under the plan for which he is eligible if such benefit is greater than the
aforesaid disability retirement benefit. However, under no circumstances shall any retired participant be entitled
at one time to more than one type of retirement benefit granted under the plan."
(d)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
235/414
Such ordinance is further amended by striking section 4 and section 5 from article V, and substituting in lieu
thereof, a new section 4, section 5, and section 6, to read as follows:
"Section 4. Disability retirement benefit. The amount of the disability retirement benefit shall be calculated in
the same manner as the normal retirement benefit with no actuarial reduction for age imposed. In no event,
however, in the case of a full-time employee, will a participant's disability retirement benefit be less than twenty
(20) percent of participant's average monthly earnings for the twelve-calendar month period immediately
preceding participant's termination of employment as a result of a disability. Upon retirement on participant's
disability retirement date, a participant shall receive a monthly retirement benefit commencing on the first day of
the month coinciding with participant's disability retirement date and payable on the first day of each month
thereafter so long as participant's disability continues."
"Section 5. Direct deposit of retirement benefits.
a. The pension committee may authorize the direct deposit of monthly retirement benefits into banks, trust
companies, savings banks, savings and loan associations, and credit unions, based upon the election of a retired
participant or beneficiary. Such election shall be in writing on a form provided for that purpose.
b. In the event that a direct deposit results in the misapplication of retirement benefits which are unrecoverable,
the amount of the loss shall be charged to the employer's trust fund."
"Section 6. Suspension of benefits.
a. Any retirement benefit payable under this plan to any participant shall be suspended, except as otherwise
provided herein, as of the date participant is reemployed as an eligible employee or holds an elective office of the
governing authority, and shall be resumed as of the first day of the month following participant's subsequent
retirement. In any case where the payment of a participant's retirement benefits shall have been so suspended, the
retirement benefit payable on participant's subsequent retirement (whether before or after participant's normal
retirement date) shall be the benefit computed in accordance with this article V on the basis of participant's
aggregate credited service, and for a full-time employee on the basis of participant's final average earnings, at the
time of participant's subsequent retirement, but reduced on an actuarial basis by the value of: any early
retirement benefits received by participant prior to being reemployed as a full-time employee or return to elective
or appointive office, and by any actuarial factors used in calculating the benefit payable at the time of
participant's previous retirement. In no event shall the resulting benefit be less than the benefit payable at the
time of participant's previous retirement. A retired participant who is reemployed as a full-time employee or
returns to elective or appointive office shall not be authorized to change participant's beneficiary on participant's
subsequent retirement or to name a beneficiary in retirement if one had not been previously named. For the
purposes of this section 6, any such participant's credited service subsequent to participant's reemployment by
the employer or holding of an elective or appointive office shall commence as of the date of participant's
reemployment as a full-time employee or as of the date participant's term of office begins, whichever is
applicable.
b. Any disability retirement benefit payable under this plan to any participant shall be suspended as of the date
participant's disability ceases. In any case where the payment of a participant's disability retirement benefit shall
have been so suspended, the period of absence from employment due to such disability shall be treated as a leave
of absence without pay and the provisions of article III, section 5 shall apply except that such period of absence
shall not be counted as credited future service. Any participant who shall have retired or been retired pursuant to
the provisions of article IV, section 5 and who dies or who has been or shall be subsequently declared ineligible
for a disability retirement benefit because of a cessation of such disability shall have a right to any benefit
afforded under any other provision of this plan to which participant or participant's beneficiary might otherwise
be entitled. In such a case, any disability retirement payments made prior to the date participant's disability
ceases or is declared to no longer exist shall be retained by the retiree and disregarded in computing any other
benefit payable under this plan."
(e)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
236/414
Such ordinance is further amended by striking section 3 and section 4 from article VII, and substituting in lieu
thereof, a new section 3 and section 4, to read as follows:
"Section 3. Termination of employment before retirement. A participant, other than an elected or appointed
member of the governing authority, whose employment is terminated under any of the following conditions for
any reason other than death or retirement shall be entitled to a vested right in participant's accrued benefit.
Payment of such vested retirement benefit shall commence on the first day of the month following participant's
normal or early retirement date at the option of the participant and shall be payable on the first day of each month
thereafter during the life of the participant. The amount of such monthly retirement benefit shall be computed in
the manner prescribed for normal or early retirement in article V herein, but based upon participant's final
average earnings and total credited service up to the participant's date of termination of employment with the
employer. The conditions for a vested retirement benefit under this section shall be one of the following:
a. A participant whose employment is terminated voluntarily or involuntarily shall be entitled to a vested benefit
if participant has completed a minimum of ten (10) years of total credited service in the plan; or,
b. A participant whose employment is terminated involuntarily and without cause shall be entitled to a vested
benefit if participant has completed a minimum of five (5) years of credited service in the plan. For the purpose
of this condition, "cause" for dismissal shall mean negligence or inefficiency in performing the duties of the
position held, unfitness to perform assigned duties, insubordination, or misconduct reflecting discredit on the
employer or upon the governing authority; or,
c. A participant whose employment is terminated because participant is disabled shall be entitled to a vested
benefit provided participant's period of disability, as determined by the social security administration, began on
or before the participant's date of termination of employment as a result of a disability. No disability benefit shall
be payable unless application for such benefit is made within one (1) year after employment is terminated as a
result of such disability, except when a delay is caused by a pendency of a disability determination by the social
security administration."
"Section 4. Termination of employment before retirement; portability.
a. A participant, other than an elected or appointed member of the governing authority, whose employment is
terminated either voluntarily or involuntarily for any reason other than death, disability, or retirement, after
participation in the plan, shall have a right to a vested retirement benefit under the conditions set forth below.
The amount of the monthly retirement benefit shall be computed in the manner prescribed for normal or early
retirement in article V herein, but based on participant's final average earnings and total credited service up to the
participant's date of termination of employment with the employer. Payment of such benefit shall commence, at
the option of the participant, on the first day of the month following participant's normal or early retirement date
as prescribed in the plan and shall be payable on the first day of each month thereafter, provided:
(1)
That any future employer be a JMEBS employer which maintains a JMEBS retirement plan with a provision on
portability that is the same or substantially similar to this section 4; and,
(2)
That to be entitled to any benefits under the provisions of this plan, the participant must meet, through
participant's total credited service with all JMEBS employers, the service requirements for vesting as provided
for herein; and,
(3)
That each break in employment between JMEBS employers shall not exceed five (5) years.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
237/414
b. In the event the participant's immediately preceding employment was with a JMEBS employer or employers,
the service performed for such former employer or employers shall be used for the purpose of qualifying the
participant for vesting under this plan. In no event shall service with another JMEBS employer be used to
calculate the benefit amount due the participant from this employer.
c. In the event the employer is participant's final JMEBS employer and the plan allows delayed retirement
beyond the normal retirement date, the benefit under this article VII, section 4, shall begin when the participant
retires and shall be computed as prescribed in article V, section 3."
(f)
Such ordinance is further amended by striking section 1 from article IX, and substituting in lieu thereof, a new
section 1, to read as follows:
"Section 1. Employer contributions. The employer shall make the necessary contributions to fund this retirement
plan. The amount of these contributions shall be based upon the actuarial assumptions adopted by the board of
trustees, the benefits provided in this plan, and the number of participants and their respective ages, earnings, and
lengths of creditable service and such other factors as the board of trustees shall deem appropriate to assure
proper funding of this plan. Contributions by the employer shall be applied as necessary to assure the payment of
accrued benefits to participants and beneficiaries. Contributions received by JMEBS by the last day of any month
shall accrue interest from the first day of the following month."
(g)
The rights and obligations under the plan with respect to persons whose employment or term of office with the
city was terminated for any reason whatsoever prior to the effective date of this amendment are fixed and shall
be governed by such plan as existed and was in effect at the time of such termination.
(h)
The effective date of these amendments shall be July 1, 1989.
(Ord. of 6-12-89, §§ 1—8)
Sec. 12-5. - Same—Amendments of 1990.
(a)
Article II—Section 25. An ordinance establishing a retirement plan for the employees of the city and setting forth
the joint trust agreement and the contract for the administration of said plan between the city and the Georgia
Municipal Employees Benefit System as provided by O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq. is hereby amended by striking
section 25 from article II and substituting in lieu thereof a new section 25 to read as follows:
"Section 25. Credited past service shall mean the number of years and complete months of past service:
a. Of an eligible employee employed on the effective date of the plan.
b. Of an eligible employee not employed on the effective date of the plan who had service prior to such effective
date provided that, subsequent to such effective date, the employee performs the lesser of: Service and leave of
absence equal to the break in service or service and leave of absence equal to five (5) years.
c. Of an eligible employee whose initial employment date is subsequent to the effective date of the plan;
however, said employee's credited past service shall only be the number of years and complete months of
continuous service from his latest employment date to his enrollment date.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
238/414
d. Of an elected or appointed member of the governing authority who is, on the effective date of the plan,
serving as an eligible employee or as an elected or appointed member of the governing authority."
(b)
Same—Section 27. Said ordinance is further amended by striking section 27 from article II and substituting in
lieu thereof a new section 27 to read as follows:
"Section 27. Credited future service shall mean the amount of future service of a participant except for a
participant who has a break in service; in which case, credited future service shall be limited to service
subsequent to the most recent employment date unless such period of service, subsequent to his most recent
employment date, the employee performs the lesser of: Service and leave of absence equal to the break in service
or service and leave of absence equal to five (5) years."
(c)
Same—Sections 30, 31. Said ordinance is further amended by striking sections 30 and 31 from article II and
substituting in lieu thereof new sections 30 and 31 to read as follows:
"Section 30. Earnings shall mean the total normal compensation paid to a full-time employee but shall exclude
compensation for reimbursed expenses and other unusual compensation. Earnings shall also include overtime,
holiday, sick, vacation pay and compensation deferred and redirected pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
Section 31. Annual earnings shall mean the earnings which have been paid to a participant for service rendered
during any consecutive twelve-calendar-month period preceding the most recent termination. It shall be limited
to such maximum amount, if any, as may be prescribed in article V, section 1b(4), of the plan."
(d)
Same—Section 44. Said ordinance is further amended by striking section 44 from article II and substituting in
lieu thereof a new section 44 to read as follows:
"Section 44. Vesting, vested right, vested benefit shall mean the rights of a terminated participant as specified in
article VII of the plan."
(e)
Same—Section 46. Said ordinance is further amended by striking section 46 from article II and substituting in
lieu thereof a new section 46 to read as follows:
"Section 46. Disability shall mean:
a. A physical or mental disability of a participant who, because of such disability, becomes entitled to receive
disability insurance benefits under the Federal Social Security Act as amended; provided, however:
(1)
Such disability commenced on a specified date during the period of the participant's employment with the
employer; and
(2)
Such disability was not self-inflicted, incurred in military service, incurred in the commission of a felonious
enterprise or the result of the use of narcotics or drugs or habitual use of alcohol; and
(3)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
239/414
Such disability will be permanent and continuous during the remainder of the participant's life; or
b. A participant who is not disabled in accordance with the above definition of disability solely because he lacks
the quarters of social security coverage required to receive a disability insurance benefit under the Federal Social
Security Act, as amended, shall be under disability if the pension committee shall determine that he is
permanently incapacitated on the basis of a certificate signed by two (2) physicians (one (1) physician selected
and paid by the disabled participant and one (1) physician selected and paid by the employer) stating that:
(1)
Such participant is permanently and totally physically or mentally disabled by anatomical, physiological or
psychological abnormalities that are demonstrable by medically acceptable clinical and laboratory diagnostic
techniques so as to be prevented from engaging in any occupation or employment whatsoever for remuneration
or profit; and
(2)
Such disability commenced on a specified date during the period of the participant's employment with the
employer; and
(3)
Such disability will be permanent and continuous during the remainder of the participant's life; and
(4)
Such disability was not self-inflicted, incurred in military service, incurred in the commission of a felonious
enterprise or the result of the use of narcotics or drugs or habitual alcoholism.
c. The pension committee shall have the right to require the participant who is under disability to be examined
by a physician chosen by the pension committee to confirm the continuation of a disability."
(f)
Same—Section 48. Said ordinance is further amended by striking section 48 from article II and substituting in
lieu thereof a new section 48 to read as follows:
"Section 48. Disability retirement date shall mean the first day of the first calendar month in which a participant
becomes entitled to receive a disability benefit as provided in article IV, sections 1 and 5. However, in no event
shall said disability retirement date be earlier than one (1) calendar month following his termination of
employment as a result of a disability."
(g)
Article III—Section 1. Said ordinance is further amended by striking class 3 of section 1, article III.
(h)
Same—Section 3d. Said ordinance is further amended by striking subparagraphs (3) and (4) from article III,
section 3d, and substituting in lieu thereof, new subparagraphs (3) and (4) to read as follows:
"(3)
A former participant who is reemployed in an eligible employee class after being on an authorized leave of
absence and who meets the provisions of article III, section 5a, shall not be deemed to have broken continuity of
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
240/414
service and may resume participation on the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the month
in which he is reemployed in accordance with the terms of the leave as approved by the governing authority; or
(4)
A former participant who is reemployed in an eligible employee class after a period of service in the armed
forces of the United States and who meets the provisions of article III, section 5b, shall not be deemed to have
broken continuity of service and may resume participation on the first day of the month coinciding with or next
following the month in which he is reemployed; and the time he was absent shall be taken into account for the
purpose of calculating benefits under the plan."
(i)
Same—Section 5. Said ordinance is further amended by striking section 5 from article III and substituting in lieu
thereof a new section 5 to read as follows:
"Section 5. Leaves of absence.
a. General leaves of absence. The governing authority shall determine the date of expiration of a leave of
absence granted to a participant. Such periods of absence shall not be counted as credited future service for the
purpose of computing a benefit hereunder unless the leave, as authorized by the governing authority, specifically
permits such participant to continue accumulating credit future service during the authorized leave of absence.
Such participant shall, for the purposes of the plan, not be deemed to have broken continuity of credited future
service provided:
(1)
He was regularly employed by the employer immediately prior to his leave of absence; and
(2)
He makes application for reemployment on or before the date of expiration of a leave of absence; and
(3)
His reemployed as an eligible employee within ninety (90) days after such application.
b. Military leaves of absence. A former employee who is reemployed in a eligible employee class after service
in the armed forces of the United States shall, for the purposes of the plan, not be deemed to have broken
continuity of service, and all military service shall be counted for the purpose of computing a benefit provided:
(1)
He was regularly employed by the employer immediately prior to his military service; and
(2)
The plan was in effect on the date he left employment for such military service; and
(3)
He makes application for reemployment within ninety (90) days after he first becomes entitled to his discharge or
release from service in the armed forces of the United States; and
(4)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
241/414
He is reemployed as an eligible employee within ninety (90) days after such application.
c. If a participant or employee has not returned to his regular employment as an eligible employee in accordance
with the provisions of paragraph a. or b. in this section 5, his interest, if any, under the plan shall be only such as
existed at the commencement of such leave of absence."
(j)
Article IV, Section 5 Said ordinance is further amended by striking section 5 from article IV and substituting in
lieu thereof a new section 5 to read as follows:
"Section 5. Disability retirement date. A participant may retire under the provisions of the plan on the first day of
the first calendar month in which a participant becomes entitled to receive disability benefits regardless of any
age or service restrictions otherwise contained herein. Upon actual retirement, such participant shall receive the
disability retirement benefit provided in article V, section 4, or any other retirement benefit granted under the
plan for which he is eligible if such benefit is greater than the aforesaid disability retirement benefit. However,
under no circumstances shall any retired participant be entitled at one (1) time to more than one (1) type of
retirement benefit granted under the plan."
(k)
Article V—Section 1b. Said ordinance is further amended by striking subparagraph (4) from article V, section 1b,
and substituting in lieu thereof a new subparagraph (4) to read as follows:
"(4)
Maximum annual earnings to be used for computing final average earnings for benefit accrual shall not exceed
two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00)."
(l)
Same—Section 7 Said ordinance is further amended by inserting a section 7 into article V to read as follows:
"Section 7. Limitation on annual benefit. A participant's annual benefit shall not exceed the lesser of: (1) one
hundred (100) percent of the participant's high three-year average compensation, or (2) a dollar amount which is
adjusted for inflation based on 215(i)(2)(A) of the Social Security Act. If a participant's total annual benefits are
not in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), this section shall not apply. Furthermore, if the participant
retires before the age sixty-two (62), the limit shall be actuarilly reduced in accordance with Internal Revenue
Code Section 415(b)(2)(C) and (F)."
(m)
Article V, Sections 4, 5. Said ordinance is further amended by striking section 4 from article VI and substituting
in lieu thereof new sections 4 and 5 to read as follows:
"Section 4. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, a participant's election of the form of benefit
payment will be restricted to assure compliance with the minimum distribution incidental death benefit
requirements of Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a)(9), equivalent of the present value of the total payments
to be made to the participant and his joint annuitant or beneficiary in retirement.
Section 5. Rule for small annuities. The present value of a retirement fund benefit shall be distributed to the
participant or terminated participant or the terminated participant's beneficiary if the benefit does not exceed
Internal Revenue Code Section 411(a)(11)(a), Limit on the date of termination. The value of a participant's or
terminated participant's benefit shall be determined in accordance with article VIII, section 7, on the date of the
participant's termination."
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
242/414
(n)
Article VIII, Section 7 Said ordinance is further amended by striking section 7 from article VIII and substituting
in lieu thereof a new section 7 to read as follows:
"Section 7. Other forms of payment. Other forms of benefit payment made under article VI, section 5, or upon
plan termination or if required for compliance with Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be
computed on the basis of the actual age of the participant and/or beneficiary at the time of distribution and under
the following actuarial assumptions:
a. Interest: Rates that would be used to value the benefits for a pension benefit guaranty corporation trusteed
single-employer plan which terminates on the first day of the calendar year in which the distribution is made.
b. Mortality: The mortality basis in use at the time of payment by the pension benefit guaranty corporation for
male retirees regardless of the actual sex of any participant or beneficiary.
c. Age at which payments begin: The greater of normal retirement date or the age at the time of distribution of
the participant and/or beneficiary."
(o)
Article XV—Section 8. Said ordinance is further amended by striking section 8 from article XV and substituting
in lieu thereof a new section 8 to read as follows:
"Section 8. Reserved."
(p)
Same—Section 11. Said ordinance is further amended by striking section 11 from article XV and substituting in
lieu thereof a new section 11 to read as follows:
"Section 11. Errors in computation of benefits. Any overpayments or underpayments from the trust fund to a
retired participant or to a beneficiary caused by errors of computation shall be corrected with interest
compounded annually from the date of the miscalculation. The rate applied shall be actuarial assumption rate
utilized by the plan actuary for estimating future plan investment earnings as of the date of the correction.
Overpayments shall be charged against retirement payments next succeeding the correction. Underpayments
shall be made up from the trust fund."
(q)
Throughout plan. Said ordinance is further amended by striking the phrase joint municipal employees benefit
system and the acronym JMEBS throughout the plan and the joint trust agreement and substituting in lieu thereof
the phrase Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System and the acronym GMEBS.
(r)
Fixed rights and obligations. The rights and obligations under the plan with respect to persons whose
employment with the city was terminated for any reason whatsoever prior to the effective date of these
amendments are fixed and shall be governed by such plan as existed and was in effect at the time of such
termination.
(s)
Effective date. The effective date of these amendments shall be October 1, 1990.
(Ord. of 9-24-90, §§ 1—19)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
243/414
Chapter 13 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
(26) Cross reference— Zoning, App. A; subdivision regulations, App. B.
(26) State Law reference— Zoning procedures law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; planning authority, Const. 1983,
Art. IX, § 2, ¶ 4.
Sec. 13-1. - City planning commission—Created.
In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the municipality which will, in
accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience,
prosperity, and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the city
planning commission, hereinafter referred to as the planning commission, is hereby created and established as
authorized by law.
(Ord. No. 41, 4-23-69)
Charter reference— Authority to form planning board, § 25.
Sec. 13-2. - Same—Membership.
(a)
The planning commission shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be residents of the city, appointed by the
council.
(b)
The terms of the members shall be for four (4) years, except that in the appointment of the first planning
commission, the first member shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, the second member shall be
appointed for a term of two (2) years, the third member shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, and the
remaining members, and all successors to regular terms, shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years each or
until a successor is appointed, whichever is later.
(c)
Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the council, which shall also have the
authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing.
(d)
All members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in
connection with their official duties.
(Ord. No. 41, § 1, 4-23-69)
Sec. 13-3. - Same—Organization; rules; staff; finances.
(a)
The planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be
one (1) year, with eligibility for reelection. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an
officer or employee of the municipality.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
244/414
(b)
The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings
of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the
planning commission shall be a public record.
(c)
The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may
contract with the Central Savannah River Area Planning and Development Commission and city planners and
other consultants for such services as it may require.
(d)
The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for
the purpose by the council.
(Ord. No. 41, § 2, 4-23-69)
Sec. 13-4. - Same—Powers and duties.
The planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities provided by law.
(Ord. No. 41, § 3, 4-23-69)
Sec. 13-5. - Zoning policies and procedures—Initial zoning ordinance updates and major revisions and city
initiated rezoning.
(a)
In the case of initial zoning, updates of the zoning ordinance or major revisions of the zoning ordinance, the
planning commission will, using existing land use studies, the land use plan, the major thoroughfares plan, with
available staff help, study the needs of the city and develop a draft zoning ordinance that includes a text that
provides definitions, specifications and conditions plus a zoning map to delineate zoned district boundaries.
When zoning district boundary changes are proposed, the planning commission shall prepare an evaluation of
each proposed change considering each of the following factors:
(1)
Existing uses and zoning of nearby property.
(2)
The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions.
(3)
The extent to which the destruction of values of the property promotes the health, safety, morals or general
welfare of the public.
(4)
The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner.
(5)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
245/414
The suitability of the subject property for the zoned purposes.
(6)
The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned considered in the context of land development in the
area in the vicinity of the property.
(7)
Conformity with or divergence from the land use plan.
(b)
Upon the completion of a draft, the planning commission will review this draft with the city council.
(c)
Changes agreed to at the review session will be incorporated and copies prepared for public review.
(d)
The council will determine a date for a public hearing.
(e)
The city clerk will prepare and cause to be published in the official organ at least fifteen (15) days, but not more
than forty-five (45) days, before the hearing date a notice of public hearing. Such notice shall contain a summary
of the proposals to be considered and the date, time and place of the public hearing.
(f)
Copies of the draft, zoning ordinance and map, plus the evaluation of any proposed district boundary changes,
will be made available for public review during normal working hours between the date of the appearance of the
public hearing notice and the time of the public hearing.
(g)
The public hearing will be convened at the advertised time and place and will be presided over by the mayor.
(h)
The presider will review for those present these procedures and set forth the operating procedures for the
hearing.
(1)
In order for a person in attendance to speak, the chair must recognize such person. Upon rising to speak the
person recognized will first identify such person's self. The chair may also request that the person furnish a home
or business street address as appropriate.
(2)
The person speaking will be allowed two (2) minutes to express opinions and make points on each separate
element of the proposed revisions which such person wishes to address, with a maximum total of ten (10)
minutes allowed per person.
(3)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
246/414
Additional persons will be recognized in accordance with the above procedure for the purpose of addressing
additional elements of the proposed revisions or to make additional points with regard to elements already
addressed, but not to rehash points already made.
(4)
When all elements that attendees want to discuss have been addressed and all arguments relative to each element
have been made the secretary will, from the notes made, restate each point, one at a time and the attendees will
be asked for a show of hands of those who support that same point, thus allowing each person an effective voice.
A count of the supporters will be recorded.
(i)
The presider or the presider's designee will review the proposed revisions, providing a rationale for both the need
for the revisions and for the specific recommendations. The evaluation of any proposed district boundary
changes as prepared in accordance with subsection (a) above will be reviewed.
(j)
A secretary will be made available to make notes of the proceedings following the above review.
(k)
When the public hearing is conducted by the city council at a regular council meeting, action may be taken
approving, rejecting or modifying the proposal at that meeting or may table the question for consideration at its
next regular meeting.
(l)
Not later than the day after a decision on the question has been reached that the results of that action will be
posted as a regular public notice at the place for such notices in the city hall.
(Ord. of 7-7-86, § 1)
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance amendment, App. A, § 11.000 et seq.
Sec. 13-6. - Same—Rezoning requested.
(a)
Application is to be filed with the zoning administrator on format prescribed therefor and fees as may from time
to time be established will be paid. Such application shall be filed during normal office hours.
(b)
The zoning administrator shall establish a public hearing date which shall be at least fifteen (15) days, but not
more than forty-five (45) days, after a public hearing notice is published in the legal organ of the county.
(c)
The zoning administrator shall develop and cause to be published in the official organ a public hearing notice
that sets out the applicant's name, the location of the property to be affected, if any, the present zoning class, the
proposed zoning class and the date, time and place of the public hearing. Such notice shall be published at least
fifteen (15) days, but not more than forty-five (45) days, before the scheduled hearing.
(d)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
247/414
The zoning administrator shall cause to be created upon the property for which rezoning is to be considered a
sign of not less than eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches announcing the public hearing, stipulating the
date, time and place for the hearing, the present zoning class and the proposed zoning class. The sign shall be
clearly visible from a public street.
(e)
Prior to the public hearing the planning commission shall prepare an assessment of the proposals using the
following criteria:
(1)
Existing uses and zoning of nearby property.
(2)
The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions.
(3)
The extent to which the destruction of property values promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of
the public.
(4)
The relative gain to the public as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner.
(5)
The suitability of the subject property for the zoning purposes.
(6)
The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned considered in the context of land development in the
area in the vicinity of the property.
(7)
Conformity with or divergence from the land use plan.
(f)
The public hearing shall be convened by the planning commission chairperson at the scheduled time.
(g)
The presider shall review the procedures for holding the public hearing, the procedures being those set forth in
section 13-5(h).
(h)
For each case the presider shall allow the applicant or the applicant's designee to present the case in accord with
section 13-5(h) as the first speaker.
(i)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
248/414
After each person has been afforded an opportunity to speak and/or be counted as to concurrence with each point
raised as provided in section 13-5(h), the presenter shall present the results of the evaluation prepared in
accordance with subsection (e) above.
(j)
When the public hearing is conducted by the commission at a regular commission meeting, action may be taken
approving or rejecting the proposal at the meeting or the commission may table the question for consideration at
its next regular meeting. The planning commission shall, within three (3) working days, prepare minutes of the
public hearing and transmit them along with its recommendations on the question, including the evaluation in
accordance with subsection (e) above to the city council which will have the question placed on the agenda for
the next regular meeting.
(k)
Not later than the day after a decision on the question has been reached, the results of that action will be posted
as a regular public notice at the place for such notices in the city hall.
(Ord. of 7-7-86, § 2)
Chapter 14 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(27) Charter reference— Authority of city over streets, § 20 et seq.; abatement of hazards thereof, § 31.
(27) Cross reference— Excavations for sewer connection, § 9-90.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 14-1—14-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - SOLICITING
Sec. 14-26. - Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, and general welfare by
regulating roadside solicitation and other charitable events where contributions are sought. Solicitors are put at
risk by entering the roadway and also put drivers and other pedestrians at risk. The citizens of the City of
Grovetown are subject to unregulated solicitation by sometimes questionable organizations or solicitations in a
hazardous manner or location. It is the purpose of this article to regulate solicitation on streets and highways and
other public areas of the city to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. No. 213, 11-14-11)
Sec. 14-27. - Definitions.
(a)
Definitions. The following words as used in this article shall have the following meanings:
Applicant shall mean the charitable organization seeking a permit.
Charitable organization means organization which is qualified under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended; Georgia registered non-profit corporations; churches; and public and private schools.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
249/414
Charitable organizations must also either be registered with the secretary of state under O.C.G.A § 43-17-5 or be
exempt from such registration under O.C.G.A § 43-17-9.
Event means a charitable solicitation with the city.
Event permit means a permit issued pursuant to this article to conduct an event.
Organizer means the person responsible for organizing the event and whose name shall be on the application.
Permit shall mean an event permit.
Solicitor means any person who engages in solicitation as described herein.
Solicitation or charitable solicitation means the act of asking for contributions on a public road, street, highway,
right-of-way, sidewalk or other public property from the occupant of any vehicle or pedestrian.
Travel lanes means the marked lanes on a road or highway, or the lanes of travel for vehicles, including turn
lanes, access lanes and acceleration or deceleration lanes.
(Ord. No. 213, 11-14-11)
Sec. 14-28. - Restrictions.
(a)
Solicitation restricted. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-97(b). The city prohibits any person from standing or
entering on a highway or public street of the city for the purposes of soliciting employment, business
solicitations, and/or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle or any pedestrian without a permit.
Solicitation shall only be allowed by charitable organizations under the terms of this article.
(b)
Permit required. No charitable organization is allowed to engage in solicitation on any public street or highway
in the city without first obtaining an event permit from the city. Persons, businesses and organizations that are not
charitable organizations, as defined in this article, are not eligible to receive a permit for solicitation. An event
permit shall be obtained from the City of Grovetown Planning and Zoning Department.
(c)
Exemption. An event permit is not required for any event sponsored or conducted by the city or its departments
and agencies, such as firefighter "boot drives" and similar collections.
(Ord. No. 213, 11-14-11)
Sec. 14-29. - Permit requirements.
(a)
Permit application. All requests for a permit must be provided to the planning and zoning director at least fifteen
(15) calendar days but no more than sixty (60) calendar days prior to the date of the requested activity. The
planning and zoning director shall issue a decision no later than one (1) week prior to the scheduled event. An
application and permit shall be required for each event, provided however; only one (1) application and permit
shall be required for each proposed event.
(b)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
250/414
Required information. All applications for permits must include the following information and shall be signed by
the organizer(s):
(1)
Name and address of charitable organization, including headquarters address and telephone number;
(2)
Type of organization and certification, if listed below. The organization must be one (1) of the following types to
apply for a permit:
a.
Organization qualified under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, including certification from
IRS;
b.
Nonprofit corporation registered in Georgia, including certification from secretary of state;
c.
Church; or
d.
Public or private school;
(3)
Name of organizer(s), and address, height, weight, age, sex, race and social security number of each organizer
for background checks purposes;
(4)
Photocopy of driver's license or other official photo identification of each organizer;
(5)
Proposed solicitation activity and purpose for activity (i.e., use of funds);
(6)
Specific location(s) for solicitation activity, including specific intersections and number of solicitors at each such
location;
(7)
Dates and times of solicitation activity;
(8)
Names of all participants proposed to be solicitors and their ages;
(9)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
251/414
If any solicitors are under eighteen (18), the names and addresses of adult supervisors; one (1) adult supervisor
per two (2) solicitors under age eighteen (18) is required;
(10)
If the event is to be held on behalf of any person or organization other than the applicant, a communication in
written form from that person or organization authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit;
(11)
The application shall contain a statement that the submission of the application shall be considered to be consent
by the organizer(s), the charitable organization and the officers of the organization for a background check to be
run by the planning and zoning director at his discretion on any person named on the application, and a statement
that all information contained thereon is true and correct; and
(12)
Any additional information the planning and zoning director may find reasonable or necessary for a fair
determination as to whether the proposed event will endanger public health, safety or welfare.
(c)
Organizer. A minimum of one (1) organizer is required for an event. No more than two (2) persons shall be
designated organizers for any event. The organizer(s) are required to be at the event in person at all times. There
shall be one (1) organizer for each location where solicitation is occurring. All events shall be conducted under
the supervision of a person or persons making application for same (the organizer) and shall be conducted in a
peaceable and orderly manner in compliance with the laws and ordinances applicable thereto.
(d)
Permit on-site. The signed permit is to be kept on-site in the possession of an organizer at all times that
solicitation is underway. If multiple locations are involved, a permit copy shall be kept at each location by each
organizer. Permits shall be displayed at the request of any citizen or law enforcement personnel.
(e)
Fees. An application shall be accompanied by an application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to cover the cost
of investigation and an additional seventy-five dollar ($75.00) permit fee. If the permit application is denied, the
seventy-five dollar ($75.00) permit shall be refunded. These fees may be raised from time to time by the city.
(Ord. No. 213, 11-14-11)
Sec. 14-30. - Investigation and issuance.
(a)
Investigation. The planning and zoning director shall review the application for completeness and compliance
with the terms of this article. The planning and zoning director shall determine that the charitable organization is
registered with the secretary of state, or is exempt under O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9. The planning and zoning director,
assisted by the director of public safety, shall determine whether there are any records of complaints against the
applicant or organizers in the records of the department of public safety or the GCIC/NCIC crime database
system. The planning and zoning director, assisted by the director of public safety, shall, conduct a background
check of the organizers or corporate officers, or any other person named on the application. The planning and
zoning director shall, make any other inquires deemed necessary for the investigation of the applicant or
organizers.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
252/414
(b)
Decision. The planning and zoning director may grant, deny or grant a restricted permit. The planning and
zoning director shall issue a permit as provided in this article from a consideration of the application and from
such information as may otherwise be obtained, unless he finds that any of the following apply:
(1)
The conduct of the event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic;
(2)
The conduct of the event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of firefighting equipment en
route to a fire, or other emergency services;
(3)
The applicant or any organizers or participants have any criminal complaints pending against them, or have a
criminal record involving crimes of theft, fraud, or other moral turpitude;
(4)
The applicant is not a qualifying charitable organization or is otherwise not a legitimate organization;
(5)
The planning and zoning director has reasons to believe the event is a fraud or sham;
(6)
If a charitable organization required to be registered with the secretary of state under O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5, is not
so registered;
(7)
The conduct of the event is contrary to the public's health, safety or general welfare; or
(8)
The application was not complete, or either the application or the permit requested is not fully in compliance
with the requirements of this article.
The planning and zoning director shall indicate on the application review form the reasons for rejection of the
application.
(c)
Restrictions. The planning and zoning director shall indicate on the permit the permitted activities, locations, and
times of the event. The planning and zoning director may approve a smaller or shorter event than requested, may
reduce the number of solicitors, may approve a different location, or may generally make any other adjustments
he believes necessary to the application to serve the public health, safety and welfare.
(d)
Non-content based review. The content of the message of any applicant, their beliefs, the identification of the
participants, or any other matter which does not directly impact on the public health, safety, and welfare shall not
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
253/414
be relevant to the determination of whether to grant or deny a permit.
(Ord. No. 213, 11-14-11)
Sec. 14-31. - Appeals.
(a)
Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the denial or restriction of a permit shall have the right to appeal the denial or
restriction to the mayor or council. A written appeal shall be filed with the city clerk.
(b)
Procedure. The planning and zoning director shall appear and present his case and evidence as to why the
application was denied. The applicant shall have the opportunity to present its case and evidence in support of
the application. The hearing shall be conducted a proceeding.
(c)
Standard of review. The mayor and council, keeping in mind the purpose of this article, the substantive
provisions, and giving deference to the judgment of the planning and zoning director, shall make a determination
as to whether the denial or restriction was lawful and in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, or
whether the permit should be issued or modified. If the latter, the mayor and council shall enter an order
providing guidance as to the location, time, persons and other criteria of this article.
(Ord. No. 213, 11-14-11)
Sec. 14-32. - Solicitation regulations; locations and times.
(a)
Prohibited times. No solicitation shall be allowed during the following times:
(1)
Before 9:30 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday.
(2)
Between the hours of 11:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. Monday through Sunday.
(3)
At any time after sunset or before sunrise.
(b)
Locations. Solicitation may only occur at signalized intersections. The planning and zoning director shall
determine and post a list of such intersections where no solicitation shall be allowed due to concerns for the
public health, safety and welfare. Solicitation from travel lanes is not permitted. When all vehicles are stopped at
an intersection, solicitors may approach cars to receive donations if the occupants have indicated they seek to
make a donation. No more than one (1) organization may solicit at the same intersection at the same time. An
event may occur at more than one (1) location or intersection on the same day pursuant to the terms of this article
and the permit issued hereby
(c)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
254/414
Duration. An event may last no longer than two (2) days. Not more than one (1) permit allowed per calendar
year.
(d)
Safety equipment. All persons participating in such solicitations shall wear a safety vest approved by the
planning and zoning director at all times when engaged in such solicitation. Any such safety vest must meet the
standard for class I safety vests as set forth by the American National Standard Institute (American National
Standard for High-Visibility Safety Apparel ANSI/ISEA 107-2004).
(Ord. No. 213, 11-14-11)
Sec. 14-33. - Violations, enforcement.
(a)
Persons soliciting without a permit or in violation of the permit shall be cited with citation for prosecution in the
municipal court, in accordance with the requirements of law for such citations.
(b)
Any person, organization, business or entity in violation of the provisions of this article is subject to a fine of up
to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation, per individual participant. The minimum fine shall be
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day per violation, per individual participant, plus court costs.
(c)
Any violation of this article shall immediately revoke the permit. The director of public safety and the planning
and zoning director shall also have the discretion to revoke the permit upon charge of violation being made, or
upon awareness of illegal or unauthorized activity or if in the best interest of public health, safety and welfare.
(d)
Any person, organization, business or entity found guilty of violating this article may not be issued a permit for a
two-year period from the date of the violation. Upon second offense, the person, organization, business or entity
found guilty of violating this article shall be banned from further solicitation in the city.
(e)
The city attorney shall be authorized to seek injunctive relief and other relief in superior court if necessary to
effectuate the intent of this article. The city shall be entitled to seek civil fines in the amounts specified above,
and shall be entitled to its attorney's fees for any successful action.
(Ord. No. 213, 11-14-11)
Sec. 14-34. - Severability.
If any paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase or any portion of this article be declared invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, or if any provision of any part of this article as applied to
any particular situation or set of circumstances be declared invalid, or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not
be construed to affect the remaining portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this
article or other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the mayor and
council to provide for separable and devisable parts and they do hereby readopt any and all parts hereof as may
not be held invalid for any reason.
(Ord. No. 213, 11-14-11)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
255/414
Chapter 15 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(28) Editor's note— Ord. No. 135, adopted Sept. 13, 1999, repealed chapter 15, sections 15-1—15-6 and 15-20
—15-31, in its entirety and replaced it with a new chapter 15, sections 135-1—135-135. In order to maintain
consistent numbering of sections and to allow for future expansion of the articles in chapter 15, the provisions of
said ordinance have been inserted in chapter 15 as sections 15-1—15-5, 15-26—15-34, 15-51—15-64, 15-81—
15-97, 15-111—15-116, 15-121—15-123, 15-131—15-134, 15-141, 15-142, 15-161—15-180, 15-201—15-204,
15-221—15-250, 15-271—15-273, 15-301, and 15-302 at the discretion of the editor. Former chapter 15
pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. No. 40, § 9, adopted Aug. 26, 1968; Ord. No. 56, adopted
Aug. 26, 1978; Ord. No. 60, adopted Aug. 4, 1978; Ord. No. 65, adopted April 23, 1979; Ord. No. 94-05-024,
adopted Aug. 8, 1994; Ord. No. 94.114, adopted March 13, 1995; Ord. No. 98.018A, adopted July 26, 1999; and
Ord. No. 98.018A, adopted July 26, 1999.Ord. No. 135 also amended chapter 15 by changing its title from
"traffic" to "motor vehicles and traffic," but in order to preserve the alphabetical sequence of chapters, said
chapter has been renamed "traffic and motor vehicles" at the discretion of the editor.
(28) Cross reference— Creation of noise by vehicles, § 8-6(1), (4).
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 15-1. - Definitions of words and phrases.
(a)
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall for the purpose of this chapter have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except when the context otherwise requires.
(b)
Whenever any words and phrases used in this chapter are not defined herein but are defined in the state laws
regulating the operation of vehicles, any such definition therein shall be deemed to apply to such words and
phrases used herein, except when the context otherwise requires.
(1)
Alley. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings in urban districts and
not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic.
(2)
Arterial street. Any U.S. or state numbered route, controlled access highway, or other major radial or
circumferential street or highway designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part of a
major arterial system of streets of highways.
(3)
Authorized emergency vehicle. Such fire department vehicles, city department of public safety vehicles,
ambulances as are publicly owned, and such other publicly or privately owned vehicles as are designated or
authorized by the city department of public safety.
(4)
Bicycle. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem
wheels either of which is more than fourteen (14) inches in diameter.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
256/414
(5)
Bus. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten (10) passengers and used for the transportation of
persons; and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
(6)
Business district. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when within any six hundred (600) feet
along such roadway there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to
hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least three hundred (300)
feet of frontage on one (1) side or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the roadway, provided
that such business district is designated and marked.
(7)
Crosswalk.
a.
That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on
opposite sides of the roadway measured from the curbs or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the
transversal roadway;
b.
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or
other markings on the surface.
(8)
Department. The city department of public safety acting directly or through its duly authorized officers or agents.
(9)
Driver. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
(10)
Driver's license. Any license to operate a motor vehicle issued under the laws of this state.
(11)
Gross weight. The weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon.
(12)
Highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof
is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic.
(13)
House trailer.
a.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
257/414
A trailer or semi-trailer which is designed, constructed and equipped as a dwelling place, living abode or
sleeping place (either permanently or temporarily) and is equipped for use as a conveyance on streets or
highways; or
b.
A trailer or a semi-trailer whose chassis and exterior shell is designed and constructed for use as a house trailer,
as defined in paragraph (a), but which is used instead permanently or temporarily for the advertising, sales,
display or promotion of merchandise or services or for any other commercial purpose except the transportation
of property for hire or the transportation of property for distribution by a private carrier.
(14)
Intersection.
a.
The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral
boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles,
or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in
conflict.
b.
Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, every crossing of each roadway of
such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such
intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, every crossing of two (2)
roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
c.
The junction of an alley with a street or highway shall not constitute an intersection.
(15)
Laned roadway. A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
(16)
Limited-access highway. Every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting
lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway.
(17)
Loading zone. A space reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers
or property.
(18)
Motor vehicle. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, either by internal-combustion engine or by electric power.
(19)
Motorcycle. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not
more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
258/414
(20)
Officer. Every officer of the city department of public safety or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic
or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
(21)
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time as may be in current in the Augusta-Richmond County area.
(22)
Official traffic-control devices. All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter and the
laws of this state placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
(23)
Park or parking. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose
of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
(24)
Passenger curb loading zone. A place reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles while receiving or discharging
passengers.
(25)
Pedestrian. Any person afoot.
(26)
Person. Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or corporation.
(27)
Private road or driveway. Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner
and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
(28)
Railroad. A carrier of persons or property upon cars operated from stationary rails.
(29)
Railroad sign or signal. Any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a public body or official or by a
railroad and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
(30)
Railroad train. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, and operated upon
rails.
(31)
Residence district. The territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district when
the property on such highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is predominantly residential in
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
259/414
nature.
(32)
Right-of-way. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another
vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to
danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
(33)
Road or roadway. That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel,
exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term
"roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
(34)
Safety zone. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and
which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
(35)
Chief. The chief of police of the city.
(36)
Sidewalk. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent
property lines, intended for use by pedestrians.
(37)
Stand or standing. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose
of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
(38)
Stop. When required, means complete cessation from movement.
(39)
Stop or stopping. When prohibited, means any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer
or traffic-control sign or signal.
(40)
Street. The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open
to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
(41)
Through street or road. Every street or road or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential
right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersection streets or roads is required by law
to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such through street or road in obedience to a stop sign, yield sign, or
other traffic-control device, when such signs or devices are erected as provided in this chapter and the laws of
this state.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
260/414
(42)
Tractor.
a.
Truck tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so
constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
b.
Farm tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for drawing plows, mowing
machines, and other implements of husbandry.
c.
Road tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to
carry any load thereon either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
(43)
Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances either singly or together
while using any highway for purposes of travel.
(44)
Traffic-control signal. Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is
alternatively directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
(45)
Traffic division. The traffic section of the city department of public safety, or in the event a traffic division is not
established, then said term whenever used herein shall be deemed to refer to the city department of public safety.
(46)
Truck. Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
(47)
Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a
highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-2. - Parking on property of others.
(a)
Consent, compliance with signs or markings required. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor
vehicle, including any truck, passenger automobile, motorbike, motor scooter or any other vehicle upon any
private owned property, parking lot or driveway, without the consent of the owner, lessee, tenant or other person
entitled to possession and use of such premises; and as to any property on which the public is invited, implicitly
or otherwise, to park such vehicles, whether the same be owned privately or by a governmental agency, the
owner, lessee, tenant or other person entitled to possession and use of such premises may designate by signs or
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
261/414
appropriate markings on the parking area the places where such vehicles may be parked, and it shall be unlawful
for any person to park any such vehicle contrary to such signs or markings.
(b)
Removal; impoundment. It shall be the duty of the city department of public safety, upon a complaint being made
by the owner, lessee, tenant or other person having the right to use such premises, to impound any such vehicle
parked in violation of this section and store such vehicle as other vehicles impounded upon the streets of the city
are stored.
(c)
Violations; penalties. Any person who shall violate this section shall be charged with each and every violation
and, upon being found guilty, shall be punished by a fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00) and/or imprisonment in the city jail for a period not in excess of thirty (30) days.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-3. - Trespass by motor vehicle.
(a)
A person commits the offense of trespass by motor vehicle when the person, after having been requested not to
do so by a law enforcement officer or by the owner or an authorized agent of the owner, parks or stands an
occupied or unoccupied motor vehicle in, or repeatedly drives a motor vehicle through or within, a parking area
which is located on privately owned property and is provided by a merchant, a group of merchants, or a shopping
center or other similar facility for customers if:
(1)
The parking area is identified by at least one (1) sign as specified in this paragraph, and if the parking area
contains more than one hundred fifty (150) parking spaces then by at least one (1) sign for every one hundred
fifty (150) parking spaces, each such sign containing the following information in easy-to-read printing:
a.
Notice of the elements of the city ordinance of trespass by motor vehicle;
b.
Identification of the property which is reserved for customers' use only;
c.
Identification of the merchant, group of merchants, or shopping center or other similar facility providing the
parking area; and
d.
Warning that violators will be prosecuted; and
(2)
The motor vehicle is parked, is standing, or is being operated other than for the purpose of:
a.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
262/414
Transporting some person to or from the interior of the place of business of a merchant identified by the sign or
signs in the parking area or to or from the interior of the shopping center or other facility so identified;
b.
Making use of a telephone, vending machine, automatic teller machine, or other similar facility located in the
parking area;
c.
Meeting the requirements of a situation in which it has unexpectedly become impossible or impractical for the
motor vehicle to continue to travel on the public roads; or
d.
Carrying out an activity for which express permission has been given by the owner of the parking area or an
authorized representative of the owner.
(b)
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a monetary fine:
(1)
Not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first such violation;
(2)
Not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second such violation;
(3)
Not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the third or subsequent such violation.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-4. - Licenses for motor vehicles; drivers.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to own or operate any motor vehicle required to be
registered under the provisions of O.C.G.A § 4-2-201, as amended, without complying with said section.
(b)
It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle in the city in violation of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-120—40-5-124.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-5. - Insurance.
An owner or any other person within the city who knowingly operates, or knowingly authorizes another to
operate, a motor vehicle without effective insurance thereon or without an approved plan of self-insurance as
required by O.C.G.A. § 33-34-1 et seq., the state Motor Vehicle Accident Reparation's Act, shall be guilty of a
violation of this code.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
263/414
Secs. 15-6—15-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Sec. 15-26. - Authority to install traffic-control devices.
The city and the department of transportation shall place and maintain official traffic control devices when and as
required under this chapter to make effective the provisions of such chapter, and may place and maintain such
additional official traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under this
chapter or the state motor vehicle code.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-27. - Regulations and specifications for traffic control devices.
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the regulations and specifications approved by the
[city] and the department of transportation. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall
so far as practicable are uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected
and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic control devices.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-28. - Obedience to official traffic control devices.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto
placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by an officer, subject to the
exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-29. - When official traffic control devices required for enforcement.
No provision of this chapter for which official traffic control devices are required shall be enforced against an
alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official device is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that
official traffic control devices are required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or
in place.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-30. - Official traffic control device; presumption of legality.
(a)
Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in a position approximately conforming to the requirements
of this chapter, such device shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful
authority unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
(b)
Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and purporting to conform to
the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this
chapter unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-31. - City and department of transportation to designate crosswalks and establish safety zones.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
264/414
The city and department of transportation is hereby authorized:
(1)
To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at
intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such
other places as he may deem necessary;
(2)
To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the
protection of pedestrians.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-32. - Traffic lanes.
The city and department of transportation is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any
street or highway where alignment of traffic is necessary.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-33. - Stop signs and yield signs; failure to stop for stop sign; ran stop sign; failure to slow down or stop
for yield sign.
(a)
Except when directed to proceed by an officer, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line or, if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view
of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After stopping, the driver shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection of junction of
roadways.
(b)
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed
reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line
or, if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no
crosswalk, at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering it. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways. If such a driver is
involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such
collision shall be deemed prima-facie evidence of his failure to yield the right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-34. - Avoiding a traffic sign, signal or light.
Except when directed to proceed by an officer, no driver of a vehicle shall purposely leave the road or highway
to avoid having to stop, slow or yield for a traffic sign, signal or light.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
265/414
Secs. 15-35—15-55. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - SPEED REGULATIONS
Sec. 15-56. - State speed laws applicable.
The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the city except as
this article, as authorized by state law, hereby declares and determines upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation, that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or roads or in certain
areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so
declared in this article where signs are in place giving notice thereof.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-57. - Specific streets.
The following speed zones are established based on engineering and traffic investigation, to wit:
On system
State route Within the
city limit
From Mile point To Mile point Length in
miles
Speed limit
SR 223 Grovetown Grovetown
northwest
city limit,
0.09 mi.
northwest of
CR 238
Chamberlin
Road
11.15 0.04 mi.
northwest of
Creekside
Drive
11.51 0.36 45
SR 223 Grovetown 0.04 mi.
north of CS
601-
Katherine
Street
11.51 0.10 mi.
southeast of
CS 665
Selkirk Way
13.30 1.79 35
SR 223
School zone
Grovetown
Grovetown
Elementary
7:30 am to
8:30 am and
2:30 pm to
3:30 pm
school days
only
0.03 mi.
north of CS
601
Katherine
Street
12.44 0.04 mi.
south of CR
616-2nd
Avenue
12.76 .032 25
SR 223 Grovetown 0.10 mi.
southeast of
CS 665-
Selkirk Way
13.30 Grovetown
southeast
city limitSelkirk Way
13.73 0.42 45
SR 388 Grovetown SR 223 0.00 Grovetown
north city
limit, 0.21
mi. north of
Willowick
Road
1.27 1.27 45
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
266/414
Signs to be erected by the state department of transportation
Off-system
Road name Within the city
limits
From To Length in miles Speed limit
Newmantown
Road (CS 242)
Grovetown SR 223 CS 633 VFW
Road
.072 35
Newmantown
Road (CS 242)
Grovetown CS 633 CS 444 Parham
Road
0.56 45
Wrightsboro
Road
Grovetown SR 388 Grovetown city
limits
0.033 45
Harlem
Grovetown Road
(CR 575)
Grovetown Grovetown city
limits
SR 223 0.30 45
Old Wrightsboro
Road
Grovetown CS 601
Katherine Street
SR 223 0.56 35
Katherine Street Grovetown SR 223 CS 600 Old
Wrightsboro
Road
0.65 35
Katherine Street
(school zone)
Grovetown
Grovetown
Elementary 7:30
am to 8:30 am
AND 2:30 pm to
3:30 pm school
days only
SR 223 CS 616 2nd
Avenue
0.09 25
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-58. - Authority of city and department of transportation.
(a)
Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, the city and department of transportation shall make
recommendations to the city council for maximum and/or minimum speed limits and for speed zones in the city.
(b)
The city and department of transportation is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the
movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise
applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
267/414
Sec. 15-59. - When limits applicable.
Speed limits established pursuant to this article shall be applicable at all or such times as shall be indicated by
official traffic control devices.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-60. - Too fast for conditions.
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having
regard for the actual and potential hazards then existing. Under this section a person could be speeding even
though he is traveling the posted speed limit or less, if the conditions are such that a lower speed would be
reasonable.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-61. - Impeding the free flow of traffic.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of
traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-62. - Driving in a race or participating in a race.
No person shall drive any vehicle on a highway, street, or road, or any portion thereof, in the city in any race,
speed competition or contest, drag race or acceleration contest, test of physical endurance, exhibition of speed or
acceleration, or for the purpose of making a speed record; and no person shall in any manner participate in any
such race, competition of speed, contest of speed, or test or exhibition of speed.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-63. - Laying drags.
No driver of any motor vehicle shall operate the vehicle upon the public streets, highways, public or private
driveways, airport runways, or parking lots in such manner as to create a danger to persons or property by
intentionally and unnecessarily causing the vehicle to move in a zigzag or circular course, or to gyrate or spin
around, except to avoid a collision or injury or damage, causing tires to spin and/or squeal. This section shall not
apply to drivers operating vehicles in or on any raceway, drag strip, or similar place customarily and lawfully
used for such purposes.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-64. - School speed limit signs.
The department of transportation and the city is hereby authorized, for the purpose of regulating, warning or
guiding traffic in school zones of the city, to erect school speed limit signs designating a school zone, the speed
limit, and when the speed limit in the school zone will be enforceable. All signs shall be erected in compliance
with all state and federal regulations.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Secs. 15-65—15-80. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - TURNING MOVEMENTS
Sec. 15-81. - Authority to place devices altering normal course for turns.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
268/414
The city and department of transportation is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent
to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to
be traveled as indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-82. - Authority to place restricted turn signs.
The city and department of transportation is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers
of vehicles shall not make a right turn, left turn, or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The
making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which
event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-83. - Obedience to no-turn signs.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right turn or left turn or U-turn is permitted, no driver
of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-84. - Limitations on turning around.
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction:
(1)
Upon any curve (improper U-turn on curve);
(2)
Upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of another
vehicle approaching from either direction (improper U-turn on grade);
(3)
Where such turn cannot be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic (improper U-turn not made in
safety).
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-85. - Failure to yield right-of-way while turning left.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road or
driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the
intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-86. - Improper right turn.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall approach and turn as close as practicable to the
right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
269/414
Sec. 15-87. - Improper left turn.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at an intersection shall approach the turn in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle. Whenever practicable, the left
turn shall be made to the left of the center of the intersection and so as to leave the intersection or other location
in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the same direction as such vehicle on the
roadway being entered.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-88. - Improper starting of parked vehicle.
No person shall start a vehicle, which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be
made with reasonable safety.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-89. - Improper turning by not being in proper position and/or using signals.
No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as
required in sections 15-85 and 15-86 or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a
vehicle from a direct course or change lanes or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such
movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate
and timely signal in the manner provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-90. - Improper use of signal lights while turning.
A signal of intention to turn right or left or change lanes when required shall be given continuously for a time
sufficient to alert the driver of a vehicle proceeding from the rear in the same direction or a driver of a vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-91. - Improper use of signal lights while stopping or stopped.
No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the
manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is an opportunity to give
such a signal.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-92. - Improper use of signal lights if flashed on one side only of parked vehicle or used as do pass signal.
The signals provided for in subsection (2) of this section shall be used to indicate an intention to turn, change
lanes, or start from a parked position and shall not be flashed on one (1) side only on a parked or disabled
vehicle, or flashed as a courtesy or do pass signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear.
(1)
Any stop or turn signal when required in this article shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by
signal lamps.
(2)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
270/414
Any motor vehicle in use on a highway, street or road shall be equipped with, and a required signal shall be
given by, signal lamps when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of
the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds twenty-four (24) inches, or when the distance from the
center of the top of the steering post to the rear limits of the body or load thereof exceeds fourteen (14) feet. The
latter measurement shall apply to any single vehicle, and also to any combination of vehicles.
When two (2) vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different highways at approximately the same
time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right, provided that
when a vehicle approaches or enters an intersection with no stop signs or other traffic-control devices from a
highway that terminates at the intersection, the driver of the vehicle shall yield: the right-of-way to the other
vehicle, whether the latter vehicle be on his right or left.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-93. - Failure to yield right-of-way from driveway.
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a roadway from any place other than another roadway shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-94. - Failure to stop while emerging from alley or driveway onto residential or business street.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road or driveway within a business or
residential district shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across such alley, building entrance, road or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall
stop at the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-95. - Failure to yield right-of-way to emergency vehicle.
(a)
Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of an audible signal and visual
signals meeting the requirements of state law, or of a vehicle belonging to a federal, state or local law
enforcement agency properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle
shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the
right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until
the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by an officer.
(b)
This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive
with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-96. - Failure to yield for highway construction vehicle or person.
The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any authorized vehicle or pedestrian actually engaged in
work upon a highway, street or road, within any highway construction or maintenance area indicated by official
traffic-control devices.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
271/414
Sec. 15-97. - Failure to yield for highway construction displaying amber lights.
The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to an authorized vehicle actually engaged in work upon a
highway whenever such vehicle displays flashing or revolving amber lights and has a permit to use such amber
lights.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Secs. 15-98—15-110. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Sec. 15-111. - Crossing at right angles.
Except where otherwise indicated by a crosswalk or other official traffic-control devices, a pedestrian shall cross
a roadway at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite side.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-112. - Failure to stop by pedestrian for railroad crossing barrier.
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing
or bridge while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-113. - Drivers must use due care with children and drunks.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid
colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway, shall give warning by sounding his horn when necessary, and
shall exercise proper precautions upon observing any child or any obviously confused, incapacitated or
intoxicated person.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-114. - Pedestrian under the influence.
A person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any drug to a degree, which renders him a hazard,
shall not walk or be upon any roadway.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-115. - No person to stand in road to solicit rides or business.
(a)
No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride.
(b)
Except as herein provided, no person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment,
business or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle. Notwithstanding the above, a permit for solicitation
on the right-of-way may be obtained from the city provided the applicant meets the following criteria, to-wit:
(1)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
272/414
The applicant shall be a charitable organization, and the solicitation shall only be for contributions for a
charitable purpose and shall not be for the purpose of selling goods or materials of any kind;
(2)
The applicant shall provide a plan for review and comment by the city department of public safety, which plan
will assure the safety of the applicant's representatives, as well as the motoring public, at the locations where the
solicitation will take place;
(3)
The applicant shall indicate in specific detail the location of such solicitation, together with the hours thereof;
(4)
The applicant shall not have previously solicited contributions on the right-of-way in the city within the
preceding twelve (12) months;
(5)
The applicant shall provide an indemnification and hold harmless agreement in favor of the city commission, its
elected officials and officers, servants, and employees, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney;
(6)
The city department of public safety may consider the nature of the solicitation request, the plan for safety of the
applicant's representatives, as well as the motoring public, the location where solicitation is being proposed, the
hours of proposed solicitation, expected or anticipated traffic or traffic congestion at the proposed locations, prior
requests by the applicant as well as prior experience with solicitations by said applicant, and such other matters
as may be important to assure the safety of the applicant's representatives as well as the motoring public at the
time and place where the solicitation is proposed to take place;
(7)
The city department of public safety shall have the right to terminate the solicitation at any time, either before or
during the solicitation event, should traffic, weather, or other conditions develop, which in the sole discretion of
the city department of public safety, present a danger to the applicant's representatives or the motoring public.
(c)
No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or
guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-116. - Driver must yield to pedestrian on sidewalk.
The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian on a sidewalk. It shall make no difference
whether a vehicle is coming out of a private driveway, alley, building or other location, or whether it is entering
from the street or highway.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Secs. 15-117—15-120. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - REGULATIONS FOR BICYCLES
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
273/414
Sec. 15-121. - Effect of regulations.
(a)
It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this article.
(b)
These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon
any path set aside within the city for the exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-122. - Traffic ordinances apply to persons riding bicycles.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except as to special regulations in this article and
except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-123. - Obedience to traffic-control devices.
Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic-control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by an officer.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Secs. 15-124—15-130. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. - OBEDIENCE TO RAILROAD CROSSING SIGNALS
Sec. 15-131. - Failure to stop for railroad crossing.
Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing, such driver shall stop within fifty
(50) feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed until he can
do so safely, when:
(1)
A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train;
(2)
A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach of the passage
of a train; or
(3)
An approaching train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-132. - Disregarding railroad crossing barrier.
No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing
while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
274/414
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-133. - Failure to stop for stop sign at railroad crossing.
Wherever particularly dangerous highway grade crossings may exist, stop signs may be erected thereat, requiring
all vehicles to stop. Whenever such stop signs are erected, the driver of any vehicle shall stop within fifty (50)
feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall proceed only upon
exercising due care.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-134. - Taxis, school buses and gas trucks to stop at railroad crossings and not change gears while driving
across railroad tracks.
(a)
Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire,
or of any school bus carrying any schoolchild, or of any vehicle carrying explosive substances or flammable
liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing at grade, track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle
within fifty (50) feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and while so stopped
shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the
approach of a train and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. After stopping as required in this section and
upon proceeding when it is safe to do so, the driver of any such vehicle shall cross only in such gear of the
vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing such crossing; and the driver shall not
shift gears while crossing the track or tracks.
(b)
No stop need be made at any such crossing where a officer or a traffic-control signal directs traffic to proceed.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Secs. 15-135—15-140. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. - FUNERAL PROCESSIONS
Sec. 15-141. - Driving through funeral or other procession.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while
they are in motion. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control
signals or law enforcement officers.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-142. - Drivers in a procession.
Each driver in funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable
and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Secs. 15-143—15-160. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. - MOTORCYCLES, MOTORIZED CARTS, MOPEDS, OFF-ROAD VEHICLES, MINIBIKES
Sec. 15-161. - Traffic laws applicable to persons operating motorcycles.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
275/414
Every person operating a motorcycle shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under this chapter except as to special regulations in this article and
except to those provisions of this chapter, which by their very nature can have no application.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-162. - Person riding motorcycle must face forward with one leg on either side of motorcycle.
(a)
A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto; and such
operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle
is designed to carry more than one (1) person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and
regular seat if designed for two (2) persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear
side of the operator.
(b)
A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the seat, facing forward, with one (1) leg on
either side of the motorcycle.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-163. - Person cannot carry article which prevents him from keeping both hands on handlebars.
No person shall operate a motorcycle while carrying any package, bundle or other article, which prevents him
from keeping both hands on the handlebars.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-164. - Passenger must not interfere with control or view of operator.
No operator shall carry any person, nor shall any person ride, in a position that will interfere with the operation
or control of the motorcycle or the view of the operator.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-165. - Operator and passenger must wear shoes on motorcycle.
No person shall operate or ride upon a motorcycle unless he shall wear some type of footwear in addition to or
other than socks.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-166. - Other vehicles must give motorcycle full lane.
All motorcycles are entitled to full use of a lane, and no motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to
deprive any motorcycle of the full use of a lane. This section shall not apply to motorcycles operated two (2)
abreast in a single lane.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-167. - Motorcycles cannot pass in same lane as another vehicle.
The operator of a motorcycle shall not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle being
overtaken.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
276/414
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-168. - Motorcycles cannot operate between lanes of traffic.
No person shall operate a motorcycle between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-169. - More than two motorcycles abreast in traffic lane.
Motorcycles shall not be operated more than two (2) abreast in a single lane.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-170. - Motorcycle headlight and taillight on.
A person operating a motorcycle shall at all times keep his headlamps and taillights illuminated.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-171. - Motorcycle clinging to other vehicle.
No person riding upon a motorcycle shall attach himself or the motorcycle to any other vehicle on a roadway.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-172. - Passengers must have footrests.
Any motorcycle carrying a passenger, other than in a sidecar or enclosed cab, shall be equipped with footrests for
such passenger.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-173. - Handlebars more than fifteen inches above seat, back rest with sharp point at tip.
No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebars more than fifteen (15) inches in height above that
portion of the seat occupied by the operator or with a backrest more commonly known as a sissy bar that is
designed in such a way as to create a sharp point at its apex.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-174. - Helmet required.
No person shall operate or ride upon a motorcycle unless he is wearing protective headgear, which complies with
standards established by the state board of public safety. (See O.C.G.A. 40-6-331).
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-175. - Windshield or visor required.
No person shall operate or ride upon a motorcycle if the motorcycle is not equipped with a windshield unless he
is wearing an eye-protective device of a type approved by the board of public safety. This section shall not apply
to persons riding within an enclosed cab or motorized cart.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-176. - Operating a motorized cart on a public street, road or highway.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
277/414
No person shall operate any motorized cart upon a street, road or public highway in the city, or on private
property without the permission of the owner of such private property.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-177. - Traffic laws applicable to persons operating mopeds.
Every person operating a moped shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to
the driver of any other vehicle under this chapter, except as to special regulations in this article and except as to
those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. However, the operator of a
moped shall not be required to comply with sections relating to headlamps and taillamps, or sections relating to
windshields and eye-protective devices.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-178. - Driver's license or permit required for certain operators.
No person under fifteen (15) years of age shall operate a moped upon the public roads and highways of the city.
No person shall operate a moped upon the public roads and highways of the city unless he shall have in his
possession a valid drivers license, instructional permit, or limited permit issued to pursuant to O.C.G.A. chapter
5, title 40, state motor vehicles and traffic laws, relating to drivers license; however, all classes of licenses,
instructional permits or limited permits issued pursuant to the O.C.G.A. chapter 5, title 40, shall be valid for the
purposes of operating mopeds upon the public roads and highways of this state.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-179. - Protective headgear required.
No person shall operate or ride as a passenger upon a moped unless he is wearing protective headgear, which
complies with standards established by the state commissioner of public safety. Such standards need not
necessarily be the same as for motorcyclists; however, any moped operator wearing an approved motorcycle
helmet shall be deemed in compliance with this section.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-180. - Reserved.
Sec. 15-181. - Operation of off-road vehicle on public street, road or highway.
(a)
No person shall operate any off-road vehicle on any public street, road or highway in the city unless such vehicle
is being used exclusively for its designed purposes; however, such operation shall meet all other requirements as
required by state law regulating the use, operation or movement of such vehicle.
(b)
Any person operating an off-road vehicle under any of the following conditions shall be deemed to be in
violation of this article:
(1)
Without operative brakes, or without mufflers or other silencing equipment;
(2)
On any private property without the express written permission of the owner of the property or his agent.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
278/414
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Secs. 15-182—15-200. - Reserved.
ARTICLE X. - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES
Sec. 15-201. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 161, § 1, adopted May 25, 2001, deleted § 15-201, which pertained to parking not to obstruct traffic and
derived from Ord. No. 135, adopted September 13, 1999.
Sec. 15-202. - Improper parking.
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a law
enforcement officer or official traffic-control device, no person shall:
(1)
Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
a.
On the curb or shoulder of any two-way road;
b.
On a sidewalk;
c.
Within an intersection;
d.
On a crosswalk;
e.
Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite
the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings;
f.
Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct
traffic;
g.
Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel;
h.
On any railroad tracks;
i.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
279/414
On any controlled-access highway;
j.
In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers; or
k.
At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
(2)
Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or
passengers:
a.
In front of a public or private driveway;
b.
Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
c.
Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
d.
Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic-control signal
located at the side of a roadway;
e.
Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, or on the side of a street opposite the
entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance (when properly signposted); or
f.
At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
(3)
Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading property or passengers:
a.
Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
b.
At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
(4)
No parking areas.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
280/414
a.
No vehicle shall park in any area that has been designated or approved as a no-parking area by the city
department of public safety, the and department of transportation, or the fire department.
b.
The prohibited no-parking areas shall include but not be limited to the following: Parking in fire lane; improper
parking, parking where signs prohibit; yellow curb; loading zone; handicapped zone (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-225);
parking on sidewalk; and parking at fire plug.
c.
It shall be unlawful and in violation of this subsection to park any vehicle within the area so designated as a noparking area.
d.
It shall be the duty of the city department of public safety to enforce the provisions of this subsection (4); and
each officer finding a vehicle which is in violation of the terms of this subsection (4) shall attach to such vehicle
a summons to the owner, or operator thereof, that such vehicle has been parked in violation of this subsection
(4).
The citation shall designate the state license number of such vehicle and the city; the time during which such
vehicle is parked in violation of this subsection (4); and any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary to a
thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
(5)
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a monetary fine as follows:
a.
Improper parking: Twenty dollars ($20.00).
b.
Handicap zone (O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-225 and 40-6-226): Not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00.)
(6)
The vehicle of any person which accumulates parking violations in excess of the sum of forty-five dollars
($45.00) shall be impounded by the city department of public safety by a city list wrecker in the event the vehicle
can be located and seized within the city. The vehicle shall be held until accumulated fines and wrecker fees have
been paid in full.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99; Ord. No. 161, § 2, 5-23-05)
Sec. 15-203. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 161, § 1, adopted May 25, 2001, deleted § 15-203, which pertained to improper parking and derived
from Ord. No. 135, adopted September 13, 1999.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
281/414
Sec. 15-204. - Obstructing an intersection.
No driver shall enter an intersection unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians,
notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Secs. 15-205—15-220. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
Sec. 15-221. - Driving on sidewalk.
No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area except upon a permanent or duly authorized
driveway.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-222. - More than three persons in front seat.
(a)
No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such a number of persons,
exceeding three (3), as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with
the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(b)
No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or
to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-223. - Opening vehicle doors and interfering with traffic.
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is
reasonably safe to do so and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than
necessary to load or unload passengers.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-224. - Following or parking within five hundred feet of fire truck or other emergency vehicle.
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in
response to a fire alarm or any other emergency vehicle closer than five hundred (500) feet and shall not drive or
park such vehicle within five hundred (500) feet of any fire apparatus stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-225. - Crossing fire hose.
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street, private
road or driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire without consent of the fire department official in
command.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
282/414
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-226. - Operating unauthorized vehicle with blue lights.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate any motor vehicle with flashing or revolving
blue lights except motor vehicles owned or leased by any federal, state or local law enforcement agency.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-227. - Without or expired emergency light permit.
All emergency vehicles shall be designated as such by the state board of public safety. The board shall so
designate each vehicle a permit to operate flashing or revolving emergency lights of the appropriate color. Such
permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-228. - Unauthorized vehicle with red/amber lights.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate any motor vehicle with flashing or revolving
red or amber lights except motor vehicles owned or leased by any federal, state or public safety or emergency
agency or other entity authorized to use same.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-229. - Illegal use of siren, whistle or bell.
No vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle, shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a
vehicle any siren, whistle or bell. No vehicle shall be equipped with a theft alarm signal device, which is so
arranged that it can be used by the driver as an ordinary warning signal.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-230. - Wearing device which impairs hearing or vision.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing a headset or headphone, which would impair such
person's ability to hear, nor shall any person while operating a motor vehicle wear any device, which impairs
such person's vision. This section shall not apply to hearing aids or instruments for the improvement of defective
human hearing, eyeglasses, or sunglasses; nor shall it apply to authorized fire or law enforcement personnel.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-231. - Use of headlights required at specific times.
Every vehicle upon a highway, street or road within the city shall display lights, including headlights at any time
from one-half (½) hour after sunset to one-half (½) hour before sunrise and at any time when it is raining in the
driving zone and at any other time when there is not sufficient visibility to render clearly discernible persons and
vehicles on the highway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet ahead.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-232. - Failure to dim headlights.
(a)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
283/414
Whenever a driver of a vehicle approaches an upcoming vehicle within five hundred (500) feet, such driver shall
use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the
oncoming driver.
(b)
Whenever the driver of a vehicle follows another vehicle within two hundred (200) feet to the rear, except when
engaged in the act of overtaking and passing, such driver shall dim his headlights.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-233. - No brakes.
Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, when operated upon a highway, street or
road, shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle.
Every motorcycle and motor-driven cycle manufactured after January 1, 1974, when operated upon a highway,
shall be equipped with at least two (2) brakes which may be operated by hand or foot.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-234. - Excessive noise and/or excessive smoke.
Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant
operation so as to prevent the escape of excessive fumes or smoke. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
any vehicle with any muffler system, which causes excessive or unusual noise or annoying smoke.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-235. - Operating a vehicle with altered suspension system.
(a)
It shall be unlawful to alter the suspension system of any private passenger motor vehicle, which may be
operated on any public street or highway more than two (2) inches above or below the factory recommendation
for any such vehicle.
(b)
It shall be unlawful to operate any private passenger motor vehicle upon any highway, roadway or street if the
suspension system of such vehicle has been altered more than two (2) inches above or below the factory
recommendation for such vehicle.
(c)
It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle upon any highway, roadway or street if the springs relative to
the suspension system are broken.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-236. - Driving unsafe or improperly equipped vehicle.
No person shall drive or move on any highway, street or road any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or pole
trailer, or any combination thereof, unless the equipment upon any and every such vehicle is in good working
order and adjustment, and the vehicle is in such safe mechanical condition as not to endanger the driver or other
occupant or any person upon the highway.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
284/414
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-237. - Driving on wrong side of road.
Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as
follows:
(1)
When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such
movement;
(2)
When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the highway, provided that
any person so doing shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such a distance as to constitute an immediate hazard;
(3)
Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; or
(4)
Upon a roadway restricted to two-way traffic.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-238. - Slower drivers must stay in right lane.
Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and
under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-239. - Impeding normal flow of traffic by driving side-by-side.
No two (2) vehicles shall impede the normal flow of traffic by traveling side-by-side at the same time while in
adjacent lanes, provided that this section shall not be construed to prevent vehicles traveling side-by-side in
adjacent lanes because of congested traffic conditions.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-240. - No passing on shoulder of road.
(a)
The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following
conditions:
(1)
When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn; or
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
285/414
(2)
Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving
vehicles in the direction being traveled by the overtaking vehicle.
(b)
If otherwise authorized, the driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under
such conditions permitting such movement in safety. Such movement shall not be made by driving off the
roadway.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-241. - Passing on hill or curve.
No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of a roadway designed and authorized for traffic traveling in opposite
directions, when approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the highway where the driver's view is
obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the
opposite direction.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-242. - Passing within one hundred feet of intersection or railroad crossing.
No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of a roadway designed and authorized for traffic traveling in opposite
directions when approaching within one hundred (100) feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade
crossing.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-243. - Passing on solid yellow line.
No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the roadway when such portion of the roadway is clearly defined as
a no-passing zone by means of a solid barrier yellow line placed on the right-hand element of a combination
stripe along the center or lane line.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-244. - Improper lane change.
Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following
rules, in addition to all other consistent with this chapter, shall apply:
(1)
A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such
lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
(2)
Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes, and provides for two-way movement of traffic, with two
(2) lanes in one (1) direction, a vehicle being driven in a continuous or center lane shall have the right of way
when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same direction.
(3)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
286/414
Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes and provides for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle
shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same
direction when such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for making a left turn,
or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the
vehicle is proceeding and such allocation is designated by official traffic-control devices or road striping.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-245. - Improper backing.
(a)
A driver shall not back a vehicle unless such movement can be made with safety and without interfering with
other traffic.
(b)
A driver of a vehicle shall not back a vehicle upon any shoulder or roadway of any controlled-access highway.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-246. - Improper passing.
The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof
at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken
vehicle.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-247. - Following too closely.
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent,
having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-248. - Crossing median in divided highways.
Every vehicle driven on a divided highway shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or
permitted to use another roadway by official traffic-control devices or law enforcement officers. No vehicle shall
be driven over, across or within any dividing space, barrier or section separating the roadways of a divided
highway; except that a vehicle may be driven through an operating in such physical barrier or dividing space or
at an established crossover or intersection unless specifically prohibited by an official sign, signal or trafficcontrol device.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-249. - Driving on highway closed to public.
No person shall, without lawful authority, drive around or through or ignore any official traffic-control device so
as to go onto an officially closed highway or road or onto a section of highway or road before it has been
officially opened to the public. This section shall not apply to law enforcement officers in the performance of
their duties, to individuals domiciled or making their livelihood within the affected area, or to any person
authorized to be in the affected area by the appropriate law enforcement officer.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
287/414
Sec. 15-250. - Refusal to comply with officer directing traffic.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or [direction of any officer directing
traffic.]
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Secs. 15-251—15-270. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. - REGULATING THE KINDS AND CLASSES OF TRAFFIC ON CERTAIN HIGHWAYS
Sec. 15-271. - Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets or highways.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any commercial vehicle at any time upon
any of the streets or highways or parts thereof except that such vehicles may be operated thereon for the purpose
of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise and then only by entering such street or highway at the
intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and proceeding thereon no farther than the nearest intersection
thereafter.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-272. - Excluding specific traffic.
The city and department of transportation is hereby authorized upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation to determine and designate those heavily traveled streets or roads upon which shall be prohibited
any class or kind of traffic which is found to be incompatible with the normal and safe movement of traffic and
shall erect appropriate official traffic-control devices giving notice thereof.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-273. - Through trucks prohibited from using certain streets or roads.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any through truck or tractor, as defined in
this chapter, at any time upon any of the streets or roads or parts thereof.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Secs. 15-274—15-290. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII. - PARKING RESTRICTIONS FOR TRUCKS AND BUSES
Sec. 15-291. - Time limit for trucks.
No person shall park or stand any truck or other freight-carrying vehicles, including any truck tractor, in excess
of one-ton capacity, of three (3) or more axles upon any public street or highway or upon any property zoned
residential for longer than one (1) hour at any time during the day or night except as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-292. - Attendant required for certain trucks, buses.
No person shall stop or stand any truck or bus with a body more than eight (8) feet wide or ten (10) feet high on
any street or public place without the driver or chauffeur being actually present and in charge thereof.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Secs. 15-293—15-300. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XIV. - ABANDONED VEHICLES
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
288/414
Sec. 15-301. - Parking vehicles with invalid license plates.
Any automobile, vehicle or trailer of any kind or type, without a valid license plate attached thereto, shall not be
parked or stand on any residentially zoned property or other zoned property unless it shall be in a completely
enclosed building or on property properly zoned according to the city comprehensive zoning ordinance.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
Sec. 15-302. - Inoperative or junk vehicle—Parking prohibition; exceptions.
No automobile, vehicle or trailer of any kind or type, which shall be inoperative or in a junk condition, shall be
parked or stand on any residentially zoned property or other zoned property unless:
(1)
It shall be in an enclosed building;
(2)
It shall be on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary to the operation
of such business enterprise; or
(3)
It shall be on property occupied and used for repair, reconditioned or remodeling of vehicles in conformance
with zoning ordinances of the city.
(Ord. No. 135, 9-13-99)
APPENDIX A - ZONING
FOOTNOTE(S):
(29) Editor's note— The zoning ordinance, being Ord. No. 57, adopted on December 20, 1976, is set out herein
as adopted and amended, except that the broad title "Section" has been redesignated "Article," and the parts
thereof designated "Section." Amendatory enactments are cited in parentheses following amended provisions.
Explanatory words and state law update notes have been inserted by the editor. Words appearing in brackets
herein have been added by the editor for clarification, except that obviously misspelled words have been
corrected without notation.
(29) Charter reference— Zoning authority, § 25.
(29) Cross reference— Planning commission, § 13-1 et seq.; zoning procedures, §§ 13-5, 13-6.
(29) State Law reference— Zoning authority, Const. 1983, Art. IX, 2, ¶ 4; zoning procedures law, O.C.G.A. §
36-66-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(30) Editor's note— Such Act was not carried forward into O.C.G.A.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
289/414
Sec. 1.000. - Jurisdiction.
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all land, buildings, and structures within the incorporated areas of
Grovetown, Georgia.
Sec. 1.010. - Title.
This ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, City of Grovetown,
Georgia.
Sec. 1.020. - Zoning map.
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this ordinance are bounded and defined as
shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map of Grovetown, Georgia," and certified by the city clerk.
Sec. 1.030. - Zoning districts established.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Grovetown is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
Residential Districts
R-1 Residential
R-2 Residential
R-3 Residential
R-3A Residential
R-4 Townhouse
Commercial Districts
C-1 Commercial
C-2 Commercial
C-3 Commercial
C-4 Commercial
Industrial Districts
M-1 Light Industrial
M-2 Heavy Industrial
Sec. 1.040. - Interpretation of district boundaries.
Unless otherwise shown on the zoning map, the boundary lines of zoning districts are lot lines, the centerlines of
streets or alleys, or such lines extended, railroad right-of-way lines, the centerlines of creeks and streams, or the
corporate limit line as it existed at the time of the enactment of this ordinance.
Zoning district boundary lines not coinciding with lot lines, the centerlines of streets or alleys, or such lines
extended, railroad right-of-way lines, the centerlines of creeks or streams, or the corporate line of the city, as it
existed at the time of the enactment of this ordinance shall be determined by use of the scale on the zoning map,
unless actual dimensions are noted.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
290/414
The board of zoning appeals shall resolve any questions or controversy arising over the exact location of district
boundary lines.
Sec. 1.050. - Definitions.
For the purposes of this ordinance and in order to carry out the provisions and intentions as set forth herein,
certain words, terms, and phrases are to be used and interpreted as herein defined. Words used in the present
tense shall include the future tenses; words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural
number include the singular; the word "person" includes a firm, partnership, or corporation as well as an
individual; the term "shall" is always mandatory and not directory; and the word "may" is permissive. The word
"used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended,
arranged, or designed" to be used or occupied.
The following words, terms, and phrases are hereby defined as follows and shall be interpreted as such
throughout this ordinance. Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them.
Accessory use: (See "Use").
Amend or amendment: Any repeal, modification, or addition to a regulation; and new regulation; any change in
the numbers, shape, boundary, or area of a district or any repeal or abolition of any map, part thereof, or addition
thereto.
Apartment house: (See "Dwelling, multiple-family").
Automobile garage, private: An accessory building, carport or similar structure, or portion of a main building
designed, arranged, or used for the housing of private motor vehicles, only one of which may be a commercial
vehicle.
Automobile parking lot or garage, commercial: A lot or building or portion thereof, other than an automobile
sales lot, held out or used for the storage or parking of six (6) or more motor vehicles for a consideration where
service or repair facilities are not permitted. Such parking lot or garage shall not be considered an accessory use;
nor shall it be used for the storage of dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles, parts thereof, or junk.
Automobile sales, repair, and service garage: A building in which the business of general motor vehicle repair
and service is conducted, but excluding junk and/or auto wrecking business. (See also "Automobile service
station").
Automobile sales lot: A lot arranged, designed, or used for the storage and display for sale of any motor vehicle
or any type of trailer provided the trailer is unoccupied, and where no repair work is done except minor
incidental repair of automobiles or trailers displayed and sold on the premises.
Automobile service station: A building, lot, or both in or upon which gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and
automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and where, in addition, the following services
may be rendered and sales made, and no other:
a.
Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, and distributors and distributor parts.
b.
Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving.
c.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
291/414
Replacement of mufflers and tail pipes, water hose, fan belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats,
windshield wipers and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors, and the like.
d.
Radiator cleaning and flushing.
e.
Washing and polishing, and sale of automotive washing and polishing materials.
f.
Greasing and lubrication.
g.
Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps, and lines.
h.
Minor servicing and repair of carburetors.
i.
Emergency wiring repairs.
j.
Adjusting and repairing brakes.
k.
Minor motor adjustments not involving removal of the head or crankcase or racing the motor.
l.
Sale of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco, and similar convenience goods for service station customers as
accessory and incidental to principal operation.
m.
Provision of road maps and other informational material to customers; provision of restroom facilities.
Uses permissible at a service station do not include major mechanical and body work, straightening of body
parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving noise, glare,
fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in service stations. A service
station is hereby declared not to be a repair and service garage nor a body shop.
Automobile wrecking: (See "Junkyard").
Billboard: A structure on which is portrayed information not necessarily related to the other uses permitted on
the zoning lot upon which the structure is located, but not including painted walls. (See also "Sign").
Boardinghouse: A residence in which, for compensation, lodging or meals, or both, are furnished to not more
than nine (9) guests. A boardinghouse shall not be deemed a home occupation.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
292/414
Broadcasting stations and towers: A place equipped and used to transmit radio or television programs, including
tower structures.
Building: Any structure which:
a.
Is permanently affixed to the land; and
b.
Has one (1) or more floors and a roof; and
c.
Is bounded by either open area or the lot lines of a zoning lot.
A building shall not include such structures as mobile homes, trailers, billboards, signs, fences, or radio towers,
or structures with interior surfaces not normally accessible for human use, such as gas holders, tanks, smoke
stakes[stacks], grain elevators, coal bunkers, oil cracking towers, or similar structures.
Building, accessory: A building subordinate to, and located on the same zoning lot with a main building, the use
of which is clearly incidental to that of the main building or to the principal use of the land, and which is not
attached by any part of a common wall or a common roof to the main building.
Building area: The maximum horizontal projected area of a building and its accessory buildings.
Building height: The vertical distance measured from the level of approved street grade opposite the middle of
the front of the building to the highest point of roof surface of a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard floor
[roof]; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof; except that, if a
building is located on a terrace, the height above the street grade may be increased by the height of the terrace.
Building inspector: The building inspector of the City of Grovetown or his authorized representative.
Building line setback: A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the property line and a
building on a lot, within which no building or other structure shall be placed except as otherwise provided.
Building line setback, front: The minimum allowable distance between the street right-of-way, or an official
future street right-of-way, and the front of a building or structure on a lot. The front setback distance applies to
the full width of the lot and is parallel to or concentric with the street right-of-way.
Building line setback, rear: The minimum allowable distance between the rear property line and a building or
structure on a lot. The rear setback applies to and extends the full width of the lot.
Building line setback, side: The minimum allowable distance between the side property line and building or
structure on a lot. The side setback applies to the full depth of a lot.
Cemetery: A place used for the permanent interment of dead bodies or the cremated remain thereof. It may be
either a burial park for earth interments, a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments, a columbarium for cinerary
interments, or a combination thereof.
Child care center: Day nursery, child boarding home, day camp, summer camp, foster family home, or other
place for the reception, board or care, with or without compensation, of a child or children under sixteen (16)
years of age. For the purpose of this ordinance, a facility providing day child care between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m. to not more than three (3) children shall not be considered a child care center. Further, the term
shall not include any family type facility which provides child care to not more than five (5) children placed by
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
293/414
order of any court of competent jurisdiction, by any public welfare department or other governmental agency
having responsibility of placing children for care, or placed by a child-placing agency.
Churches and fraternal organization: Institutions including places of public worship and places of private
membership where large groups meet regularly for religious, professional, charitable, or social purposes.
Commercial district: Any district whose designation begins with the letter "C."
Commercial parking garage: (See "Automobile parking garage, commercial").
Commercial parking lot: (See "Automobile parking lot, commercial").
Commercial use: Any use involving in part or in whole the storage of merchandise, sale of merchandise,
materials or services, but not including home occupations, as defined in this section.
Conforming use: Any use complying with the regulations of this ordinance.
Corner lot: Any lot bounding the intersection of two (2) streets, or upon the inside of a curve of a street where
the corner interior angle is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Depth of lot: The main horizontal distance between the front lot line and rear lot line of a zoning lot.
Drive-in restaurant or refreshment stand: Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or serving food,
refreshments, or beverages in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may serve
themselves and may eat or drink the food, refreshments, or beverages on the premises.
Dwelling: A building designed for dwelling purposes. The term "dwelling" or any combination thereof shall not
be deemed to include hotel, rooming or boarding house, motel, clubhouse, hospital or other accommodations
used for transient occupancy.
Dwelling, multiple-family: A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units (an apartment house).
Dwelling, single-family: A building containing not more than one (1) dwelling unit and not occupied by more
than one (1) family.
Dwelling, two-family: A building located on one (1) zoning lot containing not more than two (2) dwelling units,
arranged one above the other or side by side, and not occupied by more than two (2) families.
Dwelling unit: One (1) or more rooms in a residential building or in a mixed use building, which are arranged,
designed, used or intended for use by one (1) or more persons living together and maintaining a common
household, and which include lawful cooking space and lawful sanitary facilities reserved for the occupants
thereof.
Easement: A right or privilege in the owner of one parcel of land by reasons of such ownership to use the land of
another for a special purpose not inconsistent with a general property in the owner.
Enlargement, or to enlarge: An addition to the floor area of an existing building, an increase in the size of any
other structure, or an increase in that portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use. To "enlarge" is to
make an enlargement.
Extension, or to extend: An increase in the amount of existing floor area used for an existing use within an
existing building. The "extend" is to make an extension.
Filling station: (See "Automobile service station").
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
294/414
Floor area: The sum of the gross areas of the several floors of a building or buildings, measured from the
exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center lines of walls or from the center lines of walls separating two
(2) buildings.
Frontage: The length of the front lot line of a zoning lot abutting a public street, road, or highway, or rural rightof-way.
Garage: (All types) (See "Automobile garage").
Gasoline station: (See "Automobile service station").
Government buildings: Buildings used by the various departments of a governing authority in the performance of
their respective public service functions.
Hospital: An institution receiving in-patients and rendering medical, surgical and/or obstetrical care to patients,
and usually including research and training activities. This shall include general hospitals and institutions in
which service is limited to special fields such as cardiac, eye, ear, nose and throat, pediatric, orthopedic, skin and
cancer, tuberculosis, chronic disease and obstetrics. Hospital patients generally require intensive care for periods
generally not exceeding several months.
Hotel: An establishment which is open to transient guests, in contradistinction to a boarding, rooming or lodging
house; and which provides customary hotel services such as maid service, the furnishing and laundering of linen,
telephone and secretarial or desk service, the use and upkeep of furniture, bellboy service and food service.
Industrial districts: Any district whose designation begins with the letter "M."
Junkyard: The use of any space, whether inside or outside a building, for the abandonment, storage, keeping,
collection, disassembling or bailing of paper, rags, scrap metals, or other scrap or discarded materials, or for the
abandonment, demolition, dismantling, or salvaging of automobiles or other vehicles; or machinery or parts
thereof; or appliances (gas or electric); provided, that this definition shall not apply to any such use conducted
solely as an accessory use.
Kennel: Any zoning lot on which three (3) or more dogs six (6) months old or older are kept.
Lot: (See "Zoning lot").
Lot area: The area of a zoning lot.
Lot coverage: That portion of the lot area required for buildings and structures located on a zoning lot.
Lot line: A boundary of a zoning lot.
Lot line, front: In the case of an interior lot, it is that line separating said lot from the street. In the case of a
corner lot, or double frontage lot, it is that line separating said lot from a street.
Lot line, rear: The lot line that is most distant from, and is, or is most nearly parallel to, the front lot line. If the
rear lot line is less than ten (10) feet long, or if the lot comes to a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line
at least ten (10) feet long, lying wholly within the lot, parallel to the front lot line.
Lot line, side: Any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
Lot width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a zoning lot at the building line.
Medical or dental clinics: Any building or group of buildings occupied by two (2) or more medical or dental
practitioners for the purpose of providing health services to people on an out-patient basis.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
295/414
Mobile home: A structure or vehicle with the following characteristics:
a.
It is used, designed for use, or capable of being used as living quarters, and contains sleeping accommodations, a
flush toilet, a tub or shower bath, kitchen facilities, and plumbing and electrical connections for attachment to
outside systems.
b.
It is designed for transportation after fabrication on streets or highways on its own wheels.
c.
It arrives at the site where it is to be occupied complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other temporary or permanent foundations, connections
to utilities, and the like.
d.
It is at least eight (8) feet, but not greater than fourteen (14) feet, in body width exclusive of any acceptable
incidental appurtenances such as windows, porches, etc.
Mobile home park: Any lot, parcel or tract of land together with open spaces required by this ordinance, used,
designed, maintained, or held out to accommodate two (2) or more mobile homes, including all buildings,
structures, tents, vehicles, accessories, or appurtenances used or intended as equipment of such mobile home
park, whether or not a charge is made for sale of the park and/or its facilities. A mobile home park does not
include automobile, mobile home, or trailer sales lot, on which unoccupied mobile homes or trailers are parked
for inspection and sale.
Mobile office: A structure or vehicle with the following characteristics:
a.
It is used, designed for use, or capable of being used or occupied for the transaction of business of the rendering
of a professional service.
b.
It is designed for transportation after fabrication on streets or highways on its own wheels.
c.
It arrives at the site where it is to be occupied complete and ready for occupancy except for minor incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other temporary or permanent foundations, connections
to utilities, and the like.
Motel: A building or group of buildings which:
a.
Contain living or sleeping accommodations used primarily for transient occupancy, and
b.
Have individual entrances from outside the building to serve each such living or sleeping unit.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
296/414
Nonconforming: Any lawful use, whether of a building or other structure or of a tract of land, which does not
conform to the applicable use regulations of the district in which it is located, either on the effective date of this
ordinance or as a result of any subsequent amendment thereto. A nonconforming use shall result from failure to
conform to the applicable district regulations on either permitted uses or performance standards. However, no
existing use shall be deemed nonconforming solely because of any of the following:
a.
The existence of less than the required accessory off-street parking spaces or loading berths, or
b.
The existence of nonconforming accessory signs.
Nursing home: Rest homes, convalescent homes and homes for the aged devoted primarily to the maintenance
and operation of facilities for the treatment and care of any persons suffering from illnesses, diseases, deformities
or injuries not requiring the intensive care that is normally provided by hospitals, but who do require care in
excess of room and board and who need medical, nursing, convalescent, or chronic care. Institutions primarily
for the treatment and care of mental patients, alcoholics or drug addicts shall not, for the purpose of this
ordinance, be considered "nursing homes."
Parking space: An area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one (1) automobile, together with a
driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress and egress of an automobile.
Planning commission: The Grovetown Municipal Planning Commission as established under the General
Planning Enabling Act of 1957 [30]
 and any subsequent revisions thereto.
Principal building: A building in which conducted the principal use of the lot or tract of land on which such
building is located.
Principal use: The specific, primary purpose for which land or a building is used.
Private recreation facilities: A facility such as a swimming pool, tennis court, community center, beach, boat
dock or basketball court which is an accessory use located on residential zoning lots, the use of which is
restricted to the occupants of the principal use and guests for whom no admission or membership fees are
charged.
Public: Any land or building owned, used, or maintained by the federal, state, county, or local governments or
their agencies.
Public sewerage: A sanitary sewerage system for the collection of water borne wastes complete with a sewerage
treatment plant or stabilization pond. The entire system must be either operated by the city or have been
approved by the city, in the case of a privately-owned system.
Public utility: A public utility is an activity, or a building housing such an activity, which operates to serve the
community as a whole or a portion of the community, and which is publicly run or subject to special government
controls.
Radial lot: An irregular (pie-shaped) lot fronting on a curved street, and which is formed by its side lot line(s)
being established along the course of a radius from the axis of the street curve. (See examples below).
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
297/414
Residence, or residential: A building or part of a building containing dwelling units or rooming units, including
single-family or two-family houses, multiple dwelling, boarding or rooming houses, or apartment hotels.
Residences do not include:
a.
Such transient accommodations as transient hotels, motels, or tourist cabins.
b.
In a mixed building, that part of the building used for any nonresidential uses, except accessory to residential
uses.
Residence, single-family: A building containing only one (1) dwelling unit.
Residential district: Any district whose designation begins with the letter "R."
Riding stable: Any zoning lot used or designed for the boarding, breeding or care or [of] horses or ponies, other
than for farming or agricultural purposes, either with or without instruction in riding.
Rooming house: A dwelling in which, for compensation, lodging is furnished to three (3) or more, but not
exceeding nine (9) guests. A rooming house shall not be deemed a home occupation.
Sanatorium or sanitarium: An institution for the treatment and care of the chronically ill or for patients requiring
long-term therapy, rest and recuperation. Examples are institutions primarily for the treatment and care of feebleminded and mental patients, epileptics, alcoholics or drug addicts.
School:
a.
An institution providing full-time day instruction and a course of study which meets the requirements of the
Georgia State Code, or
b.
A nursery school or kindergarten:
1.
Whose annual session does not exceed the school sessions for full-time day schools prescribed in the Georgia
Code, and
2.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
298/414
Which is operated by the county board of education, any established religious organization as part of an
elementary school, or under a permit issued pursuant to the Georgia State Code.
Service station: (See "Automobile filling station").
Sign: Any structure or part thereof or device attached thereto or represented thereon, which shall display or
include any letter, words, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, or representation used as, or which is in the
nature of an announcement, direction, or advertisement. The word "sign" includes the word "billboard" or any
other type of advertising device, but does not include the flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation, state, city or
other political unit.
Story: That part of a building between the surface of a finished floor and the finished ceiling immediately above;
however, a cellar is not a story.
Street: A way designed or intended for general public use to provide a principal means of approach for vehicles
or pedestrians, and which performs the functions usually associated with a way. A driveway which serves only to
give vehicular access to an accessory parking or loading facility, or to allow vehicles to take or discharge
passengers at the entrance to a building shall not be considered a street.
Street line: A line defining the edge of a street right-of-way and separating the street from abutting property or
lots. If, on the master plan of streets and highways duly adopted by the city, a street is scheduled for future
widening, the proposed right-of-way line shown on the master plan shall be the street line.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or
attached to something having a permanent location on the ground.
Swimming pool, commercial: A swimming pool and/or wading pool, including buildings necessary or incidental
thereto, open to the general public and operated for profit.
Swimming pool, community: A swimming pool and/or wading pool, including buildings necessary or incidental
thereto, operated by members of more than two (2) families for the benefit of such group and not open to the
general public, whether incorporated or unincorporated, whether organized as a club or cooperative or
association, providing that it is not organized for profit and that the right to use said pool is restricted to such
families and their guests. A swimming pool and/or wading pool operated as part of a multiple dwelling is also a
community swimming pool, providing that it is not operated for profit, and that the right to use said pool is
restricted to tenants of the multiple dwelling and their guests.
Swimming pool, private: (See "Private recreational facilities").
Tie down sets: (Mobile home or mobile office): A system for anchoring a mobile home or mobile office to the
ground to prevent its being rolled or pushed off its blocks by the wind. The following number of frame and overthe-top tie down sets are required for each mobile home office.
a.
One (1) set of frame ties is required for each ten (10) feet of mobile home or office length. The frame ties are
spaced an average of every ten (10) feet apart with end sets being not more than five (5) feet from the ends of the
mobile home or office. The frame ties are secured to the anchors and the I-beam frame of the mobile home or
office and tightened with a turn buckle or other tensioning device.
b.
Four (4) over-the-top ties are required for each mobile home or office. Over-the-top ties should be positioned at
stud and rafter locations with buffers at the top corner to prevent rubbing and cutting. Over-the-top ties are
connected to the same anchors as frame ties and are tightened with a turn buckle or other tensioning device.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
299/414
The components of each tie down set include steel strapping or cable for ties; two (2) anchors, one for each side
of the mobile home; tensioning devices for drawing the sets tight; and proper blocking under each I-beam frame
of the mobile home or office.
1.
Ties should be of galvanized steel strapping or cable. Galvanized steel strap 1.25 by .035 inches are commonly
used and are sometimes built into the mobile home or office. Ties constructed of galvanized steel cable at least
three-eighths of an inch in diameter or "aircraft" cable at least one-fourth of an inch in diameter can also be used.
2.
The anchor rod must be of steel at least five-eighths of an inch in diameter and manufactured with either an
approved tensioning head or a drop forged, closed eye for use with a turnbuckle. A concrete cylindrical section
ten (10) inches in diameter and twenty-eight (28) inches deep is required around each anchor shaft not embedded
in a concrete slab. Four (4) anchor types are acceptable;
(1)
A screw auger anchor is often used in sandy or loamy soil. The anchor should be embedded at least forty-eight
(48) inches into the ground and should be installed vertically. The anchor head should rest near the ground and
directly below or just inside the edge of the mobile home or office.
(2)
A drive anchor is used in rocky soil. The same depth and positioning measures as a screw auger anchor should
be followed.
(3)
Anchor rods with hook ends can be embedded into a concrete slab while it is being poured. The anchor head
should be at ground level directly below or just inside the edge of the mobile home or office.
(4)
An anchor rod can be inserted through a pre-drilled hole in an existing concrete slab and bolted to the underside
of the slab.
3.
Tensioning heads are commercially available on anchors for steel straps. Anchors with tensioning heads for ties
constructed of cable are also available. Drop forged turnbuckles at least one-half inch in diameter with drop
forged closed eyes and U-bolt type jaws can also be used.
4.
The mobile home or office should be properly blocked. Piers should be centered under each I-beam frame of the
home with a maximum spacing of ten (10) feet on centers. The end piers should be no further than five (5) feet
from the ends of the mobile home or office.
Blocks can be of three (3) types:
(1)
Open celled concrete blocks with cells positioned vertically, perpendicular to the I-beam on a solid concrete
footer, topped with a solid concrete cap and skimmed beneath the I-beam. Added stability can be gained by
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
300/414
filling the open cells with concrete and inserting steel reinforcing rods.
(2)
Solid concrete blocks positioned perpendicular to the I-beam on a solid concrete footer and skimmed beneath the
I-beam.
(3)
Solid cylinder jack piers bolted to the I-beam and into a reinforced concrete pad.
Tourist home: A dwelling, occupied as such, in which sleeping accommodations in less than six (6) rooms with
not more than four (4) persons per room are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation, under the
management of the occupants of that dwelling for dwelling purposes. A tourist home shall not be deemed a home
occupation.
Travel trailer: A motorized camper, converted bus, tent trailer, or other similar vehicular or portable structure
used or designed for temporary portable housing or occupancy while on vacation or other trip.
Use:
a.
Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended,
maintained, or occupied; or
b.
Any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or other
structure or on a tract of land.
Use, accessory:
a.
A use conducted on the same zoning lot as the principal use to which it is related (whether located within the
same of an accessory building or other structure, or as an accessory use of land), except that, where specifically
provided in the applicable district regulations, accessory off-street parking or loading need not be located on the
same zoning lot, and
b.
A use which is clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with such principal use; and
c.
A use subordinate in area, floor area, intensity, extent, and purpose to the principal use; and
d.
A use either in the same ownership as such principal use, or operated and maintained on the same zoning lot
substantially for the benefit or convenience of the owners, occupants, employees, customers, or visitors of the
principal use.
When "accessory" is used in the text, it shall have the same meaning as "accessory use."
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
301/414
Use, conditional: Any use which is not generally considered compatible with the principal uses of the particular
district in which it is proposed and therefore requires careful consideration and the imposing of conditions on
development. Conditional uses are sometimes called "special exceptions," however the term "exception" is a
misnomer. No exception is made to the provisions of the ordinance in permitting such uses; the permit granted is
for a use specifically provided for in the ordinance in the case in which conditions, legislatively prescribed, are
also found.
Use, permitted: The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming
use. Any principal use which is allowed within a particular zoning district as a matter of right.
Zoning lot:
a.
A lot of record existing on the effective date of this ordinance or any applicable subsequent amendment thereto;
or
b.
A tract of land, either unsubdivided or consisting of two (2) or more contiguous lots of record and not previously
subdivided, located within a single block, which on the effective date of this ordinance or any applicable
amendment thereto, was in single ownership; or
c.
A tract of land, located within a single block, which at the time of filing for a building permit (or, if no building
permit is required, at the time of filing for a certificate of occupancy), is designated by its owner as a tract all of
which is to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership.
d.
A zoning lot may be subdivided into two (2) or more zoning lots, provided that all resulting zoning lots and all
buildings thereon which are constructed after the effective date of this ordinance or any applicable subsequent
amendment thereto shall comply with all of the provisions of this ordinance. In such case, the designation of
such zoning lots shall be made at the time of filing for a certificate of occupancy.
ARTICLE II. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Sec. 2.000. - Statement of intent.
The residential districts established by this ordinance are designed to promote and protect public health, safety,
comfort, convenience, prosperity, and other aspects of the general welfare. These general goals include, among
others, the following specific purposes:
a.
To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for residential development to meet the housing needs of the
city's present and expected future population, with due allowance for the need for a choice of sites and building
types;
b.
To protect residential areas, as far as possible, against heavy traffic and against through traffic of all kinds;
c.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
302/414
To protect residential areas against congestion, by regulating the density of population and the bulk of buildings
in relation to the land around them and to one another, and by providing for off-street parking spaces;
d.
To provide appropriate space for those public and private educational, recreational, health, and similar facilities
which serve the needs of the nearby residents, which generally perform their own activities more effectively in a
residential environment, and which do not create objectionable influences;
e.
To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development in accord with a wellconsidered plan, to promote stability of residential development, to protect the character of the district and its
particular suitability for particular uses, and to conserve the value of residential land and buildings.
Sec. 2.010. - Schedule of standards in residential districts.
The following table is presented only for the convenience of the user of this ordinance. All standards listed in
this table are stated in more detail elsewhere in this article as well as in other articles of this ordinance and final
information must be secured by the user from these other sources.
LOT AREA AND STRUCTURE
REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICTS
R-1 R-2 R-3
Minimum lot area (square feet)1
Single family 15,000 10,000 7,500
Mobile home 15,000 10,000 7,500
Two family 15,000 12,500 10,000
Multifamily Not
permitted
20,0002 20,0002
Other uses 15,000 10,000 7,500
Maximum lot coverage by principal and accessory structures 50
percent
50
percent
50
percent
Minimum lot frontage all uses (feet)
Rectangular lot 100 75 75
Radial lot 75 50 50
Minimum lot width at building line (feet)
Single family 100 75 75
Mobile home 100 75 75
Two family 100 75 75
Multifamily Not
permitted
100 100
Other uses 100 75 75
Minimum building line setbacks (feet)
Front 30 25 25
Rear 25 25 25
Side 15 10 10
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
303/414
Maximum building height (feet) all uses 35 40 40
1.
Minimum lot area applies to lots served by a sewage collection and treatment system. Lots utilizing septic tanks
require a minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet or written approval from the county health officer for a lot
having less than 20,000 square feet.
2.
20,000 square feet for first three units plus 4,500 square feet for each unit thereafter and must be served by a
sewage collection and treatment system or have written approval from the county health officer.
Cross reference— Similar square footage requirement, § 9-64.
Sec. 2.020. - R-1 Residential District.
2.021. Permitted uses. In the R-1 District, the following uses are permitted as a matter of right:
a.
One (1) single-family or one (1) two-family residence per lot.
b.
One (1) mobile home per lot subject to the provisions in Article VI.
c.
Public and private parks and open space, but excluding commercial facilities.
d.
Public elementary and high schools, or private schools with a curriculum the same as ordinarily offered in public
elementary and high schools, and having no rooms regularly used for housing and sleeping.
2.022. Accessory uses. In the R-1 District, the following accessory uses are permitted:
a.
Customary home occupations as permitted in this ordinance (See Article VI).
b.
The keeping of not more than two (2) nontransient roomers or boarders by a resident family.
c.
Building or structures customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted use including garages, storage sheds,
barns and green houses.
d.
Private recreational facilities, such as swimming pools, basketball courts, and tennis courts.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
304/414
e.
Principal use advertising signs, as regulated in Article VI.
f.
The raising of garden crops, vineyard crops, fruits or plants incidental to the residential use of the land.
2.023. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in the R-1 District by the board of appeals subject
to the provisions of Article VII.
a.
Public utility uses.
b.
Government buildings.
c.
Planned unit developments.
d.
Churches, other places of worship, and fraternal organizations.
e.
Art galleries or museums.
f.
Cemeteries.
g.
Mobile home parks.
h.
Child care centers.
i.
Hospitals, sanitariums and nursing homes.
j.
Boarding and rooming houses.
k.
Broadcasting towers and stations.
l.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
305/414
Agricultural uses as defined in Article VII.
2.024. Intensity of use. The following minimum standards shall apply:
a.
Every lot served by a sewage collection and treatment system shall have a minimum lot area of fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet. Lots utilizing septic tanks require a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
or written approval from county health officer for lots having less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
b.
The maximum lot coverage by the principal and accessory buildings is fifty (50) percent.
c.
The minimum lot frontage is one hundred (100) feet for rectangular lots. The planning commission may reduce
minimum lot frontage to seventy-five (75) feet for radial lots.
d.
The minimum lot width at the building line is one hundred (100) feet.
2.025. Building line setbacks. The minimum required setbacks for all buildings and structures from abutting
street rights-of-way and side and rear property lines shall be as follows:
a.
The minimum front building line setback from abutting street rights-of-way shall be thirty (30) feet. Where lots
have double frontage, the required minimum setback shall be provided from both street rights-of-way (See
Article VI).
b.
The minimum side building line setback from each side property line shall be fifteen (15) feet.
c.
The minimum rear building line setback from the rear property line shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
2.026. Height restrictions. The maximum height for a building or structure shall be thirty-five (35) feet except as
exempted in Article VI.
2.027. Parking requirements. All use shall provide off-street parking as specified in Article VI.
Sec. 2.030. - R-2 Residential District.
2.031. Permitted uses. In the R-2 District, the following uses are permitted as a matter of right:
a.
One (1) single-family or one (1) two-family residence per lot and multifamily dwellings.
b.
One (1) mobile home per lot subject to the provisions in Article VI.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
306/414
c.
Public and private parks and open space, but excluding commercial facilities.
d.
Public elementary and high schools, or private schools with a curriculum the same as ordinarily offered in public
elementary and high schools, including dormitories.
2.032. Accessory uses. In the R-2 District, the following accessory uses are permitted:
a.
Customary home occupations as permitted in this ordinance (See Article VI).
b.
The keeping of not more than two (2) nontransient roomers or boarders by a resident family.
c.
Buildings or structures customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted use including garages, storage sheds,
barns and greenhouses.
d.
Private recreational facilities, such as swimming pools, basketball courts and tennis courts.
e.
Principal use advertising signs, as regulated in Article VI.
f.
Raising of garden crops, vineyard crops, fruits or plants incidental to the residential use of the land.
2.033. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in the R-2 District by the board of appeals (See
Article VII):
a.
Public utility uses.
b.
Government buildings.
c.
Planned unit developments.
d.
Churches, other places of worship, and fraternal organizations.
e.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
307/414
Art galleries or museums.
f.
Cemeteries.
g.
Mobile home parks.
h.
Child care centers.
i.
Hospitals, sanitariums and nursing homes.
j.
Boarding and rooming houses.
k.
Broadcasting towers and stations.
l.
Agricultural uses as defined in Article VII.
2.034. Intensity of use. The following minimum standards shall apply:
a.
Every lot served by a sewage collection and treatment system shall have a minimum lot area of ten thousand
(10,000) square feet. Lots utilizing septic tanks require a minimum the area of twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet or written approval from county health officer for a lot having less than twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet. Multifamily units require a lot area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for the first three (3) units plus
four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet for each unit thereafter and must be served by a sewage collection
and treatment system or have written approval from the county health officer.
b.
The maximum lot coverage by the principal and accessory building is fifty (50) percent.
c.
The minimum lot frontage is seventy-five (75) feet for rectangular lots. The planning commission may reduce
minimum lot frontage to fifty (50) feet for radial lots.
d.
The minimum lot width at the building line is seventy-five (75) feet. Multi-family dwelling units require one
hundred (100) feet.
2.035. Building line setbacks. The minimum required setbacks for all buildings and structures from abutting
street rights-of-way and side and rear property lines shall be as follows:
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
308/414
a.
The minimum front building line setback from abutting street rights-of-way shall be twenty-five (25) feet. When
lots have double frontage, the required minimum setback shall be provided from both street rights-of-way (See
Article VI).
b.
The minimum side building line setback from each side property line shall be ten (10) feet.
c.
The minimum rear building line setback from the rear property line shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
2.036. Height restrictions. The maximum height for a building or structure shall be forty (40) feet except as
exempted in Article VI.
2.037. Parking requirements. All use shall provide off-street parking as specified in Article VI.
Sec. 2.040. - R-3 Residential District.
2.041. Permitted uses. In the R-3 District, the following uses are permitted as a matter of right:
a.
One (1) single-family or one (1) two-family residence per lot and multifamily dwellings.
b.
One (1) mobile home per lot subject to the provisions of Article VI.
c.
Public and private parks and open space, but excluding commercial facilities.
d.
Public elementary and high schools, or private schools with a curriculum the same as ordinarily offered in public
elementary and high schools, including dormitories.
2.042. Accessory uses. In the R-3 District, the following accessory uses are permitted:
a.
Customary home occupations as permitted in this ordinance (See Article VI).
b.
The keeping of not more than two (2) nontransient roomers or boarders by a resident family.
c.
Buildings or structures customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted use including garages, storage sheds,
barns, and greenhouses.
d.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
309/414
Private recreational facilities, such as swimming pools, basketball courts and tennis courts.
e.
Principal use advertising signs, as regulated in Article VI.
f.
Raising of garden crops, vineyard crops, fruits or plants incidental to the residential use of the land.
2.043. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in the R-3 District by the board of appeals subject
to the provisions of Article VII.
a.
Public utility uses.
b.
Government buildings.
c.
Planned unit developments.
d.
Churches, other places of worship, and fraternal organizations.
e.
Art galleries or museums.
f.
Cemeteries.
g.
Mobile home parks.
h.
Child care centers.
i.
Hospitals, sanitariums and nursing homes.
j.
Boarding and rooming houses.
k.
Broadcasting towers and stations.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
310/414
l.
Agricultural uses as defined in Article VII.
2.044. Intensity of use. The following minimum standards shall apply:
a.
Every lot served by a sewage collection and treatment system shall have a minimum lot area of seven thousand
five hundred (7,500) square feet. Lots utilizing septic tanks require a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet or written approval from the county health officer for a lot having less than twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet. Multifamily units require a lot area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for the first three (3)
units plus four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet for each unit thereafter and must be served by a sewage
collection and treatment system or have written approval from the county health officer.
b.
The maximum lot coverage by the principal and accessory buildings is fifty (50) percent.
c.
The minimum lot frontage is seventy-five (75) feet for rectangular lots. The planning commission may reduce
minimum lot frontage to fifty (50) feet for radial lots.
d.
The minimum lot width at the building line is seventy-five (75) feet. Multifamily dwelling units require one
hundred (100) feet.
2.045. Building line setbacks. The minimum required setbacks for all buildings and structures from abutting
street rights-of-way and side and rear property lines shall be as follows:
a.
The minimum front building line setback from abutting street rights-of-way shall be twenty-five (25) feet. When
lots have double frontage, the required minimum setback shall be provided from both street rights-of-way (See
Article VI).
b.
The minimum side building line setback from each side property line shall be ten (10) feet.
c.
The minimum rear building line setback from the rear property line shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
2.046. Height restrictions. The maximum height for a building or structure shall be forty (40) feet except as
exempted in Article VI.
2.047. Parking requirements. All use shall provide off-street parking as specified in Article VI.
Sec. 2.050. - R-4 Townhouse Residential District.
This district is established to provide for the development of Townhouse Residential Units at a density not
greater than ten (10) units per gross acre. For the purposes of this district a "townhouse" is an attached dwelling
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
311/414
unit which has its own front door and is separated from adjoining units in the same row or group by fire walls or
fire separations.
2.051 Permitted uses. In the R-4 District, the following uses are permitted as a matter of right.
a.
Single-family attached dwellings.
2.052 Accessory uses. In the R-4 District, the following accessory uses are permitted.
a.
Buildings or structures customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted use.
2.053 Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in the R-4 District by the board of appeals subject
to the provisions of Article VII.
a.
Planned Unit Development (PUD).
2.054 Intensity of use. The following minimum standards shall apply.
a.
There shall be no minimum lot size or lot width in the R-4 District.
b.
There shall be no maximum lot coverage in the R-4 District.
c.
There shall be no minimum lot frontage in the R-4 District.
d.
There shall be no more than ten (10) dwelling units per gross acre.
2.055 Building line set backs. The minimum required setbacks for all buildings and structures from abutting
street rights-of-way and side and rear property lines shall be as follows:
a.
The minimum front building line setback from abutting street rights-of-way shall be twenty-five (25) feet. When
lots have double frontage, the required minimum set back shall be provided from both street rights-of-way (see
Article VI).
b.
The minimum side building line set back from each side property line shall be ten (10) feet. Exception is when
zero lot lines are appropriate in attached dwelling units.
c.
The minimum rear building line set back from the rear property line shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
312/414
2.056 Height restrictions. The maximum height for a building or structure shall be thirty-five (35) feet.
2.057 Length restrictions. There shall be no continuous residential structures such as townhouses or attached
dwellings containing more than six (6) dwelling units.
2.058 Distance between buildings. No structure or building shall be erected within twenty (20) feet or any other
structure.
2.059 Parking requirements. All use shall provide off-street parking as specified in Article VI.
2.060 Open space requirement. Not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the development shall be maintained as
permanent open space. Parking and other paved surfaces, except patios and courtyards, shall not count toward
this open space requirement.
2.061 Application for approval. All applications for development or a change of zoning to an R-4 District shall
be accompanied by the following:
a.
A plat of the land to be included in the total development showing all rights-of-way and easements affecting the
property to be rezoned to an R-4 classification.
b.
A plat of the lots and the boundaries thereof along with the square footage contained in each lot and the location
and rights-of-way of proposed streets.
c.
The location of buildings and the number of stories contained in each.
d.
The preliminary location of water supply, sanitary and storm sewer systems.
e.
The location of all curbcuts, driving lanes and parking areas.
f.
The location and type of all common areas (pedestrian walkways, open spaces, recreational uses) including a
statement of the method to be used to insure continued maintenance of such areas.
g.
The location and height of all walls, fences and screen plantings.
h.
A tabulation of the total area, number of dwelling units, and overall density per acre.
2.062 Revision of plans after final approval. Any request to change an approval development plan which affects
the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, the location or dimension of streets,
or similar changes, shall be approved by the city planning commission. A request for revision of the
development plan shall be supported by a written statement of why the revisions are necessary or desirable.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
313/414
2.063 Compliance with subdivision regulations. The development shall comply with the pertinent requirements
of the subdivision regulations for the city.
(Ord. No. 113, § 1, 7-25-94)
Sec. 2.060. - R-3A Residential District.
The planning commission is hereby authorized to permit property located within city limits of Grovetown,
Georgia to be designated as two-family residences upon application by the owner of said property and a majority
vote by said board and final approval by the city council.
All two-family residences shall only be permitted in areas zoned as R-3A.
All two-family residences consisting of two (2) connected units shall be:
Minimum Lot Area: 10,000 square feet
Maximum Lot Coverage by principal & accessory
structures:
50%
Minimum Lot Frontage (All Uses) (Feet)
Rectangular Lot: 50
Radial Lot: 50
Minimum Lot Width at Building Line (Feet) 75
Minimum Building Line Setbacks (Feet)
Front: 25
Side: 10
Rear: 25
Maximum Building Heights (All Uses) (Feet) 40
Any residences consisting of more than two (2) units will not be allowed in the R-3A zoning district. Any
residence consisting of more than two (2) unit residences must conform to requirements of the zoning district in
which they are located.
(Ord. No. 204, §§ I—III, 6-14-10)
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Sec. 3.000. - Statement of intent.
The commercial districts established by this ordinance are designed to promote and protect public health, safety,
convenience, prosperity, and other aspects of the general welfare. These general goals include, among others, the
following specific purposes:
a.
To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations in proximity to residential areas, for local and neighborhood
retail development catering to the regular shopping needs of the occupants of nearby residences, with due
allowance for the need for a choice of sites.
b.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
314/414
To provide, as far as possible, that such space will be available for use for commercial and related activities, and
to protect residences by separating them from commercial activities.
c.
To provide appropriate space and in particular sufficient depth from a street, to satisfy the needs of modern local
and neighborhood retail development, including the need for off-street parking spaces in areas to which a large
portion of shoppers come by automobile, and to encourage the natural tendency of local and neighborhood retail
development to concentrate in continuous retail frontage, to the mutual advantage of both consumers and
merchants.
d.
To protect commercial development and nearby residences against fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter,
radiation, and other hazards, and against offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, and other particulate matter,
odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare and other objectionable influences.
e.
To protect commercial development and nearby residences against congestion, particularly in areas where the
established pattern is predominantly residential but includes local retail uses, by regulating the intensity of local
and neighborhood retail development, by restricting those types of establishments which generate heavy traffic,
and by providing for off-street parking and loading facilities.
f.
To provide sufficient and appropriate space, and in particular sufficient depth from the street, to meet the needs
of the city's central and community commercial centers, including the need for off-street parking space in areas
where a large proportion of customers come by automobile, with due allowance for the need for a choice of sites,
and to encourage commercial development to concentrate in continuous retail frontage within commercial areas,
to the mutual advantage of both consumers and merchants.
g.
To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for all types of commercial and miscellaneous service
activities, with due allowance for the need for a choice of sites.
h.
To provide freedom of architectural design, in order to encourage the development of more attractive and
economic building forms.
i.
To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development in accord with a wellconsidered plan, to promote stability of commercial development, to strengthen the economic base of the city, to
protect the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve the value of land
and buildings, and to protect the city's tax revenues.
Sec. 3.010. - Uses in commercial districts.
No building or structure shall be used, in whole or in part, and no building or structure or part thereof shall be
erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, arranged, or designed to be used, in whole or in part, unless for one (1) or
more of the uses set forth in Article V, inclusive. Only those uses specifically listed as being allowed in a specific
district as a permitted, accessory, or conditional use shall be considered for location within a particular district.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
315/414
Sec. 3.020. - Schedule of standards in commercial districts.
The following table is presented only for the convenience of the user of this ordinance. All standards listed in
this table are stated in more detail elsewhere in this article as well as in other articles of this ordinance and final
information must be secured by the user from these other sources.
LOT AREA AND STRUCTURE
REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICTS
C1 C2 C3 C4
Minimum lot area (square feet) 15,000 20,000 None 20,000
Maximum lot coverage by principal & accessory
structures (percent)
30 30 None 50
Minimum lot frontage all uses (feet) 75 75 None 75
Minimum lot width at building line (feet) 100 100 None 100
Minimum building line setbacks (feet)
Front 50 50 12 50
Rear* 20 20 20 30
Side* 20 20 20 30
Maximum building height all uses (feet) 35 35 40 40
* Minimum side and rear set backs from property lines may be eliminated where commercial structures on
adjoining lots share a common fire resistant wall. Where commercial structures on adjoining lots do not share a
common fire resistant wall or where commercial and residential lots adjoin at the side or rear, the minimum
required setbacks shall be enforced.
Sec. 3.030. - C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District.
This district is established to provide decentralized areas for the retail sales of goods and for personal services,
recreational, and institutional establishments which provide the everyday necessities and convenience of local
residents. This district is intended to permit only those nonresidential commercial uses of land and structures
which blend smoothly into the character of adjoining residential areas. It is further intended to exclude all
activities which generate perceptible light or noise, or attract traffic from outside the immediate neighborhood.
3.031 Permitted uses. In the C-1 District, uses permitted as a matter of right shall be as identified in Article V.
3.032 Accessory uses. In the C-1 District, the following accessory uses are permitted:
a.
Accessory uses as identified in Article V.
b.
Advertising signs as regulated by Article VI.
c.
Off-street parking as required in Article VI.
d.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
316/414
Off-street loading and unloading as required in Article VI.
e.
Any accessory buildings or structures customarily incidental to a permitted use.
3.033 Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in the C-1 District by the board of appeals (See
Article VII):
a.
Any conditional use so identified in Article V inclusive.
b.
Similar retail and services which are, in the opinion of the planning commission, of the same general character as
those uses listed in Article VI as conditional uses in the C-1 District.
3.034 Intensity of use. In the C-1 District, the following standards shall apply:
a.
Minimum lot area for all uses shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
b.
Maximum lot coverage by the principal and accessory structures shall be thirty (30) percent.
c.
Minimum lot frontage shall be seventy-five (75) feet.
d.
Minimum lot width at the building line shall be one hundred (100) feet.
e.
All uses of a business nature shall be conducted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
3.035 Building line setbacks. The minimum required setbacks for all buildings and structures from abutting street
rights-of-way and side and rear property lines shall be as follows:
a.
Minimum front building line setback from all abutting street rights-of-way shall be fifty (50) feet.
b.
Minimum building line setback from each side property line shall be twenty (20) feet.
c.
Minimum building line setback from the rear property line shall be twenty (20) feet.
3.036 Height restrictions. No buildings or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height except as
exempted in Article VI.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
317/414
3.037 Parking and loading requirements. All uses shall provide off-street parking and loading as specified in
Article VI.
Sec. 3.040. - C-2 Highway Commercial District.
This district is established to provide areas for those amusement, specialized sales, and travel accommodations
activities which depend on visibility from or proximity to automobiles or vehicular traffic, serve regional
travelers, cater to local residents in vehicles, or provide services essential to the movement of vehicles on major
highways. It is intended that such areas have properties with lot sizes, setbacks, performance and development
standards sufficient to insure that activities within this district will not unduly impede the flow of traffic or
adversely affect adjoining zones. It is further intended to exclude those uses which are not necessary for service
to traffic or which are not dependent on traffic.
3.041 Permitted uses. In the C-2 District, uses permitted as a matter of right shall be as identified in Article V.
3.042 Accessory uses. In the C-2 District, the following accessory uses are permitted:
a.
Accessory uses as identified in Article V.
b.
Advertising signs as regulated by Article VI.
c.
Off-street parking and loading.
d.
Any accessory buildings or structures customarily incidental to a permitted use.
3.043 Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in the C-2 District by the board of appeals (See
Article VII):
a.
Any conditional use identified in Article V.
b.
Similar retail and services which are, in the opinion of the planning commission, of the same general character as
those uses listed in Article V as conditional uses in the C-2 District.
3.044 Intensity of use. In the C-2 District, the following standards shall apply:
a.
Minimum lot area for all uses shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
b.
Maximum lot coverage by the principal and accessory structure shall be thirty (30) percent.
c.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
318/414
Minimum lot frontage shall be seventy-five (75) feet.
d.
Minimum lot width at the building line shall be one hundred (100) feet.
3.045 Building line setbacks. The minimum required setbacks for all buildings and structures from abutting street
rights-of-way and side and rear property lines shall be as follows:
a.
Minimum front building line setback from all abutting street rights-of-way shall be fifty (50) feet.
b.
Minimum building line setback from each side property line shall be twenty (20) feet.
c.
Minimum building line setback from the rear property line shall be twenty (20) feet.
3.046 Height restrictions. No buildings or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height except as
exempted in Article VI.
3.047 Parking and loading requirements. All uses shall provide off-street parking and loading as specified in
Article VI.
Sec. 3.050. - C-3 Central Business District.
This district is established to provide areas of unified, planned commercial shopping or service centers for the
conduct of pedestrian-oriented community retail and service business of an indoor and intensive nature. It is
intended that such areas have properties so developed as to promote pedestrian circulation. It is further intended
to exclude those commercial and industrial activities which are characterized by trucking other than stocking and
delivery of retail goods or which create hazards, noise, dust, smoke, odors, heat, or other nuisances greater than
those occasioned by retail or office uses.
I.
Definitions. As used in this ordinance the following words shall have the following meanings:
Addition - means a non-original element placed onto an existing building or structure.
Alteration - means any act or process which changes the exterior architectural appearance of a building.
Appropriate - means suitable to or compatible with what exists.
Central Business District - that area along Robinson Avenue between School Street on the west and Newman
Town Road on the East and is more particularly described by the plat attached and marked as "Exhibit A".
Character - means those individual qualities of buildings, sites and districts that differentiate and distinguish
them from other buildings, sites and districts.
Compatible - means not detracting from surrounding elements, buildings, sites or structures; appropriate given
what already exists.
Component - means an individual part of a building, site or district.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
319/414
Contemporary - means a product of the current period; modern.
Context - means the setting in which a historic element or a building exists.
Element - means an individual defining feature of a building, structure, site or district.
House type - means a definition based on floor plan, height and sometimes roof shape, having to do with
architectural style. Buildings falling into one of many house types are primarily significant for their forms and
spatial organizations.
Infill - means new construction within the Central Business District, generally situated on the site of a
demolished structure but possibly on a site never previously developed.
Modification - means any change in the structure, other than cosmetic, such the physical appearance is altered.
Any change that costs more than 25% of the total value of the structure shall be deemed a modification of the
structure.
New construction - means the construction of a new element, building or structure.
Setting - means the immediate physical environment of a building, structure, site, or district.
Site - means a place or plot of land where an event occurred or where some object was or is located.
Streetscape - means all physical elements that may be viewed along a street.
Style - means showing the influence of shapes, materials, detailing or other features associated with a particular
architectural style.
Vernacular - means based on tradition and passed from generation to generation maintaining continuity of form.
II.
Duties of the director of the planning and zoning department. Within the Central Business District, prior to
constructing any building or structure or renovating any building or structure other than cosmetic changes, such
as painting, the property owner or their designee shall apply to the director of the planning and zoning
department for approval. The director of the planning and zoning department shall review the appropriate plans
and shall either:
1.
Approve the modification or new construction;
2.
Deny the modification or new construction; or
3.
Approve the modification or new construction subject to recommendations made by the director of the planning
and zoning department.
The director of the planning and zoning shall consult the Grovetown 20-Year Comprehensive Plan for guidance
in whether to approve a plan. In the event a plan does not conform to the Grovetown 20-Year Comprehensive
Plan, the director of the planning and zoning department shall deny the application, unless a compelling reason
to approve the plan can be demonstrated.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
320/414
III.
Permissible architectural types. The architectural design, color and material of a proposed structure shall
conform to community standards of good taste and design as expressed by development pattern recommendation
for the Grovetown City Center Character Area in the city's 20-Year Comprehensive Plan.
IV.
Regulation of construction within the Central Business District. All exterior rehabilitations and modifications to
existing buildings and structures within the Central Business District shall comply with standard architectural
styles. Owners or occupiers of existing buildings or structures within the Central Business District are not
required by this ordinance to rehabilitate those buildings or structures unless or until the owner or occupier of the
building or structure seeks to modify the building or structure or seeks to erect a new building or structure.
Construction of new buildings and structures. All construction of new buildings and structures within the Central
Business District, including additions to existing buildings and structures within the Central Business District
shall be built with the façade of a standard architectural style.
V.
General standards. Plans for the construction of all new structures within the Central Business District and all
additions and modifications to existing structures, new signage, modifications of signage, changes to the
streetscape, changes of styles or elements of any structure or building or changes to any area of infill, shall be
submitted to the director of the planning and zoning department for review prior to commencement of any
construction. Only upon approval by the director of the planning and zoning department
The construction of all new structures within the Central Business District and all additions to and modifications
to existing structures within the Central Business District shall comply with the following general guidelines:
1.
The placement of window air conditioners, centralized air conditioning units, and satellite dishes, if allowed,
should be accomplished without detracting from the architectural integrity of the building or site. Generally, this
means positioning these items to the rear of a building or on a view obstructed side. The use of vegetation to
buffer mechanical systems is also encouraged. Rooftop equipment shall not be allowed, unless view of the
equipment from the public right-of-way is obstructed.
2.
Parking will only be allowed on the side and the rear of the building or structure or on the side streets adjoining
Robinson Avenue in parking spaces allowed and designated by the city; excepting those cases in which the
principal use is a convenience store, gasoline service station, parking lot or garage. Parking lots must be to the
rear or side of the building. Parking lots must be screened from the street and sidewalk by either opaque
shrubbery at least three feet in height when planted or by a 36-inch wall constructed of brick or other material
approved by the director of the planning and zoning department. Use of shared parking is encouraged. In general,
all retail stores and shopping centers must be designed for pedestrian use and must encourage pedestrian activity
on the sidewalk.
3.
Sidewalks should be concrete in general; however, brick pavers, street furniture, and street trees may be required
if needed in order to be consistent with existing streetscape improvements in the area of the building. In the
Central Business District, the director of the planning and zoning department shall have the right to recommend
and the planning and zoning board shall have the discretion to require sidewalks up to eight (8) feet in width in
locations where increased pedestrian traffic is encouraged.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
321/414
4.
The building or improvements shall be compatible with the orientation/placement, directional emphasis, shape,
volume, massing, proportions, rhythm, scale, and materials as recommended by the director of the planning and
zoning department and approved by the planning and zoning board.
5.
The side and rear of the buildings shall be as visually attractive as the front of the buildings.
6.
The external building walls shall be architecturally designed and faced with bricks, stucco, structural masonry,
stone or stone veneer, or fiber cement board cladding. Architectural metal panels and architectural glazing
systems may be used as an accent and up to a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of any elevation. Reflective
or shiny surfaces and mirrored glass are prohibited.
7.
Vinyl siding may be used on up to fifty (50) percent of the exterior wall surface of any building except that vinyl
siding may not be used on the building front.
8.
Gutters for storm water drainage which are metal and exposed and which include the gutters, downspouts, and
leaderheads are permitted. All exposed gutters, downspouts, and leaderheads facing public streets and in open
public space shall be designed as an architectural element in the wall and roof design.
9.
Fences and landscaping walls may be used. Fences shall be constructed of materials coordinating with external
building walls, wrought iron, vinyl or painted aluminum. Chain link fences may not be used where the fence is
exposed to a public road or is visible to the public from any public areas. Landscaping walls shall be constructed
of materials matching external building walls, wrought iron, painted aluminum or concrete block that
compliment the material used for exterior building walls.
10.
Landscaping walls that retain soil and other material with a height greater than twenty-four (24) inches shall be
deemed a retaining wall and require certification by an architect or civil engineer as to the design and soundness
of the structure and shall be submitted to the planning and zoning board for review prior to the issuance of a
building permit.
11.
Construction of outbuilding shall be governed by the same requirements as all other building within the Central
Business District.
12.
Only commercial style dumpsters shall be permitted in the Central Business District. Residential style garbage
cans shall not be permitted in the Central Business District. Garbage dumpsters shall be placed such that they are
not visible from the street. In the event a dumpster must be placed where it can be viewed from the street, the
dumpster must be enclosed with an opaque fence such that it cannot be viewed from the street.
13.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
322/414
Fuel tanks, electric meters, gas meters and other unsightly objects must be screened from view from Robinson
Avenue and any abutting road or adjacent tract of land by a structure or enclosure approved by the director of the
planning and zoning department.
14.
Structures and buildings shall be oriented or screened so that loading, delivery, equipment storage and
distribution areas are in no manner visible from residential zoning districts or existing or planned public roads
and right-of-ways. Loading docks and doors shall be situated so as to accommodate all trucks and trailers
without requiring them to maneuver in, protrude into or park on a street or any marked parking spaces or parking
circulation lanes during loading or unloading.
15.
Any buildings, structures, signs, or uses in the Central Business District (C3), which are not in conformance with
the requirements of this section shall be treated as nonconforming buildings, structures, signs or uses.
VI.
Applications for building permits. The exterior of any building or structure inside the Central Business District
shall not be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without the plans first being submitted to and
approved by the director of the planning and zoning department. Any non-structural changes to the exterior of
any building located within the Central Business District which alters the appearance must be approved by the
director of the planning and zoning department.
Applications reviewable only by the director of the planning and zoning (for interior work) may be denied by the
director of the planning and zoning department. said decision may be appealable as any other decision made by
the director of the planning and zoning department.
VII.
Conflicts with existing ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances which in conflict with this ordinance are
hereby repealed.
VIII.
Appeals. In the event the director of the planning and zoning department refuses to grant or deny the application
of the proposed plans, upon the expiration of ninety (90) days after said matter having been first presented to the
director of the planning and zoning department, the application shall be deemed to be denied and the applicant
shall have the right to appeal this decision to the Superior Court of Columbia County within thirty (30) days of
the expiration of the 90-day period.
In the event the director of the planning and zoning department denies the application of the proposed plans, the
applicant shall have the right to appeal this decision to the city council by making application to the city council
within thirty (30) days of the decision being made by the director of the planning and zoning department. The
city council shall conduct a hearing and render a decision within sixty (60) days of the application. The standard
that the city council must use shall be whether the director of the planning and zoning department abused his or
her discretion and if so this must be proven by a preponderance of the evidence. In the event the city council fails
to schedule a hearing or fails to render a decision, then the application shall be deemed to have been denied. Any
party aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal to the Superior Court of Columbia County within
thirty (30) days of the decision having been rendered.
3.051 Permitted uses. In the C-3 District, uses permitted as a matter of right shall be as identified in Article V.
3.052 Accessory uses. In the C-3 District, the following accessory uses are permitted:
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
323/414
a.
Accessory uses as identified in Article V.
b.
Advertising signs as regulated by Article VI.
c.
Off-street parking and loading.
d.
Any accessory buildings or structures customarily incidental to a permitted use.
3.053 Conditional uses. In the C-3 District, uses which may be permitted as conditional use by the board of
appeals are identified in Article V.
3.054 Intensity of use. In the C-3 District, the following requirements shall apply:
a.
There shall be no prescribed minimum lot areas nor minimum lot widths.
3.055 Building line setbacks. The minimum required setbacks for all buildings and structures from abutting street
rights-of-way and side and rear property lines shall be as follows:
a.
The minimum front building line setback from all abutting street rights-of-way shall be twelve (12) feet. There
shall be no parking, signs, nor other such obstructions to visibility within this setback.
b.
The minimum side and rear setbacks shall be twenty (20) feet. These setbacks may be eliminated where
commercial structures or adjoining lots share a common fire resistant wall. Where commercial structures on
adjoining lot do not share a common fire resistant wall, or where commercial and residential lots adjoin at the
side and rear the twenty (20) feet setbacks shall be enforced.
3.056 Height restrictions. No building or structures shall exceed forty (40) feet in height except as exempted in
Article VI.
3.057 Parking and loading requirements. All uses shall provide off-street parking and loading as specified in
Article VI.
(Ord. No. 216, 1-9-12)
Sec. 3.060. - C-4 Heavy Commercial District.
This district is established to provide areas for distribution, sales, service, or storage activities involving goods or
equipment requiring extensive indoor or outdoor spaces, large or specialized handling equipment, or significant
truck or rail transportation. These uses generate limited emissions and noise which make them incompatible with
other commercial or residential uses.
3.061 Permitted uses. In the C-4 District, uses permitted as a matter of right shall be identified in Article V.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
324/414
3.062 Accessory uses. In the C-4 District, the following accessory uses are permitted:
a.
Accessory uses as identified in Article V.
b.
Advertising signs as regulated by Article VI.
c.
Off-street parking and loading.
d.
Any accessory buildings or structures customarily incidental to a permitted use.
3.063 Conditional uses. In the C-4 District, uses which may be permitted as conditional use by the board of
appeals are identified in Article V.
3.064 Intensity of use. In the C-4 District, the following standards shall apply:
a.
The minimum lot area for all uses shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
b.
The maximum lot coverage by the principle and accessory structures shall be fifty (50) percent.
c.
The minimum lot frontage shall be seventy-five (75) feet.
d.
The minimum lot width at the building line shall be one hundred (100) feet.
3.065 Building line setbacks. The minimum required setbacks for all buildings and structures from abutting street
rights-of-way and side and rear property lines shall be as follows:
a.
The minimum front building line setback from all abutting street rights-of-way shall be fifty (50) feet.
b.
The minimum building line setback from each side property line shall be thirty (30) feet.
c.
The minimum building line setback from the rear property line shall be thirty (30) feet.
3.066 Height restrictions. No building or structure shall exceed forty (40) feet in height except as exempted in
Article VI.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
325/414
3.067 Parking and loading requirements. All uses shall provide off-street parking and loading as specified in
Article VI.
ARTICLE IV. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Sec. 4.000. - Statement of intent.
The industrial districts established in this ordinance are designed to promote and protect public health, safety,
and general welfare. These general goals include, among others, the following specific purposes:
a.
To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the city's expected future economy for
all types of manufacturing and related activities, with due allowance for the need for a choice of sites.
b.
To provide, as far as possible, that such space will be available for use for manufacturing and related activities,
and to protect residences by separating them from manufacturing activities and by prohibiting the uses of such
space for new residential development.
c.
To encourage manufacturing development which is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious
matter, radiation, and other hazards, and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust and other particulate
matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare, and other objectionable influences, by permitting such development
in areas where this resolution restricts the emission of such nuisances, without regard to the industrial products
and processes involved.
d.
To protect adjacent residential and commercial areas, and to protect the labor force in other establishments
engaged in less offensive types of manufacturing and related activities, by restricting those manufacturing
activities which involve danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and other hazards, or
create offensive noise, vibration, smoke and other particulate matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare, and
other objectionable influences, to those limited areas which are appropriate therefor.
e.
To protect manufacturing and related development against congestion, as far as is possible and appropriate in
each area, by limiting the bulk of buildings in relation to the land around them and to one another, and by
providing space off public streets for parking and loading facilities associated with such activities.
f.
To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development in accord with a wellconsidered plan, to promote stability of manufacturing and related development, to strengthen the economic base
of the city, to protect the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve the
value of land and buildings, and to protect the city's tax revenues.
Sec. 4.010. - Uses in industrial districts.
No building or premises shall be used, and no building or group of buildings, or part of a building or structure,
shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, arranged or designed to be used, in whole or in part, except for
one or more of the uses set forth in Article V. Only those uses specifically listed as being permitted in a specific
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
326/414
district shall be permitted in that district, except that a caretaker or watchman and his family may reside in a
dwelling unit on the premises where he is employed.
Sec. 4.020. - Schedule of standards in industrial districts.
The following table is presented only for the convenience of the user of this ordinance. All standards listed in
this table are stated in more detail elsewhere in this article as well as in other sections of this ordinance, and final
information must be secured by the user from these other sources.
LOT AREA AND STRUCTURE
REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICTS
M-1 M-2
Minimum lot area (acres)
Minimum lot area (acres) 1 2
Maximum lot coverage by principal and accessory structures (percent) 30 50
Minimum lot frontage all uses (feet) 100 150
Minimum lot width at building line 150 200
Minimum building line setback
Front 75 75
Side 30 30
Rear 30 30
Maximum building height all uses 40 40
Sec. 4.030. - M-1 Light Industrial District.
This district is established to provide areas for industry in locations which lie near residential areas, or which are
served by major transportational facilities and adequate utilities but are not feasible nor highly desirable for
conventional industrial development because of proximity to residential, recreational, retail, or related
developments. The regulations of this district are intended to encourage development compatible with uses of
residential property adjoining or surrounding the district, with suitable open spaces, landscaping, and parking
area.
4.031 Permitted uses. In the M-1 District, uses permitted as a matter of right shall be as identified in Article V.
4.032 Accessory uses. In the M-1 District, the following accessory uses are permitted:
a.
Any accessory building or use customarily incidental to a permitted use, in the opinion of the planning
commission, may be permitted.
b.
Signs as regulated in Article VI.
4.033 Conditional uses. In the M-1 District, uses which may be permitted as conditional uses by the board of
appeals are identified in Article V.
4.034 Intensity of use. In the M-1 District, the following standards shall apply:
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
327/414
a.
Every lot shall have a minimum area of one (1) acre.
b.
The maximum lot coverage by principal and accessory structures shall be thirty (30) percent.
c.
The minimum lot frontage for all uses shall be one hundred (100) feet.
d.
The minimum lot width at the building line shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet.
4.035 Building line setbacks. The minimum required setbacks for all buildings and structures from abutting street
rights-of-way and side and rear property lines shall be as follows:
a.
The minimum front building line setback from all abutting street rights-of-way shall be seventy-five (75) feet.
b.
The minimum building line setback from each side property line shall be thirty (30) feet.
4.036 Height restrictions. No building or structure shall exceed forty (40) feet in height except as exempted in
Article VI.
4.037 Parking and loading requirements. All uses shall provide off-street parking and loading as specified in
Article VI.
Sec. 4.040. - M-2 Heavy Industrial District.
This district is established to provide areas for manufacturing, assembling, fabricating, warehousing and related
activities. These uses generate some emissions and have some adverse effects on surrounding properties and are
not compatible with primary commercial, institutional, and residential uses.
4.041 Permitted uses. In the M-2 District, uses permitted as a matter of right shall be as identified in Article V.
4.042 Accessory uses. In the M-2 District, the following accessory uses are permitted:
a.
Any accessory building or use customarily incidental to a permitted use, in the opinion of the planning
commission, may be permitted.
b.
Signs as regulated in Article VI.
4.043 Conditional uses. In the M-2 District, uses which may be permitted as conditional uses by the board of
appeals are identified in Article V.
4.044 Intensity of use. In the M-2 District, the following standards shall apply:
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
328/414
a.
Every lot shall have a minimum area of two (2) acres.
b.
The maximum lot coverage by principal and accessory structures shall be fifty (50) percent.
c.
The minimum lot frontage for all uses shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet.
d.
The minimum lot width at the building line shall be two hundred (200) feet.
4.045 Building line setbacks. The minimum required setbacks for all buildings and structures from abutting street
rights-of-way and from side and rear property lines shall be as follows:
a.
The minimum front building line setback from all abutting street rights-of-way shall be seventy-five (75) feet.
b.
The minimum building line setback from each side property line shall be thirty (30) feet.
c.
The minimum building line setback from the rear property line shall be thirty (30) feet.
4.046 Height restrictions. No building or structure shall exceed forty (40) feet in height except as exempted in
Article VI.
ARTICLE V. - USES IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Sec. 5.000. - Schedule of permitted, conditional, and accessory uses.
No building, structure, or part of a building or structure shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, arranged,
used, or designed to be used in whole or in part in any commercial or industrial district except as specified in this
article. Uses are classified as permitted, accessory or conditional and designated by the following symbols:
P - Permitted use
C - Conditional use
A - Accessory use
All uses are subject to the applicable provisions of Article III and Article IV and other articles of this ordinance.
For uses not specified in this article refer to Article VI.
DISTRICT
USE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 M-1 M-2
Advertising signs (See Article VI) A A A A A A
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
329/414
Agricultural uses as defined in Article VII C C C C C C
Airports and heliports C C C
Animal hospitals P P P
Animal pounds P P P
Apartments P P P
Apartment hotels P
Arenas, auditoriums, or stadiums C C C C C
Auction rooms, public P P P P P
Automobiles
Body repairing A A P
Dealers—New and used P P P
Driving instructions P P P
Glass installation P P P
Motor rebuilding P P
Muffler replacement A P P P
Painting A A A P P
Parts and supplies
Retail and wholesale P P P P
Manufacture and repair P P
Renting and leasing P P P
Repairing A P P P
Upholsterers P P
Washing and polishing P P P
Wheel, frame and axle service A A P P
Wrecking P
Automotive service stations C C C C C
Bakeries P P P P P
Banks P P P
Banquet halls P P
Barber shops P P P P
Beauty parlors P P P P
Billboards (See Article VI) A A A A A
Billiard parlors P P P
Blacksmith P P P
Blueprinting P P P P P
Boarding and rooming houses P P
Bowling alleys P P P P P
Broadcasting towers and stations C C C C C C
Bus stations P P P P P
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
330/414
Carnivals/circuses/fairs, temporary P P P P
Catering establishments A A P P P
Churches, clubs, and fraternal organizations C C C C C C
Commercial parking garages or lots C C P P P
Contractors supplies P P P P P
Contractor yards P P P
Crematoriums P P
Dance studios P P
Drinking places P P P P P
Drive-in theaters C C C C
Dry cleaning or clothes pressing P P P P P
Equipment repair P P
Exterminators P P P
Farmer's markets P P P
Food
 Products processing, except meat slaughtering or preparation of
fish for packing
P P
Funeral establishments C C C P P
Golf
Courses, miniature (Ord. of 2/23/81) P P P P
Driving ranges P P P
Government buildings (Ord. of 2/9/83) P P P C C C
Hospitals and sanitariums C C C
Hotels
Transient P P P P P
Apartment P P
Junk yards P
Kennels C P P
Laboratories
 Medical or dental, for research or testing or custom
manufacturing or artificial teeth, dentures, or plates
P P P P P
Research, experimental or testing P P P
Laundry establishment, hand or automatic
Self-service P P P P P P
Loan offices P P P
Locksmith P P P P P
Manufacturing
Asphalt products P
Athletic equipment P P
Beverage bottling P P
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
331/414
Boat building P P
Brick products P
Carpet P P
Ceramic products P P
Chemical products P
Concrete products P
Crating P P
Drug products P P
Film P
Film processing P P
Furniture P P
Glass products P
Ice P P
Instruments P P
Machinery P
Metal works P
Mobile homes P P
Paint P
Paper products P
Plastics P
Rubber P
Shoe P P
Stone processing P
Textiles P P
Tires P
Toiletries P
Toys P P
Travel trailers P P
Hood products P P
Milk processing P P P
Mining and extraction of minerals and raw materials C
Mobile office P P P P P P
Motels C P C C C
Moving or storage offices P P P P
Nursing homes C C C
Pet shops P P P
Petroleum or petroleum products
Refining P
Storage or handling P P
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
332/414
Printing P P P P
Professional offices P P P P P
Restaurant P P P P P P
Restaurant, drive-in C C C P P
Retail stores
Appliances P P P
Antique P P P P
Art gallery P P P
Book P P P P
Building supplies P P P
Business supplies P P P
Candy P P P P
Carpet P P P
Clothing P P P
Convenience P P P P
Delicatessen P P P P
Drug P P P P
Dry goods P P P
Feed and grain P P
Florist P P P P
Furniture P P P
Garden P P
General department P P P
Gift P P P Pe
Hardware P P P
Hobby P P P P
Ice cream P P P
Jewelry P P P
Liquor P P P P
Lumber P P
Machinery P P
Motorcycle P P
Optical P P P
Pawn P P P
Pet P P P
Shoe P P P
Sporting goods P P P
Super market P P P
Tailor P P P P
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
333/414
Tire P P P
Toy P P P P
Travel trailer P P
Schools and educational institutions C C C C C C
Sign painting shops P P P
Skating rinks
Indoor P P P P
Outdoor ice P P P P
Outdoor roller P P P
Storage P P P
Theaters P P P P P
Theaters, drive-in C C C
Travel bureaus P P P
Trucking terminals or motor freight stations P P P
Upholstering shops P P P
Warehouses and wholesale establishments P P P
Welding shops P P P
ARTICLE VI. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
Sec. 6.000. - Automobile wrecking, junk and salvage yards.
The following regulations shall apply to all automobile wrecking, junk, and salvage yards:
a.
No automobile wrecking, junk or salvage yard shall be permitted closer than three hundred (300) feet from any
residential district.
b.
All outdoor storage of salvage and wrecking operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed fence or
wall or chain link fence, except driveway areas. Fences or walls shall be not less than eight (8) feet in height.
Storage between such fence or wall and the street or property lines is expressly prohibited. Any fence or wall
erected for screening purposes shall be properly painted or otherwise maintained in good condition.
c.
Wrecking, junk, and salvage yards are permitted only in certain industrial districts as provided for in this
ordinance.
Sec. 6.010. - Building setbacks, modifications.
6.011 Electrical transmission lines. Where easement widths are not definitely established, the minimum building
setback distance from electric transmission lines shall be as follows:
Voltage of Line Building Setback from Center of
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
334/414
Transmission Line
46 KV 37½ feet
69 KV 50 feet
161 KV and over 75 feet
6.012 Front building setbacks. District requirements for front building line setbacks may be modified where the
majority of the buildings fronting on the same street are developed with less than the required setback. In such
case the required building setback shall be the average of existing setbacks, counting any undeveloped frontage
as if it were developed at the required setback distance from the street. This modification shall not apply if it
conflicts with proposed street improvements.
6.013 Structural projections. The building line setback requirements of this ordinance shall not apply to:
a.
Bay windows, balconies, or fire escapes if extending not more than three (3) feet over a required building line
setback.
b.
Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves, and gutters.
c.
Fences, plantings, walls, uncovered porches or patios, terraces, and steps not over three (3) feet high measured
from the finished grade or from the floor of the ground story, and in no case located closer than six (6) feet to any
side or rear property line, nor closer than fifteen (15) feet to any street right-of-way.
6.014 Modification of building setbacks.
a.
In residential districts, the side and rear building setbacks for accessory buildings not exceeding four hundred
(400) square feet may be reduced to five (5) feet provided such buildings do not encroach on any drainage or
utility easements.
b.
In commercial and industrial districts, the side and rear building setbacks along adjoining commercially or
industrially zoned property may be reduced to three (3) feet.
c.
In industrial and commercial districts, the side and rear building setbacks along residentially zoned property shall
be as specified in the lot requirements of the appropriate district or as required by the planning commission.
Sec. 6.020. - Corner lots, modifications.
In all districts, where a basic minimum lot area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or less is required, such
minimum lot area for corner lots shall be increased by a factor of 0.5.
Sec. 6.030. - Customary home occupations.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
335/414
(a)
A customary home occupation is a gainful occupation or profession conducted by members of a family residing
on the premises and conducted entirely within the dwelling. Dwellings housing customary home occupation shall
display no stock in trade outside the dwelling, and no alteration to any building shall indicate from the exterior
that the building is being utilized in whole or in part for any purpose other than a residential unit, including
permitted accessory buildings. Not more than one (1) person other than the immediate members of the family
residing on the premises shall be employed in the pursuit of the home occupation, and the total floor area used in
conducting a home occupation shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total floor area of the dwelling. No
signs shall be displayed other than one (1) identification sign not exceeding twelve (12) square feet and not
illuminated other than by a white nonflashing enclosed light design on indirect lighting from a shielded source.
The following occupations, subject to the requirements of this paragraph, are permitted as customary home
occupations:
a.
Barbershop and beauty shop operated by not more than two (2) members of the residence.
b.
Artist, dressmaker, seamstress, tailor, and interior decorator.
c.
Professional office of architect, accountant, lawyer, engineer, doctor or dentist provided not more than one (1)
paid assistant is employed.
d.
Teaching, including tutoring, musical instruction, or dancing, but limited to not more than three (3) pupils at a
given time.
e.
Any similar use which the board of zoning appeals deems to be a home occupation by reason or acceptance as a
home occupation in the community.
(b)
Applying for occupational/business tax license. All applicants for home based businesses shall apply for an
occupational/business tax license with the director of the planning and zoning department or the director's
designee. The director shall have ten (10) business days from the date of the application to:
1.
Approve the request;
2.
Deny the request; or
3.
Approve the request subject to certain conditions/recommendations being met.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
336/414
The approval, denial or approval subject to certain conditions shall be made in writing and shall state the basis
for any denial or approval subject to certain conditions/recommendations being met.
(c)
Approval of licenses by the director of planning and zoning department. Upon the approval by the director of the
planning and zoning department of the request, an occupational/business tax license shall be issued.
Upon the approval of the request subject to certain conditions / recommendations being met, a license shall be
granted if the applicant is in agreement to fulfill the conditions/recommendations of the director of the planning
and zoning department.
(d)
Denial of licenses by the director of planning and zoning department. In the event the application is denied by
the director of the planning and zoning department or the applicant refuses to meet the
conditions/recommendations of the planning and zoning department, the applicant shall submit the matter to the
city council within thirty (30) days of the next city council meeting. The city council shall then conduct a public
hearing on the matter. At the conclusion of said hearing, upon motion being made for a vote, the city council
shall vote on the issue of the granting of an occupational/business tax license. Upon three (3) council members
voting in the affirmative or the mayor and two (2) council members voting in the affirmative (where approved by
the City Charter), the license shall be granted.
In the event the city council grants the occupational/business license, then the applicant shall have thirty (30)
days to tender suitable funds to the director of the planning and zoning department and the planning and zoning
department shall issue an occupational/business tax license. IN THE EVENT THE APPLICANT FAILS TO
TENDER SUITABLE FUNDS WITHIN THIRTY (30) DAYS OF THE CITY COUNCIL GRANTING THE
OCCUPATIONAL/BUSINESS TAX LICENSE, THEN THE APPLICATION SHALL BE DEEMED TO BE
ABANDONED AND NO LICENSE SHALL BE GRANTED. THE APPLICANT SHALL BE PERMITTED
TO REAPPLY AND BEGIN THE APPLICATION PROCESS OVER AGAIN.
In the event the city council denies the application then the applicant shall have thirty (30) days to appeal said
decision to the Superior Court of Columbia County, GA.
In the event the director of the planning and zoning department fails to approve, deny or approve the
recommendation subject to certain conditions within the ten (10) business day timeframe for the initial
application, said matter shall be referred to the city council upon request of the applicant.
In the event the city council refuses to grant or deny the occupational/business tax license, upon the expiration of
ninety (90) days after said matter having been first presented to the city council, the application shall be deemed
to be denied and the applicant shall have the right to appeal this decision to the Superior Court of Columbia
County within thirty (30) days of the expiration of the 90-day period.
(Ord. No. 204, §§ I—III, 6-14-10)
Sec. 6.040. - Height restrictions, exemptions.
The following structures or parts thereof are hereby exempt from the height limitations as set forth in the zoning
districts:
a.
Agricultural buildings, barns, silos, windmills, grain elevators, and other farm structures, but not including
dwellings.
b.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
337/414
Cooling towers, gas holders, or other industrial structures where required by the manufacturing process.
c.
Church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers,
windmills, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, flagpoles, radio towers, and aerials.
Sec. 6.050. - Intersection setbacks.
In all districts, all structure, shrubs, and outdoor uses in excess of thirty (30) inches in height (except non-visionobstructive structural appurtenances) and of such character as to constitute a permanent, regular, or temporary
obstruction to vision shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way line of each street at all
intersections so as to constitute neither hazard nor nuisance to the general public.
Sec. 6.060. - Liquid and solid waste.
In all districts, no discharge at any point into any private sewage disposal system, into the ground, or into any
stream of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply or otherwise create a
harmful effect on ground or surface waters except in accord with city and county health standards or applicable
state stream pollution control standards. No garbage, rubbish, or other solid wastes shall be stored outdoors or
allowed to accumulate on any lot or in streets or alleys adjoining the lot for periods in excess of the regular
collection interval of public or contracted waste collection services. All solid wastes so stored outdoors shall be
kept in tightly-covered metal containers located in suitably developed or screened areas.
Sec. 6.070. - Mobile homes on individual lots.
Mobile homes on separate, individual lots are permitted in zoning districts R-1, R-2, and R-3 subject to the
requirements of this section.
6.071 On separate lot. Only one (1) mobile home shall be located on each individual lot, parcel, or tract except
in an approved mobile home park. No mobile home shall be located permanently on any plot, parcel, or tract of
land occupied by any other permanent dwelling or occupied building.
6.072 Compliance with district zoning. Mobile homes on individual lots shall fully comply with zoning
requirements for lot size, setbacks, and other restrictions for permanent single-family residential dwellings as
well as the requirements of these regulations.
6.073 Minimum site improvements. Mobile homes on separate, individual lots shall be provided with the
following improvements to the mobile home and lot:
a.
The chassis of each mobile home shall be supported on piers or load-bearing supports or devices. These shall be
designed and constructed to evenly distribute the loads. Piers shall be securely attached to the frame of the
mobile home or shall extend at least six (6) inches from the centerline of the frame member. Manufactured loadbearing supports or devices shall be listed or approved for the use intended, or piers shall be constructed as
follows:
(1)
Piers less than forty (40) inches in height shall be constructed of open or closed cell, eight-inch by eight-inch by
sixteen-inch concrete blocks (with open cells vertically placed upon the footer). Single-stacked block piers shall
be installed with the sixteen-inch dimension perpendicular to the main (I-beam) frame. The piers shall be
covered with a two-inch by eight-inch by sixteen-inch wood or concrete cap.
(2)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
338/414
Piers between forty (40) and eighty (80) inches in height and all corner piers over three (3) blocks high shall be
double blocked with blocks interlocked and capped with a four-inch by sixteen-inch by sixteen-inch solid
concrete block, or equivalent.
(3)
Piers over eighty (80) inches in height shall be constructed in accordance with paragraph 2 above and they shall
be laid in concrete mortar and steel reinforcing bars inserted in block cells with the block cells filled with
concrete.
(4)
All piers shall be placed on footings of solid concrete not less than sixteen (16) inches by sixteen (16) inches by
four (4) inches.
b.
The base of the mobile home shall be fully skirted to screen the mobile home supports or wheels from view.
Acceptable skirting shall be only those types and materials designed by the manufacturer expressly for such use
or as required by the zoning administrator.
c.
Each mobile home shall be served by an acceptable water supply and method of sewage disposal subject to the
written approval of the county health officer having jurisdiction over such matters.
d.
Each mobile home shall have an individual connection to public electrical power.
e.
Each mobile home lot shall have a patio located convenient to the entrance of the mobile home. Said patio shall
measure not less than eight (8) feet by twelve (12) feet.
f.
Each mobile home lot shall be provided with two (2), thirty-gallon covered refuse containers. Refuse shall be
stored only in these containers and collected and disposed of regularly in an approved disposal facility.
g.
Each mobile home lot shall contain at least two (2) off-street parking spaces.
h.
Any accessory structures or additions to the mobile home or lot shall be of similar design and material as the
mobile home unit, and shall not be used as complete, independent housing units with permanent provisions for
sleeping, cooking, and sanitation.
Anyone seeking to establish a mobile [home] within any residential or commercial district or mobile home park,
planned unit development or anywhere else within the City of Grovetown must apply for a permit prior to
erection of said home.
The application for the permit shall state the year, make and model of the mobile home and the owner shall
furnish a copy of the bill of sale and or title for the mobile home.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
339/414
The city shall only grant permits for mobile homes in areas that are zoned R-1. No permits for mobile homes
shall be granted in any other residential districts. Nor shall they be granted in a planned stick built subdivision
even if the subdivision has an R-1 zoning.
No permits shall be given for a mobile home in the three (3) major corridors in the city that are defined by the
comprehensive plan and was adopted by city council on February 12th
, 2007. They are as follows: Robinson
Avenue, Katherine Street and Wrightsboro Road. Mobile homes in this section will be prohibited and not
replaced once they are removed.
In the event a mobile home is removed from a parcel of property within the city, the owner of the parcel of
property shall have six (6) months to replace the structure. The owner can request from the director of planning
and zoning a one (1) time sixty-day extension if the owner can show that there is action being taken to replace
the mobile home and that it can be completed within the sixty- day extension. In the event the structure is not
replaced within six (6) months and there has been a one (1) time sixty-day extension given, the property owner
shall not be permitted to replace the structure. Additionally, the new structure shall conform to all existing
zoning codes at the time of the application for the new permit including the requirements that the structure be ten
(10) years or less in age.
The city shall not grant any further conditional uses to establish mobile home parks. Mobile home parks in
existence may continue to operate under prior existing ordinances.
APPEALS:
(a)
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director of the planning and zoning department to the granting or
denial of a permit for the establishment of a mobile home or for any other terms of this ordinance, may appeal
such decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the director of the planning and zoning department within
ten (10) working days of the issuance of such decision by the director.
(b)
After receiving the written notice of appeal, the director may then reverse his/her decision or send the notice of
appeal to the board of appeals. A notice of appeal shall state the specific reasons why the decision of the director
is alleged to be in error and the director shall, within twenty (20) working days of the receipt of the notice of
appeal, prepare and send to the board of appeals and appellant a written response to such notice of appeal.
(c)
All appeals shall be heard by the board of appeals. The hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days after receipt
of the notice of appeal or a date mutually agreed upon in writing by the appellant and the board of appeals.
(d)
If either the appellant or director is dissatisfied with the board of appeals decision, the aggrieved party may
appeal such decision to the Columbia County Superior Court within thirty (30) days of the board of appeals
decision.
(e)
In the event the director fails to send to the board of appeals a written response to the request for an appeal
within twenty (20) working days of the receipt of the request or the board of appeals fails to hear the appeal, the
permit shall be deemed granted unless a good cause is shown for extending the time limits in order to prevent a
manifest injustice.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
340/414
Manufactured housing includes all mobile homes or trailers that precede or meet the current definition of
manufactured housing as defined by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act
of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5401-5445).
A.
Procedure for inspection of mobile homes.
1.
Definitions.
a.
Applicant: the individual requesting permission from the City of Grovetown to move a mobile home.
2.
Whenever an applicant seeks to move a mobile home into the City of Grovetown, GA or seeks to move a mobile
home currently located within the City of Grovetown, GA from one location to another within the City of
Grovetown (whether on the same parcel of property or on another parcel of property), the applicant and the
director of the planning and zoning department shall follow all procedures listed in all city ordinances,
Ordinance No. 198, all applicable state laws, and the following procedures:
3.
Prior to applying for a permit to locate a mobile home within the City of Grovetown, GA, the applicant shall post
a bond with the city in the form of cash or from an approved bonding company / surety in an amount of not less
than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Said bond amount may be amended from time to time by the director of
planning and zoning department upon providing the city council one hundred twenty (120) days notice. Said
bond shall be returned to the surety upon the mobile passing all inspections for habitability, having all proper
permits, obtaining a certificate of occupancy, and tax stickers mandated by this ordinance or any other ordinance
and all state laws. In the event a mobile fails the inspection or fails to obtain all necessary permits, fails to secure
a certificate of occupancy, or fails to obtain the appropriate tax sticker, the applicant shall be given sixty (60)
days to remove the mobile home. Upon the mobile home being removed and the property cleaned up by the
applicant, the bond shall be returned to the surety. In the event the mobile is not removed or the property is not
properly cleaned up within sixty (60) days, the bond posted shall be forfeited and used to fund the removal of the
mobile home from the property and any necessary costs associated with cleaning up the property. Any funds
remaining after the removal of the mobile home shall be returned to the applicant or other individual who posted
the bond. In the event there are not sufficient funds to cover the costs of the removal and clean up, the applicant
shall be responsible for any deficiency. In the event an applicant does not own the property upon which the
mobile is to be located, the property owner must give express written consent to the City of Grovetown to allow
for the removal of the mobile home and an acknowledgment of liability in the event the bond is insufficient to
cover the costs for the removal of the mobile home and clean up.
4.
After applying for and receiving a permit to locate a mobile home within the City of Grovetown, GA, and the
applicant shall have all utilities connected for a limited period not to exceed sixty (60) days in order for the
mobile to be inspected for habitability. During the inspection period of time, the mobile home shall not be
occupied. Only upon the passing of the final inspection and the granting of a certificate of occupancy may a
home be occupied. All applicants shall sign an affidavit indicating that they understand that the applicant may
only occupy a mobile that has passed final inspection, been issued a certificate of occupancy and that, in the
event the mobile home fails to pass inspection, all utilities and any city services connected for the purpose of the
inspection shall be disconnected upon the expiration of the sixty-day inspection / installation period.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
341/414
5.
The director of planning and zoning shall develop a list of standards to determine whether a structure is
habitable. Said list shall be made available for public inspection by August 31, 2010 and may be amended from
time to time as necessary. The director of planning and zoning shall maintain a list of individuals approved to
perform inspections for habitability. All inspectors shall have a valid business license, shall be certified by the
American Society of Home Inspectors (ASHI) or an equivalent national certification agency, and attest under
oath that he or she has no financial interest in the outcome of the inspection. Upon completion of the inspection,
the inspector shall indicate on the inspection form whether the structure passed or failed each item inspected,
sign and date the form and file the form with the department of planning and zoning.
6.
In the event the inspector notes any areas that fail the inspection, the applicant shall have up to sixty (60) days to
take any steps necessary to make the structure habitable. All repair work shall be performed by contractors that
are properly licensed and bonded. Said contractors shall obtain permits where necessary. The city shall have the
right to refuse to accept any work performed by any individual that is not properly licensed and bonded nor
where a contractor fails to obtain a proper permit.
7.
The city shall not grant a certificate of occupancy unless and until the mobile passes the habitability inspection
and is in compliance with all existing ordinances and state laws.
8.
In the event the mobile home fails the final inspection or is not granted a certificate of occupancy, the city shall
disconnect all utilities / services provided by the city upon the expiration of the 60-day inspection / installation
period.
9.
All costs and fees for the inspection, permits, bonds, and repairs to mobile home shall be the sole responsibility
of the applicant or the mobile homeowner. The city shall not bear any of these costs.
10.
Upon the final inspection being completed, the director of the planning and zoning department shall have thirty
(30) days to approve or deny the request for the mobile permit. In the event the director of the planning and
zoning department fails to approve or deny the application for the mobile permit within the specified time frame,
the application shall be deemed to be approved and the permit shall be granted.
B.
Mobile home installers. The City of Grovetown shall only allow licensed mobile home installers to install mobile
homes within the City of Grovetown. Any mobile home installer seeking to install a mobile home shall provide a
copy of their state license and proof of a business license, general liability insurance for at least one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and bond, if applicable. The mobile installer shall also furnish a list of all
employees that will work on the installation project and provide proof of worker's compensation insurance, if the
mobile home installer employs more than two (2) individuals.
C.
Tax stickers. All mobile homes located in the City of Grovetown shall maintain a current tax sticker which shall
be posted in such a manner as to be clearly visible from the nearest roadway or the driveway. Any mobile home
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
342/414
that is sixty (60) days or more delinquent in posting the tax sticker shall be deemed to be an abandoned
structures and subject to removal, as per existing ordinances governing mobile homes and nuisances.
D.
Additional requirements for all mobile homes. Beginning on September 1, 2010, whenever a property owner or
other individual seeks to move a mobile home into the City of Grovetown, Georgia or seeks to move a mobile
home currently located within the City of Grovetown, Georgia from one location to another within the City of
Grovetown (whether on the same parcel of property or on another parcel of property), the mobile home shall be
underpinned with cement or masonry underpinnings.
E.
Appeals.
1.
In the event the application for the mobile home permit is denied by the director of the planning and zoning
department or the applicant refuses to meet the conditions/recommendations of the planning and zoning
department, the applicant shall have thirty (30) days to request a hearing before the city council.
2.
In the event the city council grants the mobile home permit following the denial of the permit by the director of
the planning and zoning department, then the permit shall be issued by the city council, signed off by each
council member voting in the affirmative, and the director of the planning and zoning department shall absolved
of any liability with respect to the issuing of the permit. further, the director of the planning and zoning
department shall not be required to sign off on the permit.
3.
In the event the city council denies the application for the permit, then the applicant shall have thirty (30) days to
appeal said decision to the Superior Court of Columbia County, Georgia.
(Ord. No. 198, 4-27-09; Ord. No. 207, § II, 8-9-10)
Sec. 6.080. - Mobile offices.
Mobile offices are permitted in zoning districts C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1, and M-2 subject to the requirements of
this article.
6.081 Compliance with district zoning. Mobile offices shall fully comply with zoning requirements for lot size,
setbacks, and other restrictions for permanent structures.
6.082 Minimum site improvements. Mobile offices shall be provided with the following minimum improvements
to the mobile office and lot:
a.
The chassis of each mobile office shall be supported on piers or load-bearing supports or devices. These shall be
designed and constructed to evenly distribute the loads. Piers shall be securely attached to the frame of the
mobile home or shall extend at least six (6) inches from the centerline of the frame member. Manufactured load
bearing supports or devices shall be listed or approved for the use intended, or piers shall be constructed as
follows:
(1)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
343/414
Piers less than forty (40) inches in height shall be constructed of open or closed cell, eight-inch by eight-inch by
sixteen-inch concrete blocks (with open cells vertically placed upon the footer). Single-stacked block piers shall
be installed with the sixteen-inch dimension perpendicular to the main (I-beam) frame. The piers shall be
covered with a two-inch by eight-inch by sixteen-inch wood or concrete cap.
(2)
Piers between forty (40) and eighty (80) inches in height and all corner piers over three (3) blocks high shall be
double blocked with blocks interlocked and capped with a four-inch by sixteen-inch by sixteen-inch solid
concrete block, or equivalent.
(3)
Piers over eighty (80) inches in height shall be constructed in accordance with paragraph 2 above and they shall
be laid in concrete mortar and steel reinforcing bars inserted in block cells with the block cells filled with
concrete.
(4)
All piers shall be placed on footings of solid concrete not less than sixteen (16) inches by sixteen (16) inches by
four (4) inches.
b.
The base of the mobile office shall be fully skirted to screen the mobile home supports or wheels from view.
Acceptable skirting shall be only those types and materials designed by the manufacturer expressly for such use
or as required by the zoning administration.
c.
Each mobile office shall be served by an acceptable water supply and method of sewage disposal subject to the
written approval of the county health officer having jurisdiction over such matters.
d.
Each mobile office shall have an individual connection to public electrical power.
e.
Each mobile office shall comply with the off-street parking requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located.
Sec. 6.090. - Mobile office and mobile home, temporary use.
A mobile home or mobile office shall be permitted in any zoning district when the use of mobile home or mobile
office is temporary and incidental to the preparation of a construction site or the completion of a construction
project. These temporary uses may be permitted by the planning commission for such periods as it may deem
necessary and reasonable for the completion of the site preparation or construction project. Approval of these
temporary uses shall be in writing and shall contain the following information:
a.
Name and address of applicant
b.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
344/414
Name and address of construction firm
c.
Name and address of project
d.
Expiration date of temporary use permit
e.
Signature of planning commission chairman.
Such written permission shall not be transferrable and may be revoked by the planning commission at any time it
deems such use a public nuisance or otherwise contrary to the intent of this ordinance.
Sec. 6.100. - Off-street loading and unloading requirements.
In all districts and on the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, erected and occupied for
manufacturing, storage, warehousing, retail selling, wholesaling, hospital, funeral home, or other uses which in
the opinion of the zoning administrator involve the receipt or distribution of vehicles, material, or merchandise,
there shall be provided and maintained, on the lot adequate space for standing, loading, or unloading services
adjacent to the space or opening used for loading and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public
use of the streets or alleys. Each loading space provided shall be an area twelve (12) feet by forty-five (45) feet
with a fourteen-foot height clearance where uses require trailer-truck loading or ten (10) feet by twenty-five (25)
feet with a height clearance of fourteen (14) feet for uses not requiring trailer-truck loading. All loading spaces
shall be located so as to contain adequate maneuvering room to permit convenient access to the loading space. A
sufficient number of loading spaces shall be provided as follows:
Total Floor Area of Use
(in sq. ft.)
Number of Loading Spaces Required
Less than 100,000 One (1) space per 20,000 sq. ft. TFA
100,000 to 500,000 Five (5) spaces plus one (1) space per 40,000 sq. ft. in
excess of 100,000 sq. ft. TFA
Over 500,000 Fifteen (15) spaces plus one (1) space per 80,000 sq. ft.
in excess of 500,000 sq. ft. TFA
Sec. 6.110. - Off-street parking requirements.
In all districts at the time of the erection of any building, or at the time any principal building is enlarged or
increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats and/or floor area, or before conversion from
one (1) type of use of occupancy to another, there shall be provided permanent off-street parking space in accord
with the following requirements:
6.111 Combination of required parking space. The required parking space for any number of separate uses may
be combined in one (1) lot but the required space assigned to each use may not be assigned to another use, except
where the parking space required for churches, or other assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night,
on Sunday, or otherwise does not coincide with an adjacent use, said required parking may be assigned to the
adjacent use.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
345/414
6.112 Proximity of off-street parking spaces to use. All required parking for all uses shall be either on the same
lot or within three hundred (300) feet of the building (or open use area) it is to serve; provided, however, that no
required parking spaces may be located across any major street from the use it is intended to serve.
6.113 Parking lot design requirements. All off-street parking areas developed or modified after the effective date
of this ordinance shall conform to the following minimum standards of design:
a.
Except for parcels of land devoted to one- and two-family residential uses, all areas devoted to off-street parking
shall be so designed and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into a public street to obtain egress.
b.
Consideration for parking lot or space utilization will be determined on an individual basis consistent with
reasonableness as to lot size and structures located or to be located on the lot. (Ord. of 7-9-86)
c.
Entrances and exits for all off-street parking areas shall be developed consistent with the minimum requirements
for street access control as specified in this article.
d.
Each parking space shall be not less than two hundred (200) square feet in area.
6.114 Off-street parking requirements by use. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for
each type use follows:
a.
Single-family residences: Two (2) spaces per residence.
b.
Multifamily residences, rooming, and boarding houses: One and one-half (1½) spaces for each room to be
rented.
c.
Tourist home, motel, hotel, motor court: One (1) space for each room to be rented, plus one (1) additional space
for each three (3) employees.
d.
Medical and dental clinics: Six (6) spaces per doctor, plus one (1) additional space for each two (2) employees.
e.
Hospital: One (1) space for each two (2) beds intended for patients' use, exclusive of bassinets, plus one (1)
space for each three (3) employees including doctors.
f.
School: One (1) space for each classroom and administrative office, plus one (1) additional space for each six (6)
seats in the largest assembly area or room.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
346/414
g.
Auditorium, theaters, churches, funeral homes, and similar places of public assembly: One (1) space for each
four (4) seats, or twelve (12) feet of benches, or per thirty (30) square feet of usable floor area in the largest
assembly room, plus one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor or ground area used for
amusement, entertainment, or assembly exclusive of the major assembly room.
h.
General and professional offices: One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
i.
Gasoline service stations: Five (5) spaces for each service bay, plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees.
j.
Restaurants: One (1) space per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of usable floor area, plus one (1) space for
each two (2) employees.
(For drive-in restaurants, one (1) space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor area.)
k.
Other retail uses: One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
l.
Wholesale uses: One (1) space for each employee on the largest shift, plus one (1) space for each two hundred
(200) square feet of selling area.
m.
Warehouse and storage uses: One (1) space for each employee on the largest shift, plus one (1) space for each six
hundred (600) square feet of storage or warehousing area.
n.
Industrial uses: One (1) space for each employee on the largest shift.
6.115 Restriction of use of required parking. The required off-street parking shall be for employees, occupants,
clients, and visitors and shall be limited in use to temporary storage of motor vehicles with current license plates.
The storage of merchandise or motor vehicles for sale, the servicing or repairing of vehicles or equipment, and
regular truck loading and unloading thereon is prohibited.
Sec. 6.120. - Residential lots abutting major streets.
In all residential districts and where a lot abuts arterial street as identified on the zoning map, the following
minimum requirements shall apply:
a.
The minimum lot frontage along abutting street rights-of-way shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet;
b.
The minimum lot depth shall be not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet;
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
347/414
c.
The minimum building line setback from abutting street rights-of-way shall be not less than fifty (50) feet;
d.
Where district regulations require a minimum lot frontage, lot depth, or setback greater than these modifications,
the greatest requirement shall apply.
Sec. 6.130. - Signs and outdoor advertising.
Regulations for the use of signs, billboards, and other outdoor advertising structures are as follows:
6.131 General provisions. In all districts, the following shall apply:
a.
No sign shall be erected or maintained where by reason of its position, wording, illumination, size, shape, or
color it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic
control sign, signal, or device.
b.
For parking areas, entrance and exit signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area and not more than thirty (30)
inches in height are permitted.
c.
Nonilluminated "For Sale" or "For Rent" signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in area provided they are not
located on a public right-of-way are permitted.
d.
One (1) sign not more than twenty-four (24) square feet in area giving the names of contractors, engineers or
architects during construction of a building or development are permitted.
e.
Signs established by or by order of any governmental agency are permitted.
f.
Political campaign signs and posters are permitted on private property with permission of owner and limited in
size to four (4) square feet.
g.
For special events of public interest, one (1) sign not over twenty-four (24) square feet in area located upon the
site of the event for the duration of the event and for not more than two (2) weeks prior to the event are
permitted.
h.
With the exception of mailboxes attached to a post and traffic control signs, signals or devices, no signs or
posters are permitted on any public right-of-way or utility pole.
i.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
348/414
Flashing or intermittent illumination is prohibited.
j.
Billboards and similar advertising structures are prohibited.
k.
Off site signs are prohibited.
(Ord. No. 122, 11-13-95)
6.132 Regulations for all Residential, Professional and Special Districts.
a.
Signs not exceeding twelve (12) square feet for customary home occupations are permitted.
b.
For apartment buildings and other multi-family residences, identification signs not exceeding twelve (12) square
feet are permitted.
c.
For public recreation uses, community facilities, churches, hospitals and funeral homes, bulletin boards or
identification signs not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet are permitted.
d.
Flashing or intermittent illumination is prohibited.
(Ord. No. 122, 11-13-95)
6.133 Regulations for on-site signs in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1 and M-2 Districts.
a.
No signs in these districts shall be located within five (5) feet of a public right-of-way.
b.
No ground sign shall be erected to exceed twenty (20) feet above ground level and contain more than one
hundred fifty (150) square feet in area. The bottom coping of every ground sign shall be at least five (5) feet
above the ground or street level.
(Ord. No. 122, 11-13-95)
Sec. 6.140. - Street access control.
In order to promote the safety of the motorist and pedestrian and to minimize traffic congestion and conflict, the
following regulations shall apply:
a.
Vehicular access from properties to streets shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in width.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
349/414
b.
No more than two (2) points of vehicular ingress/egress from a property to each abutting public street shall be
permitted for each four hundred (400) feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof; provided, however, that lots with
less than one hundred (100) feet of frontage shall have no more than one (1) point of ingress/egress to any one
(1) public street.
c.
No point of ingress/egress shall be allowed within thirty-five (35) feet of the right-of-way line of any street
intersection.
d.
No curbs on city streets or rights-of-way shall be cut or altered for ingress/egress without approval of the zoning
administration.
e.
An ingress/egress driveway shall be located not closer than thirty (30) feet to another such driveway on the same
street.
Sec. 6.150. - Street frontage.
No dwelling (mobile homes in approved parks excluded) shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on an
accepted public street, for the minimum lot frontage in the zoning district in which it is located.
ARTICLE VII. - CONDITIONAL USES
Sec. 7.000. - Agricultural uses.
7.001 The keeping of livestock or poultry; the operation of a dog kennel; or the operation of a fish or game
hatchery provided:
a.
That such activities take place within a fenced area not closer than twenty-five (25) feet from any property line.
b.
That the board of appeals evaluates the impact of the proposed use on surrounding properties. Additional
conditions as described in section 10.066 may be imposed to ameliorate possible adverse affects.
7.002 The operation of a farm, nursery, or greenhouse for wholesale or retail purposes provided that the board
of appeals evaluates the impact of the proposed use on surrounding properties. Additional conditions as
described in section 10.066 may be imposed to ameliorate possible adverse effects.
7.003 Operation of riding academies and horse stable provided:
a.
Adequate trails or areas for horseback riding shall be available on the same zoning lot or within six hundred
(600) feet of such zoning lot.
b.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
350/414
In residential districts, no stables or riding areas shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of any side or rear
lot line.
c.
If not more than two (2) horses are kept, the stable shall be located on a tract of not less than two (2) acres. If
three (3) or more horses are kept, the stable shall be located on a tract of not less than five (5) acres.
7.010 Airports and heliports provided:
a.
That the board of appeals evaluates the impact of the proposed use on surrounding properties. Additional
conditions as described in section 10.066 may be imposed to ameliorate possible adverse affects.
b.
That proposals shall have been reviewed and approved by the federal aviation administration and a report
submitted to the planning commission prior to its approval.
7.020 Arenas, auditoriums or stadiums, provided:
a.
Such use shall not draw vehicular traffic to and through local streets in surrounding residential areas.
b.
Adequate reservoir space at the vehicular entrance and sufficient vehicular entrances and exits shall be provided
to prevent traffic congestion.
c.
Vehicular entrances and exits for such use shall be provided separately and shall be located not less than one
hundred (100) feet apart.
d.
Due consideration shall be given to the proximity of transit facilities to serve such use.
e.
No building shall be located at a distance of less than fifty (50) feet from any lot line.
f.
Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one (1) parking space per two (2) spectator seats; one (1)
parking space per employee; and five (5) loading berths per main entrance.
g.
No automobile parking space shall be located within any required setback area, or within twenty (20) feet of any
property line.
7.030 Art galleries and museums provided that the board of appeals evaluates the impact of the proposed use on
surrounding properties. Additional conditions as described in section 10.066 may be imposed to ameliorate
possible adverse affects.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
351/414
7.040 Automobile service stations provided:
a.
When such use abuts a residential zone, school, public playground, church, hospital, public library or other such
institutional area, and is not effectively screened by a natural terrain feature, the use shall be screened adjacent to
such residential zone or institutional area by a solid wall or a solid fence not less than five (5) feet and not more
than eight (8) feet in height, or with a planting strip with shrubs or trees which are at least four (4) feet high at
the time of planting. Such screening shall not be located closer than twenty (20) feet to any public street right-ofway. Screening shall not be required along a street frontage.
b.
Product displays, parked vehicles, signs, and other obstructions which impair visibility to or from station
driveways shall be prohibited.
c.
When such use occupies a corner lot, the ingress or egress driveways shall be located at least thirty-five (35) feet
from the intersection of the abutting street right-of-way lines, and such driveways shall not exceed thirty (30)
feet width measured at a point ten (10) feet from the street curb; provided that in no case shall the street right-ofway line be considered to be less than thirty (30) feet from the street centerline.
d.
Gasoline pumps or other service appliances shall be located on the lots at least twenty-five (25) feet from the
street curb or fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way line, whichever is greater.
e.
There shall be at least thirty (30) feet between driveways on each street, and all driveways shall be perpendicular
or not more than forty-five (45) degrees from perpendicular, to the street curb.
f.
Light automobile repair work may be done at an automobile service station provided that no major repairs, spray
painting operation, or body or fender repair shall be permitted.
g.
Not more than two (2) inoperable vehicles shall be stored on the lot unless stored entirely within a building.
h.
Except while receiving gasoline from pumps, no vehicle shall be parked closer than fifteen (15) feet to a street
right-of-way line.
7.050 Boarding and rooming houses provided that the board of appeals evaluates the impact of the proposed use
on surrounding properties. Additional conditions as described in section 10.066 may be imposed to ameliorate
possible adverse affects.
7.060 Broadcasting towers and stations provided that broadcasting towers shall be located on a tract of land
which is sufficient in size to have a lineal dimension from the base of the tower to all property lines equal to or
greater than the height of the tower.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
352/414
7.070 Cemeteries provided that the board of appeals evaluates the impact of the proposed use on surrounding
properties. Additional conditions as described in section 10.066 may be imposed to ameliorate possible adverse
affects.
7.080 Child care centers provided:
a.
That the county health department approves the proposed plans for the center.
b.
That the building inspector and the city fire department approves the structure for use as a child care center.
c.
That all outdoor play areas shall be fenced.
d.
That the board of appeals evaluates the impact of the proposed use on surrounding properties. Additional
conditions as described in section 10.066 may be imposed to ameliorate possible adverse affects.
7.090 Churches, clubs and fraternal organizations provided:
a.
Lot coverage shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the total lot area.
b.
Building line setbacks from abutting street rights-of-way shall be at least fifty (50) feet, and twenty-five (25) feet
from side and rear lot lines.
7.100 Commercial parking garages and lots provided that the board of appeals evaluates the impact of the
proposed use on surrounding properties. Additional conditions as described in section 10.066 may be imposed to
ameliorate possible adverse affects.
7.110 Funeral establishments provided:
a.
When located in residential districts, the external appearance of the principal building and accessory buildings
shall be residential in character.
b.
In residential districts, site illumination shall be limited to parking areas and landscaping, and shall be so
shielded that there will be no objectionable glare observable from any residential zoning lot or highway.
c.
In residence districts, no signs shall be displayed in connection with any such establishment, other than one (1)
identification sign, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet, not illuminated other than by a white nonflashing
enclosed light design, or indirect lighting from a shielded source, plus not more than three (3) signs, each not
exceeding two (2) square feet in area, giving direction to and from off-street parking areas.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
353/414
7.120 Government buildings, provided that the board of appeals evaluates the impact of the proposed use on
surrounding properties. Additional conditions as described in section 10.066 may be imposed to ameliorate
possible adverse affects.
7.130 Hospitals and sanitariums provided that the board of appeals evaluates the impact of the proposed use on
surrounding properties. Additional conditions as described in section 10.066 may be imposed to ameliorate
possible adverse affects.
7.140 Laboratories, research, experimental, or testing provided:
a.
That the activities to be carried on in such usage does not endanger the public health, safety or general welfare in
the immediate area as well as the community.
b.
That such establishment does not emit any obnoxious odors or fumes.
c.
That adequate steps are taken to prevent spillage or draining of contaminants, undilutable chemical or similar
acids into the city sewerage systems or into any stream or river.
d.
That adequate steps are taken to dispose of solid wastes.
7.150 Mining and extraction of minerals and raw materials provided that the board of appeals evaluates the
impact of the proposed use on surrounding properties. Additional conditions as described in section 10.066 may
be imposed to ameliorate possible adverse affects.
7.160 Mobile home parks. (See section 7.170 for existing mobile home parks). New mobile home park
development in districts R-1, R-2 and R-3 provided:
a.
That all mobile home parks shall contain a minimum of three (3) acres of land so located, dimensioned, and
related as to facilitate efficient park design and management.
b.
That direct vehicular access to the mobile home park shall be provided by means of an abutting, public street.
c.
That the park site shall be such that condition of the soil, ground water level, drainage, and topography do not
create hazards to the property or to the health and safety of the occupants.
d.
That all mobile home parks shall contain a street system designed to provide convenient circulation within the
park. The following requirements shall apply:
(1)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
354/414
All park streets shall be provided with a smooth, hard and dense surface which shall be durable and well-drained
under normal use and weather conditions. The surface shall be maintained in a state of good repair at all times.
(2)
All streets shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet.
(3)
Street grades should not exceed ten (10) percent slope and curb radii should not be less than twenty (20) feet.
(4)
On-street parking shall not be permitted on any park street.
e.
That each park shall provide an accessible, adequate, potable water supply. The following requirements shall
apply:
(1)
The design and size of the water system shall be based on the maximum number of mobile home spaces to be
contained in the park.
(2)
The location, design, and construction of a park's water supply and distribution system requires the approval of
the county health officer. Written approval of the water system by the county health officer shall be required
before a building permit will be issued.
f.
That a safe and sanitary method of sewage collection and disposal shall be provided in all mobile home parks.
The location, design, and construction of a park's sewerage system requires the approval of the county health
officer. Written approval of sewerage system by the county health officer shall be required before a building
permit will be issued. The design and size of the sewerage system shall be based on the maximum number of
mobile home spaces to be contained in the park.
g.
That each mobile home park shall be provided with a sanitary method of solid waste collection and disposal. The
following requirements shall apply:
(1)
Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least two (2) water-tight, covered refuse containers having a
capacity of thirty (30) gallons each.
(2)
Refuse shall be collected at least twice weekly. Where such collection frequency is not feasible, screened,
centrally-located bulk storage containers shall be provided within the park.
h.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
355/414
That each mobile home park shall contain an outdoor recreational area appropriately developed for both active
and passive outdoor recreation. The following minimum requirements shall apply:
(1)
Eight (8) percent of the gross land area of a park or twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, whichever is greater,
shall be reserved, developed, and maintained for recreational purposes.
(2)
No area devoted to automobile parking, setback, service buildings, streets, or other such function shall be
counted as part of the required recreational area, except that swimming pools, recreational buildings, and child
play areas may be included as part of the required recreational area.
(3)
Recreational areas shall be accessible to all park tenants. The total area may consist of two (2) or more separate
areas, provided that no single area shall contain less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
(4)
For safety reasons, recreational areas shall be located where they are free of traffic hazards.
i.
That service buildings such as restrooms, management offices, and storage facilities, and convenience buildings
of a commercial nature, including coin-operated laundry, beauty shops, and stores, may be permitted in mobile
home parks subject to the following restrictions:
(1)
Such buildings and their parking areas shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the gross land area of the
park.
(2)
All service and convenience buildings shall be subordinate to the residential use and character of the park, and
shall be located, designed, and intended to serve only the trade or service needs of the park's residents.
(3)
No service or convenience building shall present visible evidence of its commercial character from any
residential district outside its park.
(4)
The board of appeals shall have the authority to review and approve or disapprove the use and type of such
service and convenience buildings that may be permitted within a park.
(5)
All service and convenience buildings shall conform to any lot size, parking, setback, and buffer requirements as
may be imposed by the board of appeals.
j.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
356/414
That each mobile home space within a mobile home park shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the mobile
home and its accessory structures to be placed on the space. The following minimum requirements shall apply to
the development of each mobile home space:
(1)
Each mobile home space shall contain at least four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet of area with a
minimum frontage on an interior park street of forty (40) feet.
(2)
Each mobile home space shall be adequately marked by permanent lot markers.
(3)
Each mobile home space shall have a patio, measuring at least eight (8) feet by twelve (12) feet and located
convenient to the entrance of the mobile home.
(4)
An accessway not less than twelve (12) feet wide shall be provided from the fronting park street to each mobile
home stand. Paving of this accessway is not required.
(5)
Each mobile home space shall be provided with at least two (2) off-street parking spaces. Parking spaces may be
either located on each mobile home space or in integrated groupings (bays, clusters, etc.) provided that no
parking space shall be further than fifty (50) feet from the mobile home space it is to serve.
(6)
Each mobile home space shall be provided with its own connection to the park's water, sewer, and electrical
systems.
k.
That each mobile home shall be supported by piers or load-bearing supports or devices. These shall be designed
and constructed to evenly distribute the loads. Piers shall be securely attached to the frame of the mobile home or
shall extend at least six (6) inches from the centerline of the frame member. Manufactured load-bearing supports
or devices shall be listed or approved for the use intended, or piers shall be constructed as follows:
(1)
Piers less than forty (40) inches in height shall be constructed of open or closed cell, eight-inch by eight-inch by
sixteen-inch concrete blocks (with open cells vertically placed upon the footer). Single-stacked block piers shall
be installed with the sixteen-inch dimension perpendicular to the main (I-beam) frame. The piers shall be
covered with a two-inch by eight-inch by sixteen-inch wood or concrete cap.
(2)
Piers between forty (40) and eighty (80) inches in height and all corner piers over three (3) blocks high shall be
double blocked with blocks interlocked and capped with a four-inch by sixteen-inch by sixteen-inch solid
concrete block, or equivalent.
(3)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
357/414
Piers over eighty (80) inches in height shall be constructed in accordance with paragraph (2) above and they shall
be laid in concrete mortar and steel reinforcing bars inserted in block cells with the block cells filled with
concrete.
(4)
All piers shall be placed on footings of solid concrete not less than sixteen (16) inches by sixteen (16) inches by
four (4) inches.
l.
That the following minimum requirements shall apply to the placement of a mobile home on a lot (space) within
a mobile home park:
(1)
No mobile home shall be located closer than thirty (30) feet from the centerline of any interior park street.
(2)
No mobile home shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to another mobile home.
(3)
The minimum building line setbacks of the district in which the park is located shall apply.
m.
That the base of the mobile home shall be fully skirted to screen the mobile home supports or wheels from view.
Acceptable skirting shall be only those types and materials designed by the manufacturer expressly for such use
or as required by the zoning administrator.
n.
That the person to whom a building permit is issued for a mobile home park shall be responsible for providing
adequate supervision of the park to maintain it in full compliance with these regulations, and keep the park's
facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
o.
That the manager of a mobile home park shall keep an up-to-date register of the park's residents by lot or street
address, and maintain such register of departed occupants for a period of three (3) years following their
departure. Such register shall be made available to any authorized person inspecting the park, and shall contain
the following information:
(1)
Names of all occupants of the mobile home quartered on each designated space and ages of minors;
(2)
Make, model, and year of the mobile home occupied and serial number, state, and license number, or other
designation or description;
(3)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
358/414
Date of registration and departure of the mobile home and its occupants.
p.
Anyone seeking to establish a mobile [home] within any residential or commercial district or mobile home park,
planned unit development or anywhere else within the City of Grovetown must apply for a permit prior to
erection of said home.
The application for the permit shall state the year, make and model of the mobile home and the owner shall
furnish a copy of the bill of sale and or title for the mobile home.
The city shall only grant permits for mobile homes in areas that are zoned R-1. No permits for mobile homes
shall be granted in any other residential districts. Nor shall they be granted in a planned stick built subdivision
even if the subdivision has an R-1 zoning.
No permits shall be given for a mobile home in the three (3) major corridors in the city that are defined by the
comprehensive plan and was adopted by city council on February 12th
, 2007. They are as follows: Robinson
Avenue, Katherine Street and Wrightsboro Road. Mobile homes in this section will be prohibited and not
replaced once they are removed.
In the event a mobile home is removed from a parcel of property within the city, the owner of the parcel of
property shall have six (6) months to replace the structure. The owner can request from the director of planning
and zoning a one (1) time sixty-day extension if the owner can show that there is action being taken to replace
the mobile home and that it can be completed within the sixty- day extension. In the event the structure is not
replaced within six (6) months and there has been a one (1) time sixty-day extension given, the property owner
shall not be permitted to replace the structure. Additionally, the new structure shall conform to all existing
zoning codes at the time of the application for the new permit including the requirements that the structure be ten
(10) years or less in age.
The city shall not grant any further conditional uses to establish mobile home parks. Mobile home parks in
existence may continue to operate under prior existing ordinances.
APPEALS:
(1)
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director of the planning and zoning department to the granting or
denial of a permit for the establishment of a mobile home or for any other terms of this ordinance, may appeal
such decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the Director of the planning and zoning department within
ten (10) working days of the issuance of such decision by the director.
(2)
After receiving the written notice of appeal, the director may then reverse his/her decision or send the notice of
appeal to the board of appeals. A notice of appeal shall state the specific reasons why the decision of the director
is alleged to be in error and the director shall, within twenty (20) working days of the receipt of the notice of
appeal, prepare and send to the board of appeals and appellant a written response to such notice of appeal.
(3)
All appeals shall be heard by the board of appeals. The hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days after receipt
of the notice of appeal or a date mutually agreed upon in writing by the appellant and the board of appeals.
(4)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
359/414
If either the appellant or director is dissatisfied with the board of appeals decision, the aggrieved party may
appeal such decision to the Columbia County Superior Court within thirty (30) days of the board of appeals
decision.
(5)
In the event the director fails to send to the board of appeals a written response to the request for an appeal
within twenty (20) working days of the receipt of the request or the board of appeals fails to hear the appeal, the
permit shall be deemed granted unless a good cause is shown for extending the time limits in order to prevent a
manifest injustice.
Manufactured housing includes all mobile homes or trailers that precede or meet the current definition of
manufactured housing as defined by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act
of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5401-5445).
A.
Procedure for inspection of mobile homes.
1.
Definitions.
a.
Applicant: the individual requesting permission from the City of Grovetown to move a mobile home.
2.
Whenever an applicant seeks to move a mobile home into the City of Grovetown, GA or seeks to move a mobile
home currently located within the City of Grovetown, GA from one location to another within the City of
Grovetown (whether on the same parcel of property or on another parcel of property), the applicant and the
director of the planning and zoning department shall follow all procedures listed in all city ordinances,
Ordinance No. 198, all applicable state laws, and the following procedures:
3.
Prior to applying for a permit to locate a mobile home within the City of Grovetown, GA, the applicant shall post
a bond with the city in the form of cash or from an approved bonding company / surety in an amount of not less
than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Said bond amount may be amended from time to time by the director of
planning and zoning department upon providing the city council one hundred twenty (120) days notice. Said
bond shall be returned to the surety upon the mobile passing all inspections for habitability, having all proper
permits, obtaining a certificate of occupancy, and tax stickers mandated by this ordinance or any other ordinance
and all state laws. In the event a mobile fails the inspection or fails to obtain all necessary permits, fails to secure
a certificate of occupancy, or fails to obtain the appropriate tax sticker, the applicant shall be given sixty (60)
days to remove the mobile home. Upon the mobile home being removed and the property cleaned up by the
applicant, the bond shall be returned to the surety. In the event the mobile is not removed or the property is not
properly cleaned up within sixty (60) days, the bond posted shall be forfeited and used to fund the removal of the
mobile home from the property and any necessary costs associated with cleaning up the property. Any funds
remaining after the removal of the mobile home shall be returned to the applicant or other individual who posted
the bond. In the event there are not sufficient funds to cover the costs of the removal and clean up, the applicant
shall be responsible for any deficiency. In the event an applicant does not own the property upon which the
mobile is to be located, the property owner must give express written consent to the City of Grovetown to allow
for the removal of the mobile home and an acknowledgment of liability in the event the bond is insufficient to
cover the costs for the removal of the mobile home and clean up.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
360/414
4.
After applying for and receiving a permit to locate a mobile home within the City of Grovetown, GA, and the
applicant shall have all utilities connected for a limited period not to exceed sixty (60) days in order for the
mobile to be inspected for habitability. During the inspection period of time, the mobile home shall not be
occupied. Only upon the passing of the final inspection and the granting of a certificate of occupancy may a
home be occupied. All applicants shall sign an affidavit indicating that they understand that the applicant may
only occupy a mobile that has passed final inspection, been issued a certificate of occupancy and that, in the
event the mobile home fails to pass inspection, all utilities and any city services connected for the purpose of the
inspection shall be disconnected upon the expiration of the sixty-day inspection / installation period.
5.
The director of planning and zoning shall develop a list of standards to determine whether a structure is
habitable. Said list shall be made available for public inspection by August 31, 2010 and may be amended from
time to time as necessary. The director of planning and zoning shall maintain a list of individuals approved to
perform inspections for habitability. All inspectors shall have a valid business license, shall be certified by the
American Society of Home Inspectors (ASHI) or an equivalent national certification agency, and attest under
oath that he or she has no financial interest in the outcome of the inspection. Upon completion of the inspection,
the inspector shall indicate on the inspection form whether the structure passed or failed each item inspected,
sign and date the form and file the form with the department of planning and zoning.
6.
In the event the inspector notes any areas that fail the inspection, the applicant shall have up to sixty (60) days to
take any steps necessary to make the structure habitable. All repair work shall be performed by contractors that
are properly licensed and bonded. Said contractors shall obtain permits where necessary. The city shall have the
right to refuse to accept any work performed by any individual that is not properly licensed and bonded nor
where a contractor fails to obtain a proper permit.
7.
The city shall not grant a certificate of occupancy unless and until the mobile passes the habitability inspection
and is in compliance with all existing ordinances and state laws.
8.
In the event the mobile home fails the final inspection or is not granted a certificate of occupancy, the city shall
disconnect all utilities / services provided by the city upon the expiration of the 60-day inspection / installation
period.
9.
All costs and fees for the inspection, permits, bonds, and repairs to mobile home shall be the sole responsibility
of the applicant or the mobile homeowner. The city shall not bear any of these costs.
10.
Upon the final inspection being completed, the director of the planning and zoning department shall have thirty
(30) days to approve or deny the request for the mobile permit. In the event the director of the planning and
zoning department fails to approve or deny the application for the mobile permit within the specified time frame,
the application shall be deemed to be approved and the permit shall be granted.
B.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
361/414
Mobile home installers. The City of Grovetown shall only allow licensed mobile home installers to install mobile
homes within the City of Grovetown. Any mobile home installer seeking to install a mobile home shall provide a
copy of their state license and proof of a business license, general liability insurance for at least one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and bond, if applicable. The mobile installer shall also furnish a list of all
employees that will work on the installation project and provide proof of worker's compensation insurance, if the
mobile home installer employs more than two (2) individuals.
C.
Tax stickers. All mobile homes located in the City of Grovetown shall maintain a current tax sticker which shall
be posted in such a manner as to be clearly visible from the nearest roadway or the driveway. Any mobile home
that is sixty (60) days or more delinquent in posting the tax sticker shall be deemed to be an abandoned
structures and subject to removal, as per existing ordinances governing mobile homes and nuisances.
D.
Additional requirements for all mobile homes. Beginning on September 1, 2010, whenever a property owner or
other individual seeks to move a mobile home into the City of Grovetown, Georgia or seeks to move a mobile
home currently located within the City of Grovetown, Georgia from one location to another within the City of
Grovetown (whether on the same parcel of property or on another parcel of property), the mobile home shall be
underpinned with cement or masonry underpinnings.
E.
Appeals.
1.
In the event the application for the mobile home permit is denied by the director of the planning and zoning
department or the applicant refuses to meet the conditions/recommendations of the planning and zoning
department, the applicant shall have thirty (30) days to request a hearing before the city council.
2.
In the event the city council grants the mobile home permit following the denial of the permit by the director of
the planning and zoning department, then the permit shall be issued by the city council, signed off by each
council member voting in the affirmative, and the director of the planning and zoning department shall absolved
of any liability with respect to the issuing of the permit. further, the director of the planning and zoning
department shall not be required to sign off on the permit.
3.
In the event the city council denies the application for the permit, then the applicant shall have thirty (30) days to
appeal said decision to the Superior Court of Columbia County, Georgia.
7.170 Mobile home parks. The expansion of a mobile home park existing before the effective date of this
ordinance in districts R-1, R-2 and R-3 provided:
a.
That all mobile home parks shall contain a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of land so
located, dimensioned, and related as to facilitate efficient park design and management.
b.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
362/414
That a maximum of two (2) mobile homes shall be permitted on the first twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of
land area plus four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet of land for each mobile home thereafter.
c.
That all internal street systems shall comply with the requirements of section 7.160 d. If internal streets are not
used, then the requirements of section 6.110 shall apply.
d.
That each mobile home park having seven (7) or more spaces shall contain an outdoor recreational area
appropriately developed for both active and passive outdoor recreation. The following minimum requirements
shall apply:
(1)
Eight (8) percent of the gross land area of a park or five thousand (5,000) square feet, whichever is greater, shall
be reserved, developed and maintained for recreational purposes.
(2)
No area devoted to automobile parking, setback, service buildings, streets, or other such function shall be
counted as part of the required recreational area, except that swimming pools, recreational buildings, and child
play areas may be included as part of the required recreational area.
(3)
Recreational areas shall be accessible to all park tenants. The total area may consist of two (2) or more areas,
provided that no single area shall contain less than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
(4)
For safety reasons, recreational areas shall be located where they are free of traffic hazards.
e.
That the requirements described in section 7.160 shall be met with the exception of section 7.160 a. and h.
7.180 Motels, motor hotels, and tourist courts provided:
a.
The lot shall have an area of at least eight hundred (800) square feet per guest unit.
b.
The following accessory uses may be permitted subject to all applicable regulations of this ordinance:
(1)
Swimming pools but only for the use of registered guests.
(2)
Restaurants but only in motels with fifty (50) units or more.
(3)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
363/414
News stands for the convenience of residents.
7.190 Nursing homes provided:
a.
The plans are approved by the responsible local and state offices.
b.
The structure meets the requirements of building and fire codes for such uses.
7.200 Public utility uses.
a.
Including water or sewage pumping stations, electric substations, gas metering and regulating stations, sewage
disposal and water treatment plants, telephone exchanges or other such communications equipment structures,
and bus or transit stations.
b.
Such uses are permitted in any district in any location which the board of appeals deems reasonably necessary
for the public convenience and welfare.
c.
Provided that the board of appeals evaluates the impact of the proposed use on surrounding properties.
Additional conditions as described in section 10.066 may be imposed to ameliorate possible adverse affects.
7.210 Restaurants.
a.
Such uses shall meet the locational, setback, screening and ingress/egress driveway requirements established for
automobile service stations. (Section 7.040.)
7.220 Schools and educational institutions provided that the board of appeals evaluates the impact of the
proposed use on surrounding properties. Additional conditions as described in section 10.066 may be imposed to
ameliorate possible adverse affects.
7.230 Theaters, drive-in, provided:
a.
That projection screens, if located less than one thousand (1,000) feet from a major street, shall face away from
the major street.
b.
That an area capable of storing at least one-third as many cars as can be accommodated within the theater
viewing area shall be provided away from the flow of incoming or out-going traffic, for waiting vehicles.
c.
That at the points of access or egress from major streets, acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be provided to
facilitate the continuous flow of traffic to and from the theater and shall be approved by the Georgia Department
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
364/414
of Transportation.
(Ord. No. 198, 4-27-09; Ord. No. 207, § II, 8-9-10)
Sec. 7.300. - Time limitation for conditional use of property and variance.
Whenever the city grants a conditional use for a parcel of property, the property owner or applicant shall have
one (1) year from the time of the granting of the conditional use to begin exercising the conditional use by
beginning to use the property in accordance with the conditional use. The failure to follow this time restriction
shall cause the property to revert back to the status of the property prior to the granting of the conditional use.
Whenever the city grants a variance to the zoning code for a parcel of property, the property owner or applicant
shall have one (1) year from the time of the granting of the variance to begin exercising the variance by
beginning construction on said parcel in accordance with said variance. The property owner or applicant shall
then have one year from the beginning of construction to complete said construction. The failure to follow these
time restrictions shall cause the property to revert back to the zoning status prior to the granting of the variance.
(Ord. No. 188, 6-23-08)
ARTICLE VIII. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 8.000. - Definition.
For the purposes of this ordinance, planned unit development shall have the following characteristics:
a.
Land under unified control, planned and developed as a whole.
b.
In a single development operation or a definitely programmed series of development operations, including all
lands and buildings.
c.
For principal and accessory structures and uses substantially related to the character of the district.
d.
According to comprehensive and detailed plans which include not only streets, utilities, lots or building sites, and
the like, but also site plans, floor plans, and elevations for all buildings as intended to be located, constructed,
used, and related to each other, and detailed plans for other uses and improvements on the land as related to the
buildings.
e.
With a program for provision, operation, and maintenance of such areas, improvements, facilities, and services
as will be for common use by some or all of the occupants of the district, but will not be provided, operated, or
maintained at general expense.
Sec. 8.010. - Intent.
It is not the intention of these regulations to unduly restrict the development of planned projects, public or
private, including but not limited to group housing projects, industrial parks, urban renewal projects, or
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
365/414
subdivisions where public water and sewerage is provided for, where it is impracticable or unnecessary to strictly
apply the requirements of this ordinance.
The PUD concept permits modifications to intensity of use, setback requirements of a zoning ordinance,
provided the development is approved by local officials. The developer may have higher densities at selected
points in return for the provision of common open space elsewhere in the project. The planned unit development
is a method for achieving better site design and protecting natural site amenities.
Sec. 8.020. - Permitted locations.
PUD's may be permitted in any district where tracts meet the following minimum requirements:
a.
Sites for PUD's shall contain at least four (4) acres of land.
b.
PUD's shall be so located with respect to major streets and highways as to provide direct access to the site
without creating traffic along minor streets in residential neighborhoods in the vicinity of the site.
Sec. 8.030. - Intensity of use.
The overall maximum density for residential development within a PUD shall not exceed the intensity of use
permitted under the regulations for the zoning district in which the PUD is to be located. Nonresidential uses
included as a part of a PUD shall conform to appropriate commercial and industrial intensity of use
requirements.
Sec. 8.040. - Application to planning commission.
An application for the review of a PUD shall be submitted to the planning commission. An application for
planning commission action on a PUD shall be accompanied by an overall development plan which shall include
at least the following:
a.
A site plan map or maps drawn to an accurate scale showing:
1.
Proposed finished grades with contour intervals of two (2) feet.
2.
Proposed street system, including driveways, curb cuts and parking areas.
3.
Proposed location of buildings, fences, plantings, pedestrian walkways and open areas.
4.
Proposed location of any external lighting and signs.
5.
Location of essential services.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
366/414
6.
Vicinity map showing the location of the PUD site in relation to the surrounding neighborhood, land uses, and
zoning districts.
b.
Tabulations shown on the site plan or an attachment to the site map identifying:
1.
Total area of the site.
2.
Area of usable land.
3.
Area of land proposed for streets.
4.
Area of land per dwelling unit.
5.
Area of land devoted to open space.
6.
Area of land devoted to commercial and industrial uses.
c.
Architectural sketches at an accurate, appropriate scale showing buildings, proposed uses, landscaping, and other
such design features of site improvements.
d.
A statement demonstrating the developer's financial capacity to undertake the PUD and to complete all planned
activities within a reasonable time pending approval of the PUD.
Sec. 8.050. - Standards for review.
The planning commission shall review all plans and information submitted in conjunction with an application for
a PUD according to the following standards:
a.
All plans and proposals must demonstrate that the proposed development will conform to all applicable zoning
requirements, and that the PUD will at least meet the minimum requirements applicable to its development,
including off-street parking and loading, tract size, setbacks, lot width, and all other general or special or general
requirements of this ordinance.
b.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
367/414
The overall PUD plan must make adequate provision for the safe and convenient movement of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic both within the PUD and from adjacent streets.
c.
The plan must demonstrate adequate access to and the provision of necessary utilities for water, sewerage,
drainage, and solid waste disposal.
d.
The plan must demonstrate that light, heat, glare, noise, or any other use of activity on the property as indicated
by the PUD plan shall not deleteriously affect neighboring property nor limit or discourage the orderly
development of adjacent properties as provided for and permitted in the zoning district or general area in which
the PUD is to be located.
Sec. 8.060. - Approval.
a.
A public hearing shall be conducted by the planning commission on all PUD applications.
b.
The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the mayor and city council stating its approval or
disapproval of PUD applications.
c.
The mayor and city council shall have final authority to approve or deny all PUD applications.
d.
If the PUD application is approved by the mayor and city council, building permits and certificates of occupancy
may be issued even though the use of land, the height of buildings to be erected, and building line setbacks
contemplated by the PUD do not conform in all respects to the district's regulations in which it is located.
However, no permit shall be issued unless the proposed development conforms to the standards set forth in the
approved PUD application.
Sec. 8.070. - Time limit on PUD projects.
If construction and development has not been substantially undertaken, in the opinion of the zoning
administrator, on an approved PUD project within one (1) year of the date of project approval, the planning
commission shall review the circumstances and take the following action:
a.
Extend approval for another year as may be requested by the PUD developer.
b.
Require resubmission of the PUD application as described in section 8.040
ARTICLE IX. - APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION, AND PERMITS
Sec. 9.000. - Application of ordinance.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
368/414
Except as otherwise provided, no structure or land shall, after the effective date of this ordinance, be used and no
structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or moved unless in conformity with the regulations herein
specified for the district in which it is located. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
ordinance shall be considered minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety,
morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the community.
Sec. 9.010. - Enforcing officer.
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator. This official
shall have the right to enter upon any premises for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises
necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this ordinance. In addition, he shall issue all building
permits and make and maintain records thereof, and conduct inspection as prescribed by this ordinance and other
such inspections as are necessary to insure compliance with this ordinance.
Sec. 9.020. - Building permits required.
It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the construction of any building or structure, including
accessory structures, or to commence the moving, alteration, or repair of any structure, including accessory
structures, until the zoning administrator has issued for such work a building permit containing a statement that
the plans, specifications and intended use of such structure in all respects conform with the provisions of this
ordinance. For the purpose of this section repair shall be deemed to mean any repair that does not alter the
existing structure. If said repair does not alter the existing structure no building permit will be required. The
building permit required is to be administered according to guidelines stated in the Standard Building Code.
Sec. 9.030. - Application for permit.
Application for a building permit shall be made in writing to the zoning administrator on forms provided for that
purpose. It shall be unlawful for the zoning administrator to approve the plans or issue a building permit for any
excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them to be in conformity with
this ordinance. To this end, the zoning administrator shall require that every application for a building permit for
excavation, construction, moving, or alteration shall be accompanied by a plan or plat drawn to scale and
showing the following in sufficient detail to enable the zoning administrator to ascertain whether the proposed
excavation, construction, moving, or alteration is in conformance with this ordinance:
a.
The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot to be built upon.
b.
The shape, height, use and location on the lot of buildings or structures to be erected or altered.
c.
The sizes, locations, and use of all existing buildings or structures on the lot.
d.
The number of dwelling units the building, if residential, is designed to accommodate.
e.
The setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots.
f.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
369/414
The lay-out of off-street parking and unloading spaces.
g.
Signature of the county health officer approving the proposed location of the septic tank, and field lines provided
public sewerage is not available.
h.
Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the
provisions of this ordinance are being observed.
Sec. 9.040. - Permit issuance and expiration.
If the proposed excavation, construction, moving or alteration as set forth in the application for a building permit
is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, the zoning administrator shall issue a building permit for
such excavation, construction, moving, or alteration. The issuance of a permit shall, in no case, be construed as
waiving any provision of this ordinance, and building permits shall be void after six (6) months from date of
issue unless substantial progress on the project has been made by that time.
Sec. 9.050. - Conditional use permit.
The zoning administrator shall not issue a building permit for a conditional use until such conditional use is
approved by the board of appeals.
Sec. 9.060. - Certificate of occupancy.
No land or building or other structure or part thereof hereafter erected, moved, or altered in its use shall be
occupied or used until the zoning administrator has issued a certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy
shall be issued only if the building or premises is found to conform with the provisions of this ordinance. If the
certificate of occupancy is not granted upon request, the zoning administrator shall state in writing the reasons
the certificate was not granted.
Sec. 9.070. - Disapproval of permit application.
If the application for a building permit is not approved, the zoning administrator shall state in writing on the
application the cause for such disapproval and shall notify the applicant immediately of the reasons for
disapproval. Thereafter, the applicant may reapply for a building permit provided he overcomes, to the
satisfaction of the zoning administrator, the causes for the previous disapproval; or, he may institute appeal
proceedings or request a rezoning.
ARTICLE X. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Sec. 10.000. - Establishment.
A board of zoning appeals is hereby established to hear and decide appeals, grant conditional use permits, and
authorize variances in the terms of this ordinance.
Sec. 10.010. - Membership and terms of office.
The board of appeals shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the mayor and council. Members appointed
to the board shall hold no other public office except that one may also be a member of the planning commission.
The members shall serve for overlapping terms of four (4) years, except for the initial appointment of the board
in which three (3) members shall be appointed for five-year terms of office. Board members may be appointed to
succeed themselves.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
370/414
Sec. 10.020. - Vacancy.
Any vacancy for the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial
appointment. Members shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after
public hearing.
Sec. 10.030. - Organization.
The board shall hold an annual organizational meeting and shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among
its members before proceeding to any other matters of business. The zoning administrator shall be the secretary
of the board, but shall have no vote. The board shall meet at the call of the chairman and at such other times as
the board may determine. The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure. The board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed
in the office of the board and shall be a public record. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first
regular meeting after their appointment.
Sec. 10.040. - Meetings and quorum.
Three (3) members of the board shall constitute a quorum. The members of the board shall regularly attend
meetings and public hearings of the board and shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for
authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties.
Sec. 10.050. - Powers and duties.
The board of zoning appeals shall have the following powers:
10.051 Interpretation. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative office in the enforcement of this ordinance. In reaching its
decision, the board of zoning appeals shall establish firm guidelines for future administrative actions on similar
or like matters.
10.052 Conditional uses. To hear and decide upon those applications for a conditional use when the same is
authorized under these regulations. In reaching its decision the board shall not grant the application if it finds:
a.
That the use is not specifically allowed as a conditional use under these regulations, or
b.
That the location of proposed activities and improvements are not clearly defined on the site plan filed by the
applicant, or
c.
That the use will not be compatible with development on adjacent properties or will adversely affect traffic
conditions, public utility facilities, or other matters pertaining to the public health, safety, and general welfare, or
d.
That the proposed use does not comply with the conditions specified under Article VI of this regulation.
10.053 Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of the ordinance as
will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of the ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
371/414
ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may
be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of appeals that:
a.
There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question
because of its size, shape, or topography; and
b.
The application of the ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; and
c.
Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and
d.
Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of
the ordinance; provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that
is prohibited by the ordinance.
In reviewing an appeal for variance, the burden of showing that the variance should be granted shall be the
responsibility of the party applying for the variance. Any variance granted by the board shall terminate
automatically when the use ceases to be in full compliance with any conditions imposed by the board, when the
use is abandoned, or when the building permit has expired.
10.054 Reversal power. In exercising the above powers, the board of appeals may, in conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision,
or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may
issue or direct the issuance of a permit.
10.055 Administer oaths. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses by subpoena.
Sec. 10.060. - Procedures.
The board of zoning appeals shall function according to the following procedures:
10.061 Interpretation request or variance appeal. After written denial of a building permit, or certificate of
occupancy, a property owner may file an interpretation request or variance appeal with the board of zoning
appeals. The request or appeal shall be on forms provided by the board and filed with the board secretary.
10.062 Stay of proceedings. An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of appeals after the notice of appeal shall
have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life and property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining
order which may be granted by the board of appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the
officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
10.063 Conditional use permit. An application requesting a conditional use of land or a structure shall be filed
with the board of zoning appeal[s] for review. The application shall be on forms provided by the board and shall
be accompanied by a plot plan of the lot drawn to an accurate scale and showing the proposed uses of land and
buildings, parking and loading, building line setbacks, and such other information as may be required by the
board.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
372/414
10.064 Public hearing. The board of appeals shall hold a public hearing for each interpretation request,
conditional use permit and variance appeal. Notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be
advertised at least fifteen (15) days in the newspaper of record.
10.065 Withdrawal of request, application, or appeal. Any request, application, or appeal may be withdrawn
upon written notice to the board, but no appeal shall be withdrawn after posting of hearing notice and prior to
board action thereon without formal consent of the board.
10.066 Approvals. In the exercise of its approval, the board may improve conditions it may consider advisable
and necessary in the furtherance of the general purposes of this ordinance. Such conditions may include, but are
not limited to, the following:
a.
Planted or screen buffers to reduce adverse or potentially adverse effect on adjoining properties.
b.
The location, design, or limitation of street accessways, parking areas, and loading docks.
c.
The rearrangement of structures on the development site.
d.
Increases in maximum building height.
e.
Increases in the district requirements for lot size and building line setbacks, but not a reduction of these
requirements.
f.
Limitations on the hours of business operation when it can be shown that proposed operational times would
cause an adverse effect on adjoining, existing uses.
g.
Specified distances from existing residential, public, or institutional developments.
In no case, however, shall the board exempt any conditional use from meeting the minimum requirements
specified in this ordinance.
Sec. 10.070. - Appeals.
Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the board of zoning appeals, may take an
appeal to the superior court. Said appeal to the superior court shall be the same as an appeal to the superior court
from any decision made by the probate court and as specified in Chapter 6-2 of the Code of Georgia [O.C.G.A.
section 5-3-2], except, however, that said appeal may be filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the
decision of the board of zoning appeals, and upon failure to file said appeal within thirty (30) days the said
decision of the board of zoning appeals shall be final. Provided, however, that on appeal said case shall be heard
by the judge of the superior court without a jury, unless one of the parties files a written demand for a jury trial
within thirty (30) days from the filing of the appeal.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
373/414
ARTICLE XI. - ZONING CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Sec. 11.000. - Authority to amend ordinance.
The mayor and council may from time to time, after receiving a report from the planning commission and after
public hearings are held as required by law, amend, supplement, or change these regulations or the boundaries of
the zoning districts. Any amendment, supplement, or change may be initiated by the planning commission, the
mayor and council, the property owner, or by a person holding a lease or option on the property with the consent
of the owner.
Sec. 11.010. - Declaration of policy.
The mayor and council declares the enactment of these regulations governing the use and development of land,
buildings, and structures as a measure necessary to the orderly development of the community. Therefore, no
change shall be made in these regulations or in the boundaries of the zoning districts except:
a.
To correct a manifest error in the regulations or map, or
b.
To recognize changed or changing conditions or circumstances in a particular area, or
c.
To recognize changes in technology, the style of living, or the manner of doing business.
No request to amend the boundaries of any zoning district shall be considered unless the area to be rezoned is
designated for the proposed use in the city's future land use plan, or unless and until the future land use plan is
first appropriately amended to reflect this change in planned use.
Sec. 11.020. - Planning commission review and report.
All amendments shall first be submitted to the planning commission for its review and recommendations. The
planning commission shall have thirty (30) days from the date of the public hearing in which to conduct its
review and submit its recommendation to the mayor and council. If the planning commission fails to submit a
report within thirty (30) days, it shall be deemed to have recommended the adoption of the proposed
amendments. In reviewing and evaluating a requested zoning change, the planning commission shall consider the
following factors:
a.
Whether the uses to be permitted by the proposed change would be appropriate in the area concerned based on
declaration of zoning change policy identified in section 11.010
b.
Whether adequate public school facilities and other public services exist or can be provided to serve the needs of
additional residences likely to be constructed as a result of such change, and the consequences of such change.
c.
Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing public water and
sanitary sewerage to the area.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
374/414
Sec. 11.030. - Public hearing and notice.
Before enacting an amendment to this ordinance, the mayor and council shall hold a public hearing regarding the
proposed amendment. Notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be advertised at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing in the newspaper of record. The mayor and council may
authorize the planning commission to conduct the public hearings.
Sec. 11.040. - Action by mayor and council.
Consistent with the provisions of this ordinance, the mayor and council may approve or deny any change in these
regulations which have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation.
Sec. 11.050. - Appeal from decision of mayor and council.
Appeals from the decision of the mayor and council regarding the adoption or disapproval of a zoning
amendment shall be made to the superior court. The city's board of zoning appeals shall have no jurisdiction over
such appeals, and therefore shall not be authorized to hear such appeals.
Sec. 11.060. - Limitation on reapplications.
When the mayor and city council denies a requested zoning change, no new applications for the same zoning
change, or the rezoning of the same property, shall be accepted by the planning commission within a period of
twelve (12) months of the date of the denial of the original request by the mayor and council.
Sec. 11.070. - Withdrawal without prejudice.
Prior to the planning commission's decision on the appropriateness of a requested zoning change and before it
shall have submitted its recommendation to the mayor and council, the party requesting the change in zoning
may withdraw his request. In such case, the request shall be considered as though it were never proposed except
that its withdrawal and any consideration shall be entered into the minutes of the planning commission.
Withdrawn requests therefore may be exempted from the provisions of section 11.060, and resubmitted for
formal action by the planning commission as though it were a new request.
Sec. 11.080. - Requests for zoning change.
Any person or persons desiring a change in the existing boundaries of any zoning district shall first file a petition
requesting such change, together with a plat of the property to be changed and the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00)
with the zoning administrator. The applicant shall also submit to the zoning administrator any information
requested by the planning commission concerning the property proposed for rezoning, including but not limited
to information regarding neighboring uses, property ownership, and existing zoning, and all proposed or
intended uses to be developed on the property, as well as all site and/or building plans for such uses.
a.
Upon filing of a petition for a zoning change and receiving notice of the date of the public hearing concerning the
petitioned request, the applicant shall at his expense erect or cause to be erected in a conspicuous place on the
property in question a sign giving public notice of both the existing zoning district in which the property is
located and the requested change, the scheduled date for the public hearing, and the name and address of the
property owner.
Said sign shall be not less than nine (9) square feet in area with not less than two-inch black letters upon a white
background stating the required information, and shall read as follows:
"NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
375/414
A petition has been filed requesting that this property be changed from (insert present district name) to (insert
district requested). A public hearing will be held at (insert place) on (date) at (time).
All those having an interest in this petition shall be present.
/s/ (Property Owner)
(Address)"
b.
The public hearing shall be advertised and conducted as provided in this article, and any amendment involving
the petitioned request for rezoning property, said property shall be fully described by metes and bounds in the
advertisement and shall state the existing and proposed zone in which the property is located.
Sec. 11.090. - Zoning of newly annexed areas.
a.
Uses in all areas annexed to the city shall be subject to the regulations of the lowest density residential district
until the zoning for such areas are established by the mayor and council.
b.
The planning commission shall, as soon as practical after the annexation of any area, institute proceedings on its
own motion to establish zoning districts throughout the newly annexed area, and the procedure to be followed
shall be the same as is provided by law for the adoption of original zoning districts governing other parts of the
municipality.
ARTICLE XII. - NONCONFORMITIES
Sec. 12.000. - Intent.
It is the nature of this section to avoid any unreasonable invasion of established private property rights; however,
this ordinance recognizes that the elimination of existing structures and uses that are not in conformity with this
resolution is as much a subject of health, safety, and general welfare as is the prevention of the establishment of
new uses which would violate the purpose, intent, and provisions of this ordinance. A structure, building or use
which was established before the effective date of this ordinance and which does not conform to one (1) or more
of the requirements of this ordinance is a nonconformity. Such nonconformity may be continued in perpetuity;
may be replaced; shall not be converted to any other use except a conforming use; shall not be expanded except
as provided in this ordinance; shall not be reestablished after discontinuance of operation for one (1) year.
Sec. 12.010. - Maintenance and repairs.
a.
On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done on
ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not
exceeding seventy-five (75) percent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure or
nonconforming portion of the structure, provided that the bulk existing when it became nonconforming shall not
be increased.
b.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
376/414
Nothing in these regulations shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to safe condition of any
building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon
order of such official.
Sec. 12.020. - Exceptions.
Any new use permitted as a conditional use or granted a hardship variance under the terms of these regulations
shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use.
ARTICLE XIII. - VIOLATIONS, VALIDITY, AND ADOPTION
Sec. 13.000. - Violation a misdemeanor.
A violation of any provision of this ordinance is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided by law.
Sec. 13.010. - Remedies.
In case any building or structure is, or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted,
or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of this ordinance, the
zoning administrator, city attorney, or other appropriate authority of the municipality or any adjacent or
neighboring property owner who would be specially damaged by such violation may, in addition to other
remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use; or to correct or abate such
violation, or to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure, or land.
Sec. 13.020. - Each violation a separate offense.
Each and every day such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or
use continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Sec. 13.030. - Notification of violation and fine.
Failure to rectify the violation within thirty (30) days after receiving written notice from the zoning administrator
that a violation has occurred will result in the levy of a city fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each
building, structure, or alteration found to be in violation of this ordinance.
Sec. 13.040. - Validity and severability.
Should any section, clause, or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
unconstitutional or invalid, this judgment shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part
other than the part judged invalid.
Sec. 13.050. - Conflict with other laws.
Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by the
regulations and provisions of this ordinance, the provisions of such other ordinance, resolution, or statute shall
govern.
Sec. 13.060. - Effective date and adoption.
This ordinance shall take effect from and after the effective date of its passage and adoption by the mayor and
council.
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISIONS
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
377/414
FOOTNOTE(S):
(31) Editor's note— The subdivision ordinance or resolution, adopted on March 8, 1976, is set out herein as
adopted and amended, except that words and figures appearing in brackets have been added by the editor in
explanation or as updating state law. Amendatory enactments are cited in parentheses following amended
provisions.
(31) Cross reference— Planning commission, § 13-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - SHORT TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT, JURISDICTION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(32) Editor's note— The Act was not carried forward from the Ga. Code 1933 to O.C.G.A.
Sec. 101. - Short title.
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision Regulations of Grovetown,
Georgia."
Sec. 102. - Purpose and intent.
These regulations are enacted pursuant to the authority contained in the General Planning and Zoning Enabling
Act of 1957 [32]
 and all amendments thereto through and including the 1967 session of the General Assembly of
the State of Georgia.
The purpose of these regulations is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare; to promote the
orderly and beneficial development and expansion of communities within the county; to provide adequate light
and air; to provide adequate water, sewerage and surface drainage; to prevent undesirable overcrowding of
population; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote the orderly and desirable subdivision
of land; to insure the orderly and desirable development of streets; to promote the orderly and desirable
development of public utilities and services; to provide adequate and sufficient land for schools, parks,
playgrounds and other public uses; and to insure proper legal description and monumentation of all subdivided
land.
Sec. 103. - Jurisdiction.
These regulations shall govern all subdivision of land within the legal boundaries of Grovetown, Georgia, as
presently or hereafter established.
Within these regulations, the term "subdivision" shall mean the division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2)
or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or
building development, and includes all such division of land involving a new street or a change in existing
streets, and includes resubdivision and provided, however, that the following are not included within this
definition:
A.
The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not
increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of these regulations.
B.
The division of land into parcels of three (3) acres or more where no new street is involved.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
378/414
The term "subdivider" within these regulations shall mean any person, firm, or corporation having such a
proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide
such land under these regulations, or the authorized agent of such person, firm, or corporation for the purpose of
proceeding under these regulations.
Any owner of land within Grovetown wishing to subdivide land shall submit to the Grovetown Planning
Commission a plat of the subdivision according to the procedures outlined in Article II, which plat shall conform
to the minimum requirements set forth in Article III. Improvements shall be made as required by Article IV of
these standards.
Sec. 104. - Definitions.
For the purposes of these regulations, certain words, terms, and phrases are to be used and interpreted as herein
defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the singular number include the
plural and words in the plural number include the singular; the term "shall" is always mandatory and not
directory; and the word "may" is permissive.
The following words, terms, and phrases are hereby defined and shall be interpreted as such throughout these
regulations. Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them:
Artery, primary: Those major streets and roads used for high speed and high volume traffic between urban
centers and regions; intersections, land access, and traffic-oriented effects of abutting land uses warrant careful
control.
Limited access primary artery: Those primary arteries of considerably higher speeds and volumes where
intersections, land access, and traffic effects warrant a high degree of control, even prohibition in some cases.
Artery, secondary: Those major streets and roads used for traffic of moderate-to-fast speeds and high volumes
between major local centers of employment, recreation, and shopping and suburban centers; access controls
warranted but to lesser degree than primary arteries.
Board of commissioners: The board of commissioners of Columbia County, Georgia.
Building setback line, front: The minimum allowable distance between the centerline of an abutting street, or an
official future street, and the front of a building or structure on a lot. The front setback distance applies to the full
width of the lot and is parallel to or concentric with the street centerline.
Centerline: That line determined as such by the official authority having jurisdiction over the street, otherwise it
shall be the succession of mid-points between the identifiable limits of any improvements on the ground or of
any easement.
City: (1) City of Grovetown, Ga.; (2) Mayor and council City of Grovetown, Ga.
City attorney: The Grovetown attorney.
City engineer: The Grovetown engineer.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
379/414
City of Grovetown: The incorporated area of Columbia County, Georgia, known as Grovetown, Georgia.
Clerk of superior court: The clerk of the Superior Court of Columbia County, Georgia.
Columbia County: The unincorporated area of Columbia County, Georgia.
County: (1) Columbia County, Georgia; (2) Board of Commissioners of Columbia County, Georgia.
County engineer: The Columbia County Engineer.
County health officer: The Columbia County Health Officer.
Cul-de-sac: A land service street that terminates in dead-end turnarounds and not intended for future extension.
Dedicated to public use: Land or improvements that has been deeded to and accepted by the county for public
use and maintenance.
Deflection angle: The angle between a deviation in the direction of the centerline of a street and the extension of
the centerline along a straight course from the point from which the centerline changed direction. (See below)
Double frontage: The incidence where a lot, tract, or parcel of land abuts the rights-of-way of more than one (1)
public street.
Easement: (1) A strip of land on which the property owner has granted a person or persons, a corporation, or
governing authority the right to use such land for specific purposes; (2) the grant of such a right.
Final plat: A complete and exact plat of a completed subdivision prepared for submission to the planning
commission as required by these regulations.
Hearing: A public review of a subdivision plat during an open meeting of the planning commission.
Improvements: The physical additions and changes to land that may be necessary to produce usable, desirable,
and acceptable lots.
Intersection: The point at which the centerline of a street intersects the centerline of another street or railway.
Loop street: A land service street of short length and of such design as to originate and terminate in a "T"
intersection with another street. (See below)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
380/414
Major road plan: Any legally adopted plan for the future development or classification of major streets and roads
in Grovetown.
Master sewerage plan: The long-range, master plan for the development of a public sewerage systems as
adopted by the city.
On-site disposal: The disposal of sewage from an individual use into the ground, a septic tank, grease trap, or
elsewhere except into a public or private sewerage system.
Planning commission: The Grovetown Planning Commission.
Plat of record: (1) An abbreviated version of the final plat of a subdivision that is prepared as required by these
regulations for filing with the clerk of superior court; (2) the plat so filed.
Preliminary plat: A plat of the proposed subdivision of land prepared and submitted in accordance with these
regulations.
Registered engineer: A professional engineer licensed and registered to perform the duties of an engineer.
Registered surveyor: A land surveyor licensed and registered to perform the duties of a land surveyor.
Reserve strip: A strip or tract of land reserved for the purpose of controlling or limiting access from properties to
abutting streets.
Reverse frontage: A lot or tract of land that abuts two (2) public streets but does not have vehicular access to one
(1) of them.
Service drive: (1) A land service street that provides vehicular access to the interior, back, or side of properties
otherwise abutting a public street; (2) an alley.
Sewerage, private: A sanitary sewerage system for the collection of water borne wastes complete with a sewage
treatment plant or stabilization pond which is owned and operated by corporations or persons other than a public
agency or authority.
Sewerage, public: A sanitary sewerage system for the collection of water borne wastes complete with a sewage
treatment plant or stabilization pond which is owned and operated by a public agency or authority.
Sketch plan: A general illustration, usually drawn freehand, of the proposed subdivision of land.
Street, collector: A major street used for traffic of moderate speeds and high peak volumes between land service
streets and arteries or serving as principal entrance streets or primary circulation routes within a neighborhood or
other limited area; control of access from abutting properties warranted but to a lesser degree than arteries.
Street, land service: A minor street used for traffic of relatively low speeds and volumes and for primary access
to abutting properties; access controls not necessarily warranted, but through traffic should be discouraged by
street design.
Street jog: The incidence where two (2) streets or two (2) portions of a single street are separated by a relatively
short distance, usually at their intersection with another street. (See below)
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
381/414
Tangent: The straight-line distance between the ending of one curve of a line (center-line of a street) and the
beginning of another curve of the same line (center-line). (See below)
U.S.G.S.: The United States Geodetic and Coastal Survey.
Variance: An alteration or relaxation of the terms of these regulations where such alteration will not be contrary
to the public interest, convenience, and welfare, and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property over
which the applicant for a variance has no control, a literal enforcement of these regulations would create
unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant in the use of the property.
Zoning (zoning regulations): The comprehensive zoning regulations of the incorporated areas of Grovetown,
Georgia.
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE FOR PLAT APPROVAL
Sec. 201. - General.
The owner of any land lying within the area of jurisdiction of these regulations who wishes to subdivide such
land shall seek approval by the planning commission according to the following procedure:
A.
Informal consultation: The subdivider should consult early and informally with the planning commission (or a
designated representative of the planning commission) for advice and assistance prior to submitting any plat. The
subdivider should submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity
and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision. No fee shall be charged for this informal
consultation and no formal application shall be required.
B.
Submission of preliminary plat: Prior to making any street improvements or installing any utilities, the
prospective subdivider shall submit to the planning commission a preliminary plat as specified in section 202 of
this article. Where circumstances warrant, the planning commission may modify the herein contained
requirements in accordance with section 402 of Article IV. Approval of the preliminary plat by the planning
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
382/414
commission constitutes authorization for the subdivider to develop the subdivision subject to the minimum
standards for improvements prescribed in Article IV, and the minimum standards of design prescribed in Article
III.
C.
Submission of final plat: After approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may proceed with the preparation
of the final plat and other documents as may be required in connection therewith. No final plat shall be approved
by the planning commission until either:
1.
The required improvements listed are constructed in satisfactory manner and approved by the local approving
authority or agent, or
2.
In lieu of such prior construction, the planning commission has received written notification from the City
Attorney that the mayor and city council has accepted an approved bond, or security in the amount equal to the
estimated cost of installation and completion of the required improvements, whereby improvements may be
made and utilities installed without cost to the city in the event of default by the subdivider.
D.
Submission of plat of record: Upon approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall submit to the planning
commission for its approval a plat of record prepared in accordance with section 204 of this article.
Sec. 202. - Preliminary plat.
A. Submission: The subdivider shall submit to the planning commission, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
next regular meeting of the planning commission, the following:
1.
A letter requesting review and approval of a preliminary plat and giving the name and address of a person to
whom the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the preliminary plat shall be sent; and
2.
Five (5) copies of a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision drawn to a scale not less than one (1) inch
equals one hundred (100) feet.
3.
A subdivision review and inspection fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per lot platted for development.
(Ord. No. 109, § 1, 4-25-94)
B. Contents: The preliminary plat shall meet the general requirements and minimum standards of design set
forth in Article III and minimum standards for improvement set forth in Article IV and shall give the following
information:
1.
Topography, based on U.S.G.S. datum showing contours at vertical intervals of not more than five (5) feet except
when specifically not required by the planning commission; and
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
383/414
2.
Name, location, and acreage of subdivision; name and address of owner of record and subdivider; the name,
registration stamp, and signature of the designer and surveyor; and
3.
North point, date, and graphic scale; total number of lots and average lot size; and
4.
Vicinity map showing location of subdivision in relation to surrounding area; and
5.
Location of existing site features; property lines, utilities, easements, streets and their classifications, buildings,
streams, land subject to flooding or periodic inundation, railroads, sewers, water mains, bridges and drainage
structures, zoning both on land to be subdivided and on adjoining land, and names of adjoining property owners
or subdivisions; and
6.
Proposed layout of streets showing proposed street names, rights-of-way, and pavement widths (classifications to
be determined by planning commission); evidence of approval of street plans by the city; and
7.
Exact boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, by bearings and distances; lot lines with approximate
dimensions; minimum front building setback line; and
8.
Locations and dimensions of easements, parks, playgrounds, and land to be dedicated to public use other than
street rights-of-way; land to be used for purposes other than residential; and
9.
Proposed layout of water distribution system showing connections to existing or proposed water supply systems;
evidence of approval of the water system plans by city; and
10.
Proposed layout of sewerage system showing connections to public sewerage systems (where required) and
evidence of approval system plans by city engineer and any other state or local agencies or officers having
jurisdiction over such systems (approval of county health officer where on-site disposal is to be used or approval
of Georgia Board of Natural Resources or the Director of the Environmental Protection Division where private
sewerage is to be provided); and
11.
Proposed layout of storm and surface water drainage system and evidence of approval of system plans by city
engineer as provided for in section 309 of these regulations and by the soil erosion and sedimentation control
regulations of the city; and
12.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
384/414
Any adjoining areas to be developed at a later date by the subdivider as an extension of or addition to the
proposed subdivision as part of a continuing or long-range development program; and
13.
Certain other information as may be required by the planning commission, city engineer, or county health officer.
C. Certificate of approval: A certificate of approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission shall be
inscribed on the plat as follows:
"Pursuant to the land subdivision regulations of Grovetown, Georgia, all the requirements for approval having
been fulfilled, this preliminary plat was given approval by the Grovetown Planning Commission on ;daterule;, 19
____________.
This approval does not constitute approval of a final plat. This certificate of approval shall expire and be null and
void on ;daterule;, 19 ____________.
Date:;daterule;, 19____________ _____
D. Action by the planning commission: The designated representative of the planning commission shall check
the plat for conformance to these regulations and report his findings and recommendations to the planning
commission which shall afford a hearing on the preliminary plat. Notice of the time and place of the hearing
shall be sent by the planning commission by registered or certified mail to the person designated in the letter
requesting preliminary plat review and approval, not less than five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.
Thereafter, the planning commission shall give approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat. A notation of the
planning commission's action shall be made on two (2) copies of the preliminary plat, including a statement of
the reasons for disapproval if the plat is disapproved. One (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider or his
agent and one (1) copy retained in the files of the planning commission.
Approval of a preliminary plat does not constitute approval of a final plat. It indicates only approval of the layout
as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. Approval of a preliminary plat shall expire and be null and void
after a period of one (1) year unless an extension of time is approved by the planning commission.
If action on a preliminary plat is not taken by the planning commission within sixty (60) days of the date of
submittal, the preliminary plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on
demand. However, the applicant may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time.
E. Construction authorization: Approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission constitutes
authorization for the subdivider to develop the subdivision in accordance with the approved preliminary plat and
subject to the minimum standards prescribed in Article III and Article IV of these regulations. However, the
subdivider, subdivision owner, or agent of the subdivider or owner shall not transfer, sell, agree to sell, or
negotiate to sell any part of the subdivision by reference or exhibition until after the planning commission has
approved the final plat and filed the plat of record.
(Ord. No. 139, § 1, 4-23-01)
Sec. 203. - Final plat.
A.
Submission: After the preliminary plat of a proposed land subdivision has been given approval by the planning
commission, the subdivider may, within one (1) year from the date of such approval, submit to the planning
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
385/414
commission:
1.
A letter requesting review and approval of a final plat and giving the name and address of the person to whom
the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the final plat shall be sent; and
2.
The original and five (5) copies of the final plat together with any street profiles or other plans or information
that may be required by the planning commission or county engineer; the final plat shall be drawn to a scale of
one (1) inch equals not more than one hundred (100) feet; the original copy of the final plat shall be drawn in
black India ink on linen, mylar, coated acetate, or other material as may be approved by the planning
commission; and
3.
A final plat filing and recording fee of ten dollars ($10.00).
B.
Contents: The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved. It shall meet the general
requirement and minimum standards of design set forth in Article III and minimum standards for improvement
set forth in Article IV. The plat shall show the following information:
1.
Topography, based on U.S.G.S. datum, showing contours at vertical intervals of not more than five (5) feet
except when specifically not required by the planning commission; and
2.
Name, location, and acreage of subdivision; name and address of owner of record and subdivider; name,
registration stamp, and signature of the designer and surveyor of the subdivision; and
3.
North point, date, and graphic scale; total number of lots and average lot size; and
4.
Vicinity map showing exact location of the subdivision in relation to surrounding area; and
5.
Exact boundary lines of subdivision tract; names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and streets; the location
and ownership of adjoining property; and
6.
Layout of streets showing street names, rights-of-way, pavement widths, and classifications; street center-lines
showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, and lengths of tangents; and
7.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
386/414
Lot lines with dimensions and bearings; minimum front building setback lines; lots numbered in numerical order
and blocks lettered alphabetically; area of each lot; and
8.
Locations, dimensions, and purposes of any easements, recreational areas, land to be dedicated for public use,
and land to be used for purposes other than residential; and
9.
Layout of approved water, sewer, storm drainage, and other utility systems and connections to existing systems;
and
10.
The location of any adjoining areas to be developed at a later date by the subdivider as an extension of or an
addition to the subdivision as part of a long-range or continuing development program; and
11.
All dimensions to be to the nearest one one-hundredth (1/100) of a foot and all bearings and angles to the nearest
minute; and
12.
Locations, material, and descriptions of monuments and markers; and
13.
Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing, and length of every street,
lot line, boundary line, front building setback line, and block line, whether curved or straight; and
14.
A statement, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document, of any private covenant; and
15.
Such other information as may be required by the planning commission, city engineer, county health officer, or
mayor and council; and
16.
The following certifications inscribed directly on the final plat:
a.
Engineer's or surveyor's certification:
"It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by
me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist and their location, size, type, and
material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the Land Subdivision Regulations of
Grovetown, Georgia have been fully complied with."
By: ____________ Registered
C.E. No.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
387/414
;#rule;
____________
Registered
Georgia
Land
Surveyor
No.
;#rule;"
b.
Owner's certification:
"I (we) hereby certify that I (we) are the Owner(s) of the property shown on this plat; that this plat was made
from an actual survey; that all state and county taxes or other assessments now due on this land have been paid;
and that I (we) adopt this plan of subdivision with my (our) free consent, and dedicate all streets, parks, and other
open spaces to public or private use as noted.
Date: ;daterule; Owner:
_____
Date: ;daterule; Owner:
_____
Date: ;daterule; Authorized Agent:
_____
For: _____
C.
Other certifications: The following certifications shall be submitted with the final plat on forms provided for
such purposes:
1.
Certification of acceptance of water distribution system and installation, by city engineer.
2.
Certification of acceptance of sewage collection system and installation, by city engineer.
3.
Certification of approval of any private means of sewage treatment and disposal, by county health officer, and, if
required, by city engineer.
4.
Certification of acceptance of street installation or acceptance of bond or security in lieu of thereof, by the mayor
and city council.
5.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
388/414
Certification of acceptance of street rights-of-way and other lands as may be dedicated to public use, by mayor
and city council.
6.
Certification of approval of final plat, by planning commission.
7.
Certification of acceptance of public open spaces by city.
D.
Action by the planning commission: The designated representative of the planning commission shall check the
final plat for conformance with the approved preliminary plat and with the provisions set forth in these
regulations and shall report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall afford a
hearing on the final plat; notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the planning commission by
registered or certified mail to the person designated in the letter requesting final plat review and approval, not
less than five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.
Thereafter, the planning commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat. A notation of the action shall be
made on the original tracing and two (2) prints of the final plat, including a statement of the reasons therefor if
the final plat is disapproved.
If action on a final plat is not taken by the planning commission within sixty (60) days of the date of the
submittal, the final plat shall be considered approved, and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand.
However, the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time.
Sec. 204. - Plat of record.
A.
Submission: After the final plat has been approved by the planning commission, the subdivider shall, within ten
(10) days after such approval and before any lots are sold, file for record the final plat in the office of the clerk of
the superior court.
B.
Size and contents: The plat of record shall be drawn in permanent India ink on tracing cloth (linen), and in no
case shall exceed eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches in size. This original and two (2) copies (blue
or black line prints) shall be submitted to the planning commission for its approval and recording.
The plat of record shall display the following:
1.
Name and location of the subdivision, date of survey, name and stamp of surveyor, graphic scale (recommended
scale: 1;inch; = 100;ft;), and north point; and
2.
Names and locations of adjoining streets and the ownership of adjoining properties; and
3.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
389/414
Street rights-of-way, lot and property lines, lot number and block letter designation, easements, and areas
dedicated for public use; and
4.
The engineer's/surveyor's certification and the owner's certification as provided for in section 203 (B) (16) (a and
b) of this article; and
5.
Such other information as may hereafter be required by the clerk of superior court and/or the planning
commission.
C.
Sales authorization: In no case shall the subdivider, owner, or the agent of the subdivider or owner, transfer, sell,
agree to sell or negotiate to sell any part of the subdivision by reference or exhibition until the planning
commission has approved the final plat, and said final plat has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the
superior court of Columbia County, Georgia.
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN
Sec. 301. - Suitability of the land.
A.
Land physically unsuitable for subdivision: Land which the planning commission has found to be unsuitable for
development:
1.
Because of flooding, bad drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, or other such features which may endanger
health, life or property, aggravate erosion, increase flood hazard, or necessitate excessive expenditures of public
funds for supply and maintenance of services, and
2.
Land which other public agencies concerned have investigated and found in the best interest of the public not
suitable for the type of platting and development proposed;
shall not be approved for subdivision unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer for meeting the
problems created by subdivision of such land.
B.
Land unsuitably located for subdivisions: The planning commission shall not approve what it considers to be
scattered or premature subdivision of land which would endanger health, safety, or property because of lack of or
adverse effect on water supply, schools, proper drainage, good transportation, other public services or public
funds for the supply or maintenance of such services.
Sec. 302. - Name of subdivision.
The name of each subdivision must have the approval of the planning commission. The name shall not duplicate
nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision.
Sec. 303. - Street classifications.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
390/414
Streets and roads are hereby classified according to the function which they are to serve, the type, speed, and
volume of traffic they will carry and the required standards of design. The classifications of streets and roads
shall be (a) primary arteries, (b) secondary arteries, (c) collector streets, and (d) land service streets; and are
displayed on the major road plan adopted by the planning commission. The designation in the major road plan of
arteries and collectors shall not prevent other streets proposed in or adjoining subdivisions from being similarly
classified. For the purposes of these regulations, land service streets are further classified by street design and
use. Street classifications and subclassifications are as follows:
A.
Primary arteries: (PA)
B.
Secondary arteries: (SA)
C.
Collector streets: (CS)
D.
Land service streets: (LS)
1.
Residential
a.
Small lot subdivisions (lots less than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet).
b.
Large lot subdivisions (lots larger than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet with a minimum frontage of one
hundred twenty-five (125) feet).
c.
Rural subdivisions (lots larger than two and one-half (2.5) acres).
d.
Large lot rural subdivisions (lots larger than five (5.0) acres).
2.
Industrial
3.
Commercial
4.
Service drive
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
391/414
Sec. 304. - Relation to present, proposed, and future street system.
A.
The location and width of all streets and roads shall conform to the official major road plan as adopted by the
planning commission.
B.
Existing streets which terminate at or adjoin a subdivision boundary shall be deemed a part of the subdivision.
The proposed street system within a subdivision shall have the right-of-way of existing streets extended not less
than the required minimum width. Subdivisions that adjoin only one (1) side of existing streets shall dedicate
one-half of the additional right-of-way needed to meet minimum width requirements. If any part of the
subdivision includes both sides of an existing street all the required additional right-of-way shall be dedicated.
C.
Where, in the opinion of the planning commission, it is necessary to provide for street access to adjoining
property proposed streets shall be extended by dedication of right-of-way to the boundary of such property.
D.
When an artery adjoins or is included in a subdivision, lots therein which abut the artery shall be provided with
another means of access, e.g. (1) platting a single tier of lots which back to the artery and front on a minor street,
(2) platting a service drive, (3) platting a looped land service street and culs-de-sac, (4) platting a rear service
drive for access, or (5) other methods approved by the planning commission.
Subdivision streets which intersect an artery shall do so at intervals not less than as follows: limited access
primary artery, one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet; other primary artery, eight hundred (800) feet; and
secondary artery, four hundred (400) feet.
When land is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to
allow for the opening of streets in the future and for logical resubdivision.
Sec. 305. - Design standards for streets.
A.
Width of street right-of-way: The minimum width of right-of-way measured from lot line to lot line shall be as
follows:
CLASSIFICATION WIDTH OF RIGHT-OF-WAY (Feet)*
Primary artery 150
Secondary artery 120
Collector street 80
Land service street
1. Residential
a. Small lot subdivisions 50
b. Large lot subdivisions 50
c. Rural subdivisions 60 + 10;ft; easement each side
d. Large lot rural subdivisions 60 + 10;ft; easement each side
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
392/414
2. Industrial 50
3. Commercial 50
4. Service drive 40**
* Or greater amount as may be required by planning commission
** Requires prior approval of planning commission
B.
Vertical alignment of streets: Grades on arteries, collectors, and industrial land service streets shall not exceed
seven (7) percent; grades on commercial land service streets shall not exceed ten (10) percent; grades on
residential land service streets shall not exceed thirteen (13) percent; all curbed and paved raised edge street shall
have a minimum grade of one (1) percent.
All changes in grade shall be connected by a vertical curve so constructed as to afford a minimum sight distance,
said sight distance being measured from the driver's eyes, which are assumed to be three and three-quarter (3¾)
feet above the pavement surface, to an object six (6) inches high on the pavement.
This minimum sight distance shall be the minimum stopping sight distance for the rated speed of the street as
follows:
STREET
CLASSIFICATION
DESIGN SPEED
(MPH)
MINIMUM STOPPING SIGHT
DISTANCE
Primary artery 60 475 feet
50 350 feet
Secondary artery 45 300 feet
35 210 feet
Collector street 30 180 feet
Land service street
Residential 25 125 feet
Commercial 20 75 feet
Industrial 25 125 feet
Service drive 15 40 feet
C.
Horizontal alignment of streets: Where a deflection angle of more than ten (10) degrees in the alignment of a
street occurs, the radius of curvature of the center-line of said street shall be not less than as follows:
STREET
CLASSIFICATION
MINIMUM RADIUS OF
CURVATURE OF
CENTER-LINE
Primary artery 690 feet
Secondary artery 430 feet 
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
393/414
Collector street 230 feet
Land service street
Residential 90 feet*
Commercial 90 feet
Industrial 150 feet
Service drive 50 feet
* Planning commission may approve a fifty-foot curvature to make more efficient use of land.
A tangent of at least one hundred (100) feet in length shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and
collector streets.
Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than the minimum stopping sight distance (in accordance with section
305) of the street intersected shall not be allowed.
Intersections. All streets shall intersect at right angles; such intersecting streets shall continue as perpendicular
from the center point of the intersection for not less than the minimum stopping sight distance for their
respective rated speeds in accordance with section 305 of this article.
Right-of-way lines at street intersections shall have a radius of curvature of not less than twenty (20) feet.
Wherever necessary to permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius without curtailing the sidewalk
at a street corner to less than normal width, the street right-of-way line at such street corner shall be rounded or
otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such construction.
D.
Private streets and reserve strips: There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision. Every lot in
subdivided property shall abut a publicly dedicated street. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to
streets except where the control of such strips is definitely placed with the community under conditions approved
by the planning commission.
E.
Service drives: Service drives or alleys shall be provided to the rear of all lots used for business purposes and
shall not be provided in residential blocks except where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the
planning commission of the need for alleys or service drives, such as subdividing adjacent to an artery, or where
specifically required by the planning commission.
F.
Culs-de-sac: Culs-de-sac, or dead end streets shall be no more than seven hundred (700) feet long unless
necessitated by topographic or other conditions and approved by the planning commission. Such streets shall be
provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least eighty (80) feet and
a street right-of-way diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet.
G.
Street names: Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others already existing and named shall
bear the names of existing streets. In no case shall the name for a proposed street duplicate existing names,
irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, road, pike, drive, way, place, court, or other
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
394/414
derivatives. Through its index list of street names and guide for naming and suffixing, the planning commission
can assist the subdivider in avoiding duplication, and in coordinating the names of streets within his subdivision.
Sec. 306. - Blocks.
A.
Length: Blocks shall be neither less than four hundred (400) feet nor more than twelve hundred (1200) feet in
length, except as the planning commission considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features
of street pattern.
In blocks greater than eight hundred (800) feet in length, the planning commission may require at locations it
deems necessary one (1) or more public cross walks of not less than ten (10) feet in width to extend entirely
across the block, or pedestrian easements in lieu thereof (See Article III, section 308).
B.
Width: Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) rows of lots, except where reverse frontage on major streets
is provided or when prevented by topographic conditions or size of property or location next to an artery, in
which case the planning commission may approve a single row of lots.
Sec. 307. - Lots.
A.
Adequate building sites: Each lot shall contain a building site not subject to flood or periodic inundation.
B.
Arrangement: Each lot must abut a public street or road. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles
to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
C.
Minimum lot dimensions and areas:
1.
The size and shape of lots shall meet the minimum standards set in the city's zoning regulations and orientation
of lots shall be such as the planning commission deems appropriate for the use contemplated, type of water
supply and sewage disposal, soil characteristics, improvements, and relation to the street system.
2.
The minimum depths of building setback lines for lots platted for all purposes shall be subject to the provisions
of the city zoning regulations as well as the following:
a.
Wherever fill is proposed to raise land, the building setback line shall be located not less than twenty-five (25)
feet from the outer edge of the fill.
b.
To prevent infringement of sight lines at intersections, the setback distances for corner lots shall be based on the
minimum stopping sight distances for automobiles approaching the intersection as cited in section 305 of this
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
395/414
article. The building setback line for the corner lot shall be no nearer the street right-of-way line than that line
which connects the two (2) points located on the center lines of the two (2) streets the prescribed minimum
stopping sight distance from the center of the intersection.
3.
Properties reserved or platted for commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate in size to provide for the
off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. Platting of
individual lots should be avoided in favor of an overall design of the land to be used for such purposes. Land
shall not be platted for commercial or industrial purposes unless the subdivider can demonstrate to the planning
commission:
a.
A site arrangement that prevents undue interference with through traffic. (Each industrial subdivision or area
shall utilize a single collector for all heavy traffic between the area and the general system of streets and roads.
Industrial streets and individual industrial parcels shall be oriented at right angles with the collector and with
adjacent railroads.)
b.
An on-site parking area.
c.
An insulation against any adverse effects on any present or future adjacent residences.
d.
A parcel size sufficient in area to allow future expansion.
D.
Double and reverse frontage lots: Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where
specifically required by the planning commission to provide separation of residential development from traffic
arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation of property. A planting screen
easement of at least ten (10) feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided where
required by the planning commission along the line of lots abutting such traffic arteries, or to overcome the
disadvantageous orientation of property.
Sec. 308. - Public use and service areas.
A.
Public open spaces: Where a school or recreation area, shown on an official map or in a plan made and adopted
by the planning commission, is located in whole or in part in the applicant's subdivision, the planning
commission may require the dedication or reservation of such open space within the subdivision up to a total of
ten (10) percent of the gross area of the plot, including any water frontage for park, school, or recreational
purposes.
B.
Easements for utilities, drainage, and pedestrian traffic:
1.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
396/414
Utilities easements: Except where alleys or rear service drives are permitted for the purpose, easements along
rear and/or side lot lines (or elsewhere if necessary) not exceeding twenty (20) feet in width shall be required for
the extension of existing or planned utilities.
2.
Pedestrian easements: In such cases and at such locations as the planning commission deems advisable,
easements along side or rear lot lines not exceeding twelve (12) feet in width may be required for pedestrian or
bicycle traffic to and from schools, parks, and other public places.
3.
Drainage easements: In cases in which a subdivision is traversed by a stream or drainage channel, there shall be
provided a storm water easement of such width along each side of the stream as the planning commission deems
necessary for the purpose of widening, deepening, protecting, relocating, or otherwise improving such drainage
element.
C.
Community assets: In all subdivisions due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as large trees and
water courses and for historical spots and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness
and value to the property.
Sec. 309. - Drainage.
In addition to the requirements of section 401 B, any plan for subdividing property shall include the following:
A.
A plan showing the acreage of all on-site and off-site drainage areas contributing flow through the project.
B.
A hydrology report which shall include minimum design of frequency of a twenty-five-year storm; minimum
time of concentration of ten (10) minutes; detailed calculations indicating the formula used; the co-efficient of
run-off; the time of concentration; the rainfall intensity; the discharged velocity and the source of all data used.
C.
Where the drainage area exceeds one hundred fifty (150) acres, two (2) formulas shall be used and the average of
the two (2) submitted.
D.
In addition to the requirements of section 308 B 3, the following shall be required:
1.
Five-foot easement along all side property lines.
2.
A ten-foot easement along all rear property lines.
3.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
397/414
All storm drainage pipes shall be located within a ten-foot easement.
4.
All storm water discharge into natural drainage areas shall be as straight as possible.
5.
All storm drainage pipes shall be at least eighteen (18) inches in diameter and eighteen (18) inches below the
surface and shall have a slope of at least one (1) percent.
6.
Catch basins shall be located at all low points of streets and shall be located so as to service not more than four
(4) acres.
7.
High water elevation contour based on a twenty-five-year storm at the entrance of each head wall.
E.
All drainage easements, natural ditches, and drainage areas shall be grassed and/or rip-rapped as necessary to
control erosion.
F.
All plans of subdivisions shall include a method of control so as to prevent the silting and/or erosion of natural
drainage areas, natural drains and streams, and adjoining property; such plans shall also provide for control of
the rate of discharge of excess water.
G.
In addition to the requirements of these regulations, all property located in a flood prone area shall be developed
in accordance with the minimum standards of the United States and State of Georgia governing flood prone
areas.
ARTICLE IV. - MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR IMPROVEMENTS
[Sec. 400. - Applicability.]
The following tangible improvements are required before final plat shall be approved by the planning
commission.
Sec. 401. - Required improvements.
A.
Monuments and lot markers: Numbered concrete monuments, four (4) inches in diameter or square, three (3) feet
long with a flat top, shall be set at all street corners, at all points where the street lines intersect the exterior
boundaries of the subdivision, at the intersection of curves and tangents along street lines, and at all corners of
the plot. The top of the monument shall have an indented cross to identify properly the location and shall be set
flush with the finished grade.
All other lot corners shall be marked with iron pipes or pins not less than three-fourths inch in diameter and
twenty-four (24) inches long and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
398/414
B.
Storm drainage: An adequate drainage system, including necessary ditches, pipes, culverts, drains, inlets,
bridges, etc. shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water.
All storm drainage systems shall comply with the city specifications for such systems, and shall be approved by
the city before such systems may be installed and before final plat approval will be issued by the planning
commission.
C.
Street development: Every subdivision developer shall be required to grade and improve new streets and alleys.
1.
Preparation of right-of-way: The full width of all roadways shall be prepared so that pavement and sidewalks
(where required) can be constructed in such a manner that future extension of additional utilities or street
improvements will not damage yards of abutting property. Abutting property shall be suitably sloped to the rightof-way line. Due regard shall be shown for desirable trees not impairing visibility.
2.
Preparation of subgrade: Before grading is started the entire area to be paved shall be first cleared of all stumps,
roots, brush and other objectionable materials. In all areas to be graded or filled, the subdivider shall stockpile
the topsoil later to be spread in all disturbed areas not paved.
3.
Protection of banks: Immediately after grading and filling and respreading of topsoil, all areas of disturbed soil
shall be fertilized and seeded (or in steep areas sodded or otherwise appropriately treated) with suitable
vegetative cover to retard erosion.
4.
Pavement base: Pavement base material shall conform to the city specifications for such material and shall be
approved by the city.
5.
Minimum width of pavement: The minimum width of pavement measured between curbs, required for arteries,
collectors and land service streets shall be as follows:
CLASSIFICATION WIDTH OF RIGHT-OF-WAY
(Feet)*
Primary artery 48*
Secondary artery 48*
Collector street 36*
Land service street
1. Residential
a. Small lot subdivisions 30
b. Large lot subdivisions 26
c. Rural subdivisions 22
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
399/414
d. Large lot rural subdivisions 20
2. Industrial 30
3. Commercial 30
4. Service drive 20
* Arteries and collectors protected from curb cuts as outlines in section 304 D may be approved with a
pavement width of twenty-four (24) feet.
6.
Curb-and-gutter and paving: All new streets shall be surfaced by the developer with paving materials as required
by city specifications regarding street paving and surface materials.
Curbs and gutters on all new streets shall be constructed by the subdivision developer in accordance with the city
specifications for curbs and gutters.
Where a subdivision abuts an existing city road, the subdivision developer may be required by the city to widen
the road and install pavement in accordance with city specifications regarding such widening. The developer may
also be required to install curb and gutter.
7.
The preparation and development of all new streets shall comply with the city specifications, and shall be
approved by the city before such streets may be developed and accepted by the city engineer and mayor and city
council before final plat approval will be issued by the planning commission.
8.
Turning lanes: Turning lanes may be required at all entrances to subdivisions and industrial and commercial
developments which front on arterial and collector streets. Turning lanes shall be twelve (12) feet in width plus
curb and gutter for a minimum distance of two hundred (200) feet measured from the intersection of the right-ofway lines.
D.
Sidewalks: Sidewalks may be required where deemed by the planning commission as an integral part of a
pedestrian traffic system within a one-mile radius of existing or planned schools, neighborhood recreation or
commercial areas, or other public place. Where provided, sidewalks shall be located not less than one (1) foot
from the property line to prevent interference of encroachment by fencing, walls, hedges or other planting or
structures placed on property line at a later date.
E.
Sanitary sewerage: In the areas of Grovetown designated for sewerage service in the master sewerage plan,
prepared by the city engineer, all subdivision developers shall be required to install a sanitary sewerage
collection system. The layout and specifications of the system shall be in accordance with the master sewerage
plan and other applicable city specifications, and shall require the approval of the city.
Where sanitary sewerage collection systems are not specifically required by the city, all lots shall contain
adequate area for the installation and safe operation of approved septic tanks and disposal fields, and must be
approved by the county health officer and other agencies having jurisdiction over such matters.
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
400/414
F.
Public water systems: Each subdivision developer shall be required to provide a potable water supply subject to
the approval of the county health officer or city.
Where specifically required by the city, each subdivision developer shall provide the subdivision service from the
city water system.
Any water lines or mains that are installed by any person, firm, or corporation to be attached to the water system
of Grovetown shall be constructed in accordance with city specifications and approved by the city engineer.
G.
Site improvements: Banks which infringe on sight lines at intersections (See Article III, section 307, C.2) shall be
appropriately graded to correct the deficiency.
Wherever grading or filling occurs on lots within the subdivision, the subdivider shall first stockpile the topsoil
from the affected areas, immediately after grading and filling, and shall redistribute to areas of disturbed soil
sufficient topsoil to support growth of lawn grass, and other vegetation, and shall immediately seed such areas
with appropriate vegetative cover to prevent erosion, silting of streams, and other damages.
Due regard shall be shown for such desirable trees as are already on the site, and grading and filling should be
planned to preserve as many as possible; however, no retained planting shall infringe on sight lines at
intersections. If trees are planted by the subdivider, they shall be located five (5) feet inside or behind property
lines where they are less subject to injury, decrease the chances of motor accidents and enjoy more favorable
conditions for growth. If trees are to be planted within a planting strip in the right-of-way, their proposed
locations and species to be used must be submitted for the planning commission's approval, inasmuch as the
public inherits the care and maintenance of such trees. The planning commission will assist the subdivider in
location of trees and species to use under varying conditions.
Where land is platted or reserved for commercial or industrial use bordering and across minor streets from
residential lots, a suitable buffer planting of trees and shrubs (not infringing on sight lines at intersections)
approved by the planning commission shall be required.
H.
Street name signs: Appropriate street signs add sales value to land subdivisions and enable strangers, delivery
concerns, and even potential lot buyers to find their way around. Street name signs of a type approved by the city
shall appear at all intersections.
Sec. 402. - Variances.
The planning commission may authorize variances from the general requirements and minimum standards of
design contained in Article III provided the subdivider makes a specific request and shows to the satisfaction of
the planning commission that topographical or other conditions peculiar and particular to the site are such that
strict adherence to the requirements would cause him unnecessary hardship and would not carry out the intent of
these regulations.
Any variance thus authorized is to be stated in writing in the minutes of the planning commission with the
reasons for which the departure was justified and the conditions under which granted set forth.
Sec. 403. - Guarantee in lieu of completed improvements.
No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the planning commission or accepted for record by the clerk of the
superior court until one (1) of the following conditions has been met:
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
401/414
A.
All required improvements have been constructed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the mayor and city
council.
B.
The mayor and council has accepted a performance bond in an amount equal to the estimated cost of installation
of the required improvements, whereby improvements may be made and utilities installed without cost to public
bodies in the event of default of the subdivider.
ARTICLE V. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(33) Editor's note— The Act was not carried foreward from the Ga. Code 1933 to OCGA.
[Sec. 500. - Applicability.]
The enforcement of these regulations and penalties for the unapproved recordation or transfer of land are
provided by the state law in the authority granted by the public acts of the State of Georgia.
Sec. 501. - Enforcement.
A.
No plat of a subdivision within the jurisdiction of the Grovetown Planning Commission shall be filed or recorded
in the office of the clerk of the superior court until it shall have been submitted to and approved by the planning
commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the secretary of the planning commission.
B.
The governing authority of the city or other public authority shall not accept, layout, open, improve, grade, pave,
or light any street unless such street shall have been accepted, opened, or otherwise received the legal status of a
public street prior to the adoption of these regulations, or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines
with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the planning commission or on a street plat made and
adopted by said planning commission.
Sec. 502. - Penalties.
A.
The clerk of the superior court shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision which does not have the approval of
the Planning Commission as required by the 1957 Act [33]
. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision
without the approval of the planning commission is hereby declared a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is
punishable as provided by law.
B.
The owner or agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiate
to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land before such
plat has been approved by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court
in the county, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by
law; and the description be metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process
of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The city, through its attorney or other
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
402/414
official designated by the governing authority of the city may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by
appropriate action.
C.
From and after the time when the platting jurisdiction of the planning commission shall have attached by virtue
of adoption by the planning commission of a major street plan and the adoption by the governing authority of the
city of a set of land subdivision regulations recommended to them by the planning commission, as provided in
section 15 of the 1957 Act, no building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be
erected on any lot within the city unless the street giving access to the lot upon which said building is proposed
to be placed shall be accepted or opened as, or shall otherwise receive the legal status of a public street prior to
that time, or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a subdivision plat
approved by the planning commission or on a street plat made and adopted by said planning commission or with
a street located and accepted by the governing authority of the city.
D.
Any building erected in violation of this section shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the building
inspector or the attorney or other official designated by the governing authority of the city may bring appropriate
action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed.
Sec. 503. - Severability.
A.
It is the intent of this resolution that the provisions of these regulations be severable and should any portion be
held invalid, such invalidity shall not effect [affect] any other portion of this resolution.
Sec. 601. - Public hearing.
Before adoption of these land subdivision regulations, a public hearing as required by Georgia Law was held by
the Grovetown Planning and Zoning Commission.
Sec. 602. - Adoption.
These rules and regulations shall be in full force and effect from and after their adoption and effective date.
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
This is a numerical and chronological listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or
superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table.
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date
Section Section
this Code
1 1-12-60 1 2-1
2 1-12-60 1 11-7
5 1-12-60 1 9-21
10 8-29-60 1 6-1
2, 3 6-3, 6-4
4 6-2
23 9-28-64 7-2
26 10- 9-64 7-2
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
403/414
40 8-26-68 4—6 11-2—11-4
8 9-33
9 15-2
21 7-3
11-5
22 15-5
23 11-8
24 11-6
41 4-23-69 13-1
1—3 13-2—13-4
47 9-22-74 1, 2 9-110, 9-111
3 9-113
5—9 9-114—9-118
10(a)(1) 8-1
10(a)(2), 10(a)(3) 9-111, 9-112
10(b) 9-120
10(c) 9-119
10(e) 9-122
10(f), 10(g) 9-120, 9-121
12—15 9-123—9-126
3- 8-76 App. B, §§ 101—602
55 8- 3-76 1 3-1
2, 3 3-8, 3-9
4 3-2
5 3-5—3-7
6 3-4
7 3-7
3-11
8 3-17
3-20
10 3-25
11 3-18
12, 13 3-23, 3-24
14, 15 3-27, 3-28
16 3-19
17—19 3-29—3-31
20 3-11
21 3-3
22 3-16
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
404/414
23 3-26
24 3-13
25, 26 3-21, 3-22
27, 28 3-14, 3-15
29 3-6
30 3-12
31 3-7
32, 33 3-32
34 3-41
36 3-34
37 3-33
38, 39 3-35, 3-36
40, 41 3-40, 3-41
42 3-43
43 3-42
44 3-35
45 3-37
46 3-44
47 3-10
8-23-76 3-3
56 8- 4-78 15-3
57 12-20-76 1.000—13.060 App. A,
Arts. I—XIII
59 5- 9-77 1 10-16, 10-17
2 10-1
10-18
3 10-3
10-19
4 10-2
10-20
5 10-4
10-21
6, 7 10-5, 10-6
8—13 10-8—10-13
16 10-7
17, 18 10-14, 10-15
60 8- 4-78 15-1
63 2-26-79 2 9-32
64 4- 9-79 1 11-1
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
405/414
2 11-9
65 4-23-79 15-4
7- 9-80 App. A, § 1.250
68 11-10-80 2(Art. I)—
2(Art. III)
8-2—8-4
69 2- 9-81 1(b), 1(c) 10-40, 10-41
1(d) 10-43
1(e) 10-42
1(f) 10-44
1(g) 10-45, 10-46
1(h), 1(i) 10-47, 10-48
2-23-81 App. A, § 5.000
2- 9-83 App. A, § 5.000
70 6-20-83 1, 2 5-1
4 5-1
71 9-26-83 1—3 10-30—10-32
4, 5 10-34, 10-35
6 10-33
7 10-36
72 9-26-83 12-1
74 12-21-83 1, 2 10-22, 10-23
12-23-85 3-26
7- 7-86 1, 2 13-5, 13-6
7- 9-86 App. A, § 6.110(6.113, b.)
77-B 11-14-88 1 9-23
2 9-20
3 9-22
4—11 9-24—9-31
81 1-12-87 1, 2 9-34
84 5-11-87 12-2
85 5-11-87 2.1—2.36 9-40
3.1, 3.2 9-43
3.3, 3.4 9-41, 9-42
3.5, 3.6 9-44, 9-45
4.1 9-60
4.2—4.4 9-62—9-64
4.5 9-61
4.6 9-70
4.7, 4.8 9-65, 9-66
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
406/414
4.9 9-44
4.10—4.12 9-67—9-69
4.13 9-46
4.14 9-71
5.1—5.10 9-81—9-90
5.11 9-80
5.12, 5.13 9-91, 9-92
6.1—6.3 9-96—9-98
6.5—6.7 9-99—9-101
6.8, 6.9 9-103, 9-104
6.10 9-102
6.11—6.14 9-105—9-108
7.1 9-47
8.3 9-48
9.1 9-49
10.1—10.7 9-50
11.1 9-51
12.1, 12.2 9-52
13.3 9-53
10-24-88 1 2-2
1—6 12-3
87 5- 8-89 1—3 11-10
6-12-89 1—8 12-4
88 9-11-89 2 4-26
3 4-28
4, 5 4-30
6, 7 4-27
8 4-29
9 4-12
10 4-31
11, 12 4-3, 4-4
13 4-21
4-26
14 4-22
15 4-8
16 4-5
4-10
17 4-11
18 4-25
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
407/414
19 4-2
4-9
20 4-20
21—27 4-40—4-46
28, 29 4-6, 4-7
29(G) 4-5
30 4-2
31 4-32
32 4-24
33 4-23
89 10-23-89 2—8 5-20—5-26
9(C) 5-27
1- 8-90 9-33
91 3-26-90 1 8-21
2 8-30
3—3.2 8-22—8-24
4—8 8-25—8-29
9 8-31
9-24-90 1—19 12-5
12-19-90 9-22, 9-23
100 1- 4-91 1     Rpld 11-7
     Added 11-7—11-7.2
101 3-25-91 1—6     Added 5-71—5-76
104 9-14-92 1—6     Added 10-51—10-57
105 4-12-93 1, 2 2-2
106 8- 9-93 1—5     Added 10-61—10-66
109 4-25-94 1 App. B, § 202.A.3.
110 4-25-94 1 9-119
111 6-23-94 1     Added 8-41—8-46
113 7-25-94 1     Added App. A, § 2.050
114 3-13-95      Added 15-6
94-05-024 8- 8-94 15-6
115 8-22-94 1—3 11-8
116 11-28-94 1—3 10-30—10-32
4, 5 10-34, 10-35
6 10-33
7 10-36
117 12-12-94 1—26     Rpld 10-1—10-23
     Added 10-1—10-26
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
408/414
119 12-22-94 1 5-1(a)
94.114 3-13-95 15-6
120 7-10-95 1—6     Added 11-11
121 11-13-95 2—9 5-20—5-27
122 11-13-95 App. A, § 6.131—6.133
125 9-23-96 1 9-110, 9-125
     Added 9-128
126 12-23-96 1 9-30
7-28-97 1 9-127
98.018A 7-26-99 15-6
135 9-13-99      Rpld 15-1—15-6
15-20—15-31
     Added 15-1—15-5
15-26—15-34
15-51—15-64
15-81—15-97
15-111—15-116
15-121—15-123
15-131—15-134
15-141, 15-142
15-161—15-180
15-201—15-204
15-221—15-250
15-271—15-273
15-291, 15-292
15-301, 15-302
137 2-28-00      Added 2-51—2-62
3-27-00 9-22, 9-23
139 4-23-01 1 App. B, § 202
140 6-25-01      Rpld 5-20—5-27
     Added 5-21—5-28
142 11-26-01 1—6     Rpld 10-30—10-36
     Added 10-30—10-35
147 11-11-02      Rpld 3-1—3-37
3-40—3-44
     Added 3-101—3-112
3-146—3-163
3-186—3-205
3-214
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
409/414
3-216, 3-217
3-251—3-256
11-25-02 1-8
156 4-12-04      Added 11-12
158 7-12-04 1—15     Added 10-85—10-100
159 12-27-04 1 9-23
2 9-20
3 9-22
4—11 9-24—9-31
161 5-23-05 1     Dltd 15-201
     Dltd 15-203
2 15-202(1)(a)
164-02 7-11-05 1—3     Added 11-16—11-18
165-02 7-11-05 1     Added 11-13
166-02 7-11-05 1     Added 11-14
2     Added 11-15
167 4-24-06 1 5-1(a)(13)
167-02 7-11-05 1 11-3
168-02 7-11-05 1 11-7.1
2 11-7.2
170-02 7-11-05 1     Added 11-19
171-02 7-11-05 1     Added 11-20
173-02 2-13-06 1 3-199(a)
174 10-10-06      Added 5-2
175 11-13-06 1     Added App. A, § 2.060
182 7-16-07 1—3     Added 9-1
184 7-16-07 1—3     Added 5-3
187 10- 8-07 5-40—5-53
188 6-23-08      Added App. A, § 7.300
193 10-27-08 1 10-3
2 10-4(b)(1)
198 4-27-09 App. A, § 6.070
App. A, § 7.160
200 7-27-09 9-100
201 9-14-09 I—VII 10-27
202 9-28-09 9-100
204 6-14-10 I—III App. A., § 6.030
205 6-14-10 I—X 5-21—5-30
206 9-13-10 8-2—8-4
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
410/414
207 8- 9-10 I App. A, § 6.070
II App. A, § 6.070
App. A, § 7.160
210 6-13-11      Added 5-1(a)(14)
211 6-13-11 8-6(8)
212 12-27-11 1—6 10-30—10-35
213 11-14-11 1—9     Added 14-26—14-34
214 10-10-11 1—3 7-3
215 12-12-11      Added 3-206
216 1- 9-12 App. A, § 3.050
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of
references to the state law.
State Const.
Article
Section Paragraph Disposition
VI 10 1 1-8
2-1
IX 2 4 Ch. 13
App. A
O.C.G.A.
Section
Section
this Code
1-3-1(d)(1) 1-2
1-3-1(d)(3)
1-3-3 5-23
2-4-23(c)(1), (2) 4-44
2-6-20 et seq. 9-34
2-10-105 10-16
3-1-1 et seq. 3-111
3-3-2 Ch. 3
3-3-2(a) Ch. 3, Art. III
3-3-2(b)(1) Ch. 3, Art. III
3-4-13o Ch. 3, Art. IV
3-4-49 Ch. 3
3-5-40 et seq. Ch. 3
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
41
1
/414
3-5-80 Ch. 3, Art. IV
3-6-40 Ch. 3
Ch. 3, Art. III
3-7-1 3-102
4-3-2 4-1
4-5-1 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. IV
4-8-1.1 4-6
4-8-2 4-6
4-8-5 Ch. 4
4-7
4-8-6 4-24
4-8-21 4-1
4-8-22(c) 4-1
4-20
4-8-23 4-40
, 4-41
4-8-25 4-42
4-8-28(b)—(d) 4-45
4-8-29, 4-8-30 4-43
, 4-44
5-3-2 App. A, § 10.070
5-4-1 5-52
8-2-1 9-34
8-2-21 5-1
8-2-25 5-1
9-6-20—9-6-28 10-96
12-2-8 5-24
12-4-72 5-23
12-5-20 5-22
12-5-23 5-25
12-5-30(f) 5-22
5-24
12-5-440 et seq. 5-22
ch. 12-7 5-22
12-7-1 et seq. 5-24
12-7-6 5-23
12-7-6(b) 5-23
, 5-24
12-7-6(c) 5-24
12-7-7(e) 5-26
12-7-7(f)(1) 5-25
12-7-7.1 5-23
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
412
/414
12-7-8(a) 5-22
5-25
, 5-26
12-7-17 5-25
12-7-19(b)(1) 5-28
12-7-20 5-25
5-28
12-8-20 et seq. 8-3
Ch. 9, Art. IV
12-9-1 et seq. 7-2
8-4
15-11-36
11-8
tit. 16, ch. 13
11-7.1
16-6-8 10-92
16-7-22 et seq.
11-9
16-7-42 et seq. 8-3
Ch. 9, Art. IV
16-7-63 8-4
16-8-5 et seq. 9-21
9-33
16-10-6 2-56
16-10-27 Ch. 7
16-11-30 et seq.
11-7.1
16-11-36
11-8
16-11-39
11-4
16-11-41
11-2
16-11-120 et seq.
11-5
16-12-4 Ch. 4
4-7
16-12-80
11-4
16-13-1 et seq.
11-3
16-13-32
11-7.1
tit. 21, ch. 3 Char. § 5.10
Char. § 5.14
Char. § 5.15
tit. 22 Char. § 1.12
25-1-1 et seq. Ch. 7
25-10-1 et seq. 7-3
31-19-4 4-10
33-3-5 10-30
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
413
/414
33-3-5(1) 10-33
33-8-4 10-32
, 10-33
33-8-8 et seq. 10-16
33-8-8.1,
33-8-8.2
10-32
, 10-33
33-34-1 et seq. 15-5
34-9-1 et seq. 12-1
tit. 36, ch. 81 Char. § 6.24
36-1-20(a) 5-40
36-18-1 5-23
36-32-1 1-8
2-1
36-32-2 1-8
2-1
36-32-3 1-8
36-32-5 et seq. 2-1
36-32-6
11-3
36-35-6(a)(2) 1-8
2-1
36-60-13 Char. § 6.22
36-66-1 et seq. Ch. 13
App. A (note)
36-71-2(8) 10-2
36-81-3 et seq. Ch. 6
tit. 40, ch. 5 15-178
40-5-120—
40-5-124
15-4
40-6-97(b) 14-28
40-6-225,
40-6-226
15-202
40-6-249 8-3
Ch. 9, Art. IV
40-6-331 15-174
40-11-1 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. II
40-13-22 1-8
2-1
40-13-23 1-8
2-1
tit. 41, ch. 1 8-22
41-2-7—41-2-17 8-42—8-44
5/10/2019 Grovetown, GA Code of Ordinances
414/414
41-2-13 8-46
42-1-12 10-90
43-17-5 14-30
43-17-9 14-30
tit. 45 Char. § 2.12
Char. § 5.16
tit. 46, ch. 3 10-16
46-7-15 10-16
47-5-1 et seq. 12-2—12-5
tit. 48 Char. § 1.12
tit. 48, ch. 4,
art. 3
8-44
48-4-1 et seq. 6-4
48-5-352 Ch. 6
48-5-355,
48-5-356
10-16
48-5-358 8-44
48-6-93 10-16
48-8-50 3-251
48-13-5—
48-13-26
10-10
48-13-7 10-1
10-4
10-10
48-13-9(c)(1)—
48-13-9(c)(18)
10-8
48-13-55 10-16
tit. 50, ch. 14 Char. § 2.14
50-14-1 Char. § 2.19
Char. § 2.24