THE OFFICIAL CODE OF HALL COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted June 27, 1996 
Effective July 1, 1996 
____________ 
Published in 1996 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS AT REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Brenda Branch, Chairman 
Frances Meadows, District 4 
Jimmy Echols, District 3 
Jerry Carpenter, District 2  Dennis Pitts, District 1 
County Commissioners 
____________ 
Reggie Forrester 
County Administrator 
____________ 
William H. Blalock, Jr. 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Mark Lane 
Commission Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Richard Higgins, Chairman 
Kathy Cooper, District 1 
Billy Powell, District 2 
Shelly Echols, District 3 
Jeff Stowe, District 4 
County Commissioners 
____________ 
Jock Connell 
County Administrator 
____________ 
Lisa Johnsa 
Marty Nix 
Assistant County Administrators 
____________ 
Lisa Ritchie 
Commission Clerk 
____________ 
William Blalock 
Commission Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete republication of the general and permanent resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances of Hall County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1991 Official Code, as supplemented through June 30, 1995, and resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1991 Official Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent resolution, general resolution or ordinance included herein. 
The titles of the Code have been conveniently arranged and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together have been included. A table listing the amendments and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Obvious misspellings, punctuation errors and errors in grammar have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Title, Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The title, chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of three parts separated by periods. The first number is the title number, the second number is the chapter number, and the third number is the section number. To allow room for expansion, chapters and sections have been numbered in increments of ten. Therefore, if new material consisting of one section is enacted which would logically come between sections 10.30.120 and 10.30.130 it could be numbered as section 10.30.125. New chapters may be included in the same manner, or at the ends of titles. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a title of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the title. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, and their corresponding prefixes, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This republication was under the direct supervision of Mary Grace Tavel, Supervising Editor, and Connie Timmons, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mark Lane, Commission Clerk and Communications Director, and William H. Blalock, Jr., County Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of Hall County readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Hall County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; numbering system; code comparative table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Hall, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Hall, Georgia. 1996. 
ADOPTING RESOLUTION 
A Resolution Adopting and Enacting a New Code for Hall County, Georgia; To Provide for the Repeal of Certain Resolutions Not Included Therein; To Provide a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; To Provide for the Manner of Amending Such Code; To Provide for an Effective Date for the Code and This Resolution; To Repeal Conflicting Ordinances and Resolutions, and for Other Purposes. 
Whereas, the Board of Commissioners of Hall County adopted by resolution on May 28, 1991, the codification of Resolutions, General Resolutions and Ordinances passed by the Board of Commissioners of Hall County as "The Official Code of Hall County, Georgia;" and further provided for the adoption and incorporation of any Resolution, General Resolution or Ordinance passed subsequent to May 28, 1991, to automatically become a part of The Official Code of Hall County, Georgia; and 
Whereas, the Board of Commissioners of Hall County desires to adopt a new Code entitled "The Official Code of Hall County, Georgia" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of titles 1 through 17, inclusive; and 
Whereas, the Board of Commissioners of Hall County desires to adopt a uniform penalty provision for every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any resolution, ordinance, rule or regulation adopted unless another penalty is expressly provided; and 
Now, Therefore, Be It Resolved by the Board of Commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, and it is hereby resolved by the authority of the same as follows: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Official Code of Hall County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of titles 1 through 17, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All resolutions and ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 14, 1995, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any resolution or ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent resolution or ordinance that is repealed by this resolution. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any resolution, ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory resolution or ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the Board of Commissioners of Hall County may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Commissioners of Hall County to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Resolutions or ordinances adopted after December 14, 1995, that amend or refer to resolutions or ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. A copy of The Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, shall be kept on file in the Office of the Clerk to the Hall County Board of Commissioners, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the Clerk or someone authorized by the Clerk to insert in their designated places all Resolutions, General Resolutions and Ordinances which indicate the intention of the Hall County Board of Commissioners to make the same a part of The Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from The Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the Hall County Board of Commissioners. This copy of The Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same and shall be considered The Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. 
Section 8. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or a portion of The Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with The Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of Hall County, Georgia, to be misrepresented thereby. 
Section 9. All Resolutions, or Ordinances, or parts thereof, in conflict with the terms of this Resolution are hereby repealed, but it is hereby provided that any resolution, ordinance or law, which may be applicable hereto and aid in carrying out and making effective the intent, purpose and provisions hereof, which shall be liberally construed to be in favor of Hall County, is hereby adopted as part hereof. 
Section 10. If any paragraph, sub-paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or any portion of this Resolution shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or if the provisions of any part of this Resolution as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of this Resolution not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, to provide for separable and divisible parts, and it does hereby adopt any and all parts hereof as may not be held invalid for any reason. 
Section 11. This Resolution adopting "The Official Code of Hall County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation shall become effective on the 1st day of July, 1996, at 12:00 A.M. 
This 27th day of June, 1996. 
HALL COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 
;mb=18q;By 



ATTEST: 

FIRST READING: June 13, 1996 
SECOND READING: June 27, 1996 
PUBLISHED: June 6, 1996 
PUBLISHED: June 20, 1996 
PASSED: June 27, 1996 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - OFFICIAL CODE 
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

 
CHAPTER 1.10. - CODE ADOPTION 

 

1.10.010. - Adoption of Code; name. 
The codification of resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances passed by the Hall County Commission is adopted as "The Official Code of Hall County, Georgia." 
(Res. of 5-28-91, § 1; Code 1991, § 1.04.010) 
1.10.020. - Incorporation of resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances. 
Any resolution, general resolution or ordinance not presently included in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, and passed subsequent to the preparation of said codification is automatically included and incorporated herein by reference. Any resolution, general resolution or ordinance passed subsequent to May 28, 1991, shall automatically become a part of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 5-28-91, § 2; Code 1991, § 1.04.020) 
1.10.030. - Form of Code; designated place for Code to be kept on file; method of up-dating. 
A copy of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk to the Hall County Board of Commissioners, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the clerk or someone authorized by the clerk to insert in their designated places all resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances which indicate the intention of the Hall County Board of Commissioners to make the same a part of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the Hall County Board of Commissioners. This copy of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same and shall be considered the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 5-28-91, § 3; Code 1991, § 1.04.030) 
1.10.040. - Alteration of Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or a portion of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of Hall County, Georgia, to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 5-28-91, § 4; Code 1991, § 1.04.040; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 1.20. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

 

1.20.010. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Code: 
Administrator means the person employed by the commission to fulfill the duties of county administrator as then defined. 
Commission means the Hall County, Georgia, Board of Commissioners. "All its members" or "all commissioners" means the total number of commissioners holding office. 
Commissioner or commissioners means one or more members of the commission. 
County means Hall County, Georgia. 
Hall County Zoning Board of Adjustment shall mean the Hall County Planning Commission. 
Law denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the State of Georgia, the resolutions of the county, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
May is permissive. 
Month means a calendar month. 
Must and shall are each mandatory. 
Oath includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Owner, applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
Personal property includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
Preceding and following mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property includes real and personal property. 
Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Road or street includes all roads, streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this county which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
State means the State of Georgia. 
Tenant and occupant, applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Written includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
Year means a calendar year. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 1; Code 1991, § 1.08.010; Res. of 3-27-03, § 5) 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Resolution of March 27, 2003, states, "As of the effective date of this resolution and forward, all references to the Hall County Zoning Board of Adjustment contained in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, shall be understood to refer to the Hall County Planning Commission." Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, a definition as been added to § 1.20.010 restating the provisions and intent of said § 5. 
1.20.020. - References to titles of officers, employees or public bodies. 
Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the county. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 2; Code 1991, § 1.08.020) 
1.20.030. - Interpretation of language. 
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 2; Code 1991, § 1.08.030) 
1.20.040. - Grammatical interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the resolutions of the county unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
A.  Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
B.  Singular and plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 2; Code 1991, § 1.08.040) 
1.20.050. - Acts by agent. 
When an act is required by resolution, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by a designated agent. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 2; Code 1991, § 1.08.050) 
1.20.060. - Causing, permitting, abetting or concealing prohibited act. 
Whenever in the resolutions of the county any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 2; Code 1991, § 1.08.060) 
1.20.070. - Computation of time. 
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 2; Code 1991, § 1.08.070) 
1.20.080. - Construction of provisions. 
The provisions of the resolutions of the county and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 2; Code 1991, § 1.08.080) 
1.20.090. - Repeal shall not revive any ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 2; Code 1991, § 1.08.090) 
CHAPTER 1.30. - OFFICIAL MAP[1] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration generally, tit. 2. 

1.30.010. - Adopted; copies. 
A.  The map attached to the resolution codified in this chapter is adopted as the official map of Hall County, Georgia. 
B.  Copies of the map shall be made and furnished to all departments of the county having need of them. 
C.  Copies of the map shall be printed and sold to the general public of the county, the charges therefor being sufficient to cover the expense of printing the maps and the cost of distribution. 
D.  A copy of the resolution codified in this chapter, together with a copy of the official map, shall be certified to the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
(Res. of 3-26-73; Code 1991, § 1.12.010) 
CHAPTER 1.40. - GENERAL PENALTY[2] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Penalties imposed by magistrate court, ch. 1.50. 

1.40.010. - Violations; penalty. 
Each and every county resolution which has been or will be duly passed and enacted by the board of commissioners of the county to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare, to provide traffic regulations, to regulate and control litter, or to provide for the implementation and enforcement of any power or duty vested in the county governing authority, shall, in the discretion of the court or courts having jurisdiction over such violations of county resolutions, have a penalty or punishment up to the maximum penalty or punishment provided by the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020. 
(Res. of 8-12-85, § 1; Code 1991, § 1.16.010; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 1.50. - PENALTIES IMPOSED BY MAGISTRATE COURT[3] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty, ch. 1.40. 

1.50.010. - Authority granted to magistrate court. 
A.  O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 gives the governing authority of each county, for the purpose of protecting and preserving the public health, safety and welfare, authorization to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, violations of which ordinances may be punished by fine or imprisonment or both. 
B.  O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60 and 36-1-20 provide for the punishment that may be imposed by a court exercising jurisdiction over a county ordinance violation. 
C.  O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 gives jurisdiction over violations of such county ordinances to the Magistrate Court of the County. However, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(c), jurisdiction over ordinances having to do with traffic offenses shall be in the court or courts having jurisdiction over state traffic offenses. 
(Res. of 4-13-92; Code 1991, § 1.18.010; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
1.50.020. - Maximum punishment for violation of resolutions or ordinances. 
(a)  Maximum sentence. By virtue of the authority of O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60 and 36-1-20, the maximum punishment for the violation of any ordinance or resolution previously passed by the Board of Commissioners of Hall County shall be as follows: It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any resolution or ordinance applicable to the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia; and where no specific penalty is provided therefore or where there is a penalty that is less than a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days or both, the violation of any such provision shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months' imprisonment or both, provided the judge shall probate not less than 120 days of any sentence imposed, except as otherwise provided by general law. In the event a sentence is revoked, a defendant shall not serve more than 60 days in a county jail. 
(b)  Suspended sentences. The trial court may suspend the service of the sentence imposed in the case upon such terms and conditions as it may prescribe for the payment of the fine, for performance of community service in lieu of a fine or incarceration, for the payment of restitution to a victim, or other condition relating to the underlying offense. Service of the sentence, when so suspended, shall not begin unless and until ordered by the court having jurisdiction thereof, after a hearing as in cases of revocation of probated sentences, because of the failure or refusal of the defendant to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of a sentence was suspended. 
(c)  Duration of conditions. Service of all or any part of any sentence suspended upon such conditions may be ordered to commence by the trial court any time before the expiration of one year from the date of the sentence after a hearing and a finding by the court that the defendant has failed or refused to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of the sentence was suspended. 
(d)  Violations per day. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Misdemeanor punishment. Where in this Code any violation shall be deemed punishable as a "misdemeanor," "misdemeanor" shall be defined as an offense, the violation of which shall be punishable as specified for ordinance violations in this section. 
(Res. of 4-13-92, § 1; Code 1991, § 1.18.020; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
1.50.030. - Incorporation of O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 into the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. 
Official Code of Georgia Annotated O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60 and 36-1-20 shall be incorporated as a part of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 4-13-92, § 2; Code 1991, § 1.18.030; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL[1] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Official map, ch. 1.30; revenue and finance, tit. 3; animal control unit, § 6.10.020; animal control officer, § 6.10.050; county ambulance service, ch. 8.20; indigent care, ch. 8.30; solid waste management district, § 8.60.010; solid waste director, § 8.60.070; valid structure number required before provision of certain county services, § 12.10.100; sewage collection and disposal district, § 13.10.010; street light assessment districts, ch. 16.90; administration of zoning regulations, ch. 17.360. 

CHAPTER 2.10. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 

 

2.10.010. - Commission meetings; Robert's Rules of Order adopted. 
Robert's Rules of Order are implemented as the official rules governing all meetings of the board of commissioners of the county. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 1; Code 1991, § 2.04.010) 
2.10.020. - Commission meetings; participation of chairman of county commissioners. 
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in Robert's Rules of Order, the chairman of the county board of commissioners may participate in all deliberations, make, second, and vote on all motions to come before the commission, and the chairman shall have the same and equal rights of any other member of the county board of commissioners to fully participate in the legislative progress of county government. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 2; Code 1991, § 2.04.020) 
2.10.030. - Operative uniform policy for boards and commissions. 
A.  As per O.C.G.A. Title 50, Chapter 14 Section 1(d)(1)(1) every board or committee created by the Hall County Board of Commissioners shall prescribe the time, place, and dates of regular meetings of the board or committee and this information shall be available to the general public and a notice containing such information shall be posted at least one week in advance and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the public at the regular meeting place of the board or committee meeting. 
B.  As per O.C.G.A. Title 50, Chapter 14 Section 1(d)(1)(2) every board or committee created by the Hall County Board of Commissioners that meet outside of the regularly scheduled meeting dates will notify the legal organ, currently the Gainesville Times, of any scheduled meeting at least 24 hours prior to said meeting. 
C.  As per O.C.G.A. Title 50 Chapter 14 Section 1(e)(1) every board or committee created by the board of commissioners will have available an agenda of all matters expected to come before the board or committee at such meeting. Said agenda shall be posted at the meeting site within the two week period prior to the meeting but no later than 24 hours prior to the meeting. 
D.  As per O.C.G.A. Title 50 Chapter 14 Section 1(e)(2)(A) a summary of the subjects acted on and those members present at a meeting of any board or commission shall be written and made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of the meeting. 
E.  As per O.C.G.A. Title 50 Chapter 14 Section 1(e)(2)(B) every board or committee created by the board of commissioners will promptly record minutes of said meetings and have those available for inspection by the public once approved but no later than immediately following the next regular meeting. Said minutes shall, at a minimum, include the names of the members present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made, the identity of the persons making and seconding the motion or other proposal and a record of all votes. 
F.  Every board or committee will be required to forward an original signed copy of the approved minutes to the Hall County Commission Clerk for permanent retention. 
(Res. of 5-10-12, § 1) 
Editor's note— Res. of 5-10-12, § 1, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore these provisions have been added as § 2.10.030, at the editor's discretion. 
CHAPTER 2.20. - COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR 

 

2.20.010. - Position created; purpose. 
There is created the position of county administrator to provide administrative assistance to the board in the performance of its duties and responsibilities. 
(Res. of 5-12-69; Code 1991, § 2.08.010) 
2.20.020. - Powers and duties. 
The county administrator as the chief executive officer of the government of the county shall be responsible to the board of commissioners for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the county, and shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  To direct and supervise the administration of all county offices and departments for which the board is responsible, or may hereafter be responsible, including specifically the construction, maintenance and operation of all county roads, bridges, drains, buildings and other public works, and the care and maintenance of all real and personal property owned by the county; 
B.  To appoint and, when in his discretion the welfare of the county requires it, suspend, discharge, transfer or remove all employees for whom the board is responsible, excepting the warden and the county attorney, who are appointed directly by the board, but he may delegate to any department head such powers with respect to subordinates within the officer's department or office; 
C.  To see that all ordinances, resolutions and orders of the board and all laws of the state subject to enforcement by him or by officers or department heads subject, under this resolution [chapter], to his direction and supervision are faithfully executed; 
D.  To prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the board and to execute the budget and capital program adopted by the board, approving all disbursements and expenditures as budgeted and/or authorized by the board; 
E.  To confer with and assist the heads of all departments, such as the county health department, library and the county welfare department, whose missions are not under the direct control and supervision of the board, but who are dependent upon appropriations of the board for their continued operation; 
F.  To confer with and advise all elected or appointed officials of the county who are not under the immediate control of the board, but who receive financial support from the board, such as the sheriff, clerk of court, ordinary, tax commissioner, hospital authority, county agricultural and home demonstration agents and the like; 
G.  To examine regularly at periods fixed by the board the accounts, records and operations of every county board, commission, department, office and agency which receives appropriations from the board; to make regular monthly reports to the board on county fiscal and other affairs; to keep the board fully advised on the financial condition of the future needs of the county; and to make such recommendations on county affairs as he deems necessary for the efficient operation of the county; 
H.  To supervise the keeping of all records, books of account, bookkeeping, etc., of the county; 
I.  To supervise and approve the issuance of all purchase orders of the county; 
J.  To submit to the board at the end of each fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the county for the preceding year; 
K.  To carry into execution such other powers and duties as may be prescribed from time to time by the board; 
L.  All reports by the administrator shall be made to the full board in either a regular or called meeting of the board. 
(Res. of 5-12-69; Code 1991, § 2.08.020) 
CHAPTER 2.30. - HALL COUNTY MARSHALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 1-14-10, § 1(Exh. A), amended Ch. 2.30 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 2.30, §§ 2.30.10—2.30.30, pertained to enforcement division of Hall County. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

2.30.010. - Name created. 
The position of marshal, a/k/a the Hall County Marshals was originally created by the Hall County Board of Commissioners on January 26, 1981. The name was changed to the Enforcement Division of Hall County Public Safety Department on October 28, 1991 and to the Enforcement Division of Hall County on December 14, 1995. The Enforcement Division of Hall County shall now hereafter be known as the Hall County Marshals, and any reference to the enforcement division within this Code shall be deemed to refer to the Hall County Marshals. 
(Ord. of 1-14-10, § 1(Exh. A)) 
2.30.020. - Powers and duties. 
The Hall County Marshals shall have the powers and duties as well as other statutory authority as set out in O.C.G.A. §§ 36-8-1 through 36-8-7 as well as any other powers and duties that may have been heretofore or hereafter will be conferred upon positions of this nature. 
(Ord. of 1-14-10, § 1(Exh. A)) 
2.30.030. - Chain of command. 
The chain of command for the Hall County Marshals enforcing the regulations of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, shall be as follows: 
A.  The Hall County Board of Commissioners. 
B.  The Hall County Administrator. 
(Ord. of 1-14-10, § 1(Exh. A)) 
CHAPTER 2.40. - BOARD OF TAX ASSESSORS 

2.40.010. - Creation of board of tax assessors. 
The Hall County Board of Tax Assessors shall consist of five members, who shall be residents of the county, shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Hall County, upon the recommendation of the Commissioner whose District is served by the Tax Assessor, and shall comply with the additional provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-290 et seq. 
(Res. of 11-14-2013, § 2(Exh. A)) 
2.40.020. - Qualifications, appraisal courses, rules and regulations. 
A.  The requirements for qualifications for Tax Assessors are set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-291(a); and each Tax Assessor appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Hall County shall comply with the same. 
B.  Each Tax Assessor shall complete 40 hours of training either prior to or within 180 days of appointment. Additionally, each Tax Assessor must successfully complete an additional 40 hours of approved appraisal courses during each two calendar years of tenure as a member of the county board of tax assessors as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-291(b). 
C.  The Tax Commissioner shall promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the administration of this Chapter and O.C.G.A. § 48-5-291. 
D.  No Tax Assessor shall be eligible to hold any state, county, or municipal office during the time he holds such office pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-292. 
(Res. of 11-14-2013, § 2(Exh. A)) 
2.40.030. - Terms of appointment. 
A.  The provision in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-292, gives the Board of Commissioners of Hall County the authority to select the length of terms of office for members of the Board of Tax Assessors by resolution. In the resolution, all new appointments and reappointments shall be for the term lengths specified in the resolution; however, such resolution shall not have the effect of shortening or extending the terms of office of the current members of the Board of Assessors whose terms have not yet expired. 
B.  As of January 1, 2013, the following chart specifies the terms of office of the appointed Tax Assessor to overlap with the terms of office of the recommending Hall County Commissioner according to his or her District after said Commissioner has been in office for one year or more: 

 
C.  The recommendation for appointment of a Tax Assessor to the Board of Tax Assessors as made by a District Commissioner shall be considered by the Board of Commissioners of Hall County as advisory, but still shall not be binding upon the Board of Commissioners of Hall County if a majority of the Board of Commissioners of Hall County does not agree with such recommendation. 
D.  Any member of the Board of Tax Assessors shall be eligible for reappointment after review of his or her service on the Board of Tax Assessors by the Board of Commissioners of Hall County. 
E.  In the case of a vacancy on the Hall County Board of Tax Assessors at any time, whether caused by death, resignation, removal, or otherwise, the vacancy shall be immediately filled upon recommendation by the County Commissioner from the district the vacancy has occurred and upon approval of the Hall County Board of Commissioners. 
F.  Any person appointed to fill a vacancy shall be appointed only to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term of the assessor he or she replaces and shall possess the same qualifications required under this Chapter for regular appointment to a full term of office. 
G.  Any member of the Board of Tax Assessors may be removed by the Board of Commissioners of Hall County only for cause shown for the failure to perform the duties or requirements or meet the qualifications imposed upon such member by law, including, but not limited to, the duties, requirements and qualifications specified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-295.1 and subsection (e) of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-262. 
H.  All other provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-295 pertaining to terms of office, vacancies and removal from office are incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this Section. 
(Res. of 11-14-2013, § 2(Exh. A)) 
2.40.040. - Adoption of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-290 through O.C.G.A. § 48-5-314. 
All Sections of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-290 through O.C.G.A. § 48-5-314 pertaining to the Board of Tax Assessors are incorporated herein by reference and made a part of Chapter 2.40 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, as if specifically set forth herein. 
(Res. of 11-14-2013, § 2(Exh. A)) 
CHAPTER 2.50. - RECREATION AND PARKS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and public places, tit. 12. 

ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

2.50.010. - Definitions and interpretation of provisions. 
A.  Interpretation of provisions. 
1.  Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. 
2.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
3.  The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
B.  Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter certain words or terms used in this chapter shall be defined as follows: 
1.  Alcoholic beverages means intoxicating beverages, malt beverages, wine or any other beverage containing any alcohol whatsoever. 
2.  Building means any structure attached to the ground which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
3.  Litter means garbage, refuse, paper, rubbish, debris, trash and all other waste material, whether natural or artificial. 
4.  Person. The word "person" includes the words "individuals," "firms," "partnerships," "corporations," "associations," and "governmental bodies" and all other legal entities. 
5.  Recreation facilities means all recreation areas and parks, including land, buildings, lakes, swimming pools, and all other property and buildings owned, leased or managed by the county or the county recreation authority or their designated agents or department. 
6.  Vehicle means any motor driven equipment, automobile, truck, motorcycle, bicycle or sled. 
7.  Weapon means a pistol, firearm, rifle, hatchet, ax, shotgun, air gun, slingshot or other similar device. 
8.  Consumer fireworks means any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission as provided for in Parts 16 CFR 1500 and 1507, the United States Department of Transportation as provided for in 49 CFR 172, and the American Pyrotechnics Association as provided for in the 2001 American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, and additionally shall mean Roman candles. 
9.  Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, bombs, sparklers and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tables and other devices containing an explosive substance. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 1; Code 1991, § 2.20.010; Res. of 9-10-15(1), §§ 1, 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 
2.50.020. - Recreation and parks department created; purpose. 
The Hall County Recreation and Parks Department is created to function as a line department directly responsible to the board of commissioners of the county. The primary purpose of the county recreation and parks department is to provide, maintain and conduct parks, playgrounds, recreation centers, and to carry out all other recreational activities and services within the geographical boundaries of the county. 
(Res. of 12-8-80, § 2; Code 1991, § 2.20.020) 
2.50.030. - Authority of board of commissioners; purchasing and contracts. 
The board of commissioners of the county reserves sole and exclusive authority to buy, sell, lease and convey real estate, and to enter into all contracts for all recreational and park purposes. All goods and services shall be purchased in accordance with the county's purchasing manual, and the county purchasing department shall be utilized on all such acquisitions. 
(Res. of 12-8-80, § 3; Code 1991, § 2.20.030) 
Cross reference— Revenue and finance, tit. 3. 
2.50.040. - Recreation and parks director. 
The top administrative officer of the county recreation and parks department shall be the recreation and parks director. The director shall exercise overall responsibility and management of the department, and shall be directly responsible to the county administrator. The recreation and parks director shall be appointed by the county administrator. 
(Res. of 12-8-80, § 4; Code 1991, § 2.20.040) 
2.50.050. - Composition of parks and leisure services board. 
A.  The parks and leisure services board is composed of eight persons serving without pay, each member being appointed by the Hall County Board of Commissioners. 
B.  The five voting members are to be appointed individually by the chairman and each of the four district commissioners. 
C.  The three ex-officio members are nominated by the group they individually represent and the nominees are then confirmed by the commissioners. The ex-officio members consist of a sitting commissioner, an active Hall County School Board member and a member of the agricultural center advisory committee. The board members may not be a full time regular county employee; however, the board member may be an elected official of the county. 
(Res. of 4-22-2010, § 1) 
Editor's note— Res. of Apr. 22, 2010, § 1, deleted former § 2.50.050, and enacted a new § 2.50.050 as set out herein. Former § 2.50.050 pertained to composition of recreation and parks board. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
2.50.060. - Terms of parks and leisure services board members. 
A.  The terms of office for the members of the parks and leisure services board shall be for four years, or until their successors are appointed and qualified. The terms may be staggered in order to maintain continuity of service; 
B.  The board will be composed of residents of Hall County; 
C.  Each member will serve one four-year term and will be eligible to serve additional, consecutive four-year terms if appointed by the county commission; 
D.  The board member terms will coincide with the commissioner's term who selected the individual for appointment to the board; 
E.  The ex-officio appointment will be made annually by the body they represent. 

 
(Res. of 4-22-2010, § 2) 
Editor's note— Res. of Apr. 22, 2010, § 2, deleted former § 2.50.060, and enacted a new § 2.50.060 as set out herein. Former § 2.50.060 pertained to terms of recreation and parks board members. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
2.50.061. - Meetings. 
A.  The parks and leisure services board meetings will be held on a monthly basis. 
B.  The first regular meeting in January of each year shall be called the organizational meeting. The purpose of the meeting shall be the election and installation of officers and other business that may need to come before such meetings. 
C.  The parks and leisure services board shall meet and organize by electing one of their members as chairman and such other officers as may be necessary; vacancies in such board occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the county board of commissioners only for the unexpired term. 
D.  The procedure for conducting all meetings shall be in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order. 
E.  Any agenda items to be considered should submitted to the chairman of the parks and leisure services board and the parks and leisure services director no later than three business days prior to the scheduled meeting date. 
F.  Special meetings may be called by the chairman of the board, the parks and leisure services director, or on the written request of at least three members of the board. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on other members by phone or in writing at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. 
G.  Three voting members shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting. 
H.  The absence for three consecutive regular meetings of any member of the board without due and acceptable excuse, shall constitute a vacancy on the board. 
I.  All meetings are open to the public. 
(Res. of 4-22-2010, § 3) 
2.50.070. - Powers and duties of parks and leisure services board. 
The parks and leisure services board shall act in an advisory capacity to the parks and leisure services director and the Hall County Board of Commissioners to assist in determining the best, most effective, and most economical manner in which to provide recreational activities and parks to meet the various leisure interests of the citizens of the county. The specific duties of the parks and leisure services board shall include the following: 
A.  To promote recreation to the citizens of the county of all ages and interests; 
B.  To solicit input from citizens and bring their requests and concerns to the board and/or parks and leisure services director, and communicate to citizens information and/or concerns relative to matters involving parks and recreation in Hall County. 
C.  To assist in formalizing and in overseeing the implementation of policies regarding programs of both athletic and general recreation through coordination with the parks and leisure services director; 
D.  To review and advise the commissioners of the county on matters of park development, park location, personnel selection, and purchasing; 
E.  To advise the parks and leisure services director in the formulation of the parks and leisure services department budget; 
F.  To seek public input as to parks and leisure services development and programs, and to assure the basic elements of the master plan are followed; 
G.  To review and approve the official minutes of all board meetings as prepared by the parks and leisure services department, prior to the transmittal of such minutes to the county administrator's office; 
H.  To act in an advisory capacity to the parks and leisure services department in promoting, marketing, programming, planning and other leisure services related aspects of the parks and leisure services program including the long range planning for resources for capital projects for rehabilitation, design and/or development of recreation and park facilities. 
I.  To assist and advise the parks and leisure services director in the establishment of essential policies, rules and regulations relating to the planning, acquisition, disposition, operation, use, care and maintenance of areas and structures owned, leased or otherwise acquired by Hall County for use as parks; 
J.  To assist and advise the parks and leisure services department staff liaison in the development of a continuing plan for the parks and leisure services program; 
K.  To assist and advise the parks and leisure services department in establishing priorities at budget time for those items other than administrative functions relating to parks and leisure services policy; 
(Res. of 4-22-2010, § 4) 
Editor's note— Res. of Apr. 22, 2010, § 4, deleted former § 2.50.070, and enacted a new § 2.50.070 as set out herein. Former § 2.50.070 pertained to powers and duties of recreation and parks board. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
2.50.071. - Staff support. 
Staff support will be assigned by the parks and leisure services director to process the administrative work of the board, prepare agendas, record meeting minutes and to provide staff guidance/update. The director shall prepare or cause to be prepared a manual for each member of the board to include the following information: 
A.  Copy of ordinance authorizing the parks and leisure services board. 
B.  By-laws of the board. 
C.  List of fees and charges used by the department. 
D.  Copy of current annual budget. 
E.  Site plans of each park area owned and operated by the county and list of their facilities and equipment. 
F.  Any other information helpful in acquainting new board members of the procedures and operation of the park and leisure services board. 
(Res. of 4-22-2010, § 5) 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Health and safety generally, tit. 8. 

2.50.080. - Littering prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter on the grounds, streets, sidewalks, fountain, pond, lake, swimming pool, stream or other body of water in any recreation facility, except within public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the recreation facility. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 2; Code 1991, § 2.20.080) 
Cross reference— Littering, § 8.60.090 et seq. 
2.50.090. - Weapons prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to take on a recreational facility any weapon; or to shoot, use, carry or employ any weapon or similar device in a recreation facility. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 3; Code 1991, § 2.20.090) 
2.50.091. - Consumer fireworks and fireworks prohibited. 
Without a valid permit issued by the Hall County Fire Services Department, it shall be unlawful for any person to take into or onto a Hall County park or Hall County recreation facility any consumer fireworks or fireworks as defined in this chapter. It is also unlawful to shoot, explode, use, ignite, carry or employ any consumer fireworks or fireworks or similar devices in any Hall County park or recreation facility without a valid permit. 
(Res. of 9-10-15(1), § 3) 
2.50.100. - Throwing objects prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to throw any stone or missile at any person or at any public or private building or sign in a recreation facility. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 4; Code 1991, § 2.20.100) 
2.50.110. - Obscene language and fighting words. 
It is unlawful for any person, without provocation, to use obscene language or fighting words in a recreation facility. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 1; Code 1991, § 2.20.110) 
2.50.120. - Fires restricted. 
It is unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire in a recreation facility except in designated areas which are clearly marked by signs. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 6; Code 1991, § 2.20.120) 
2.50.130. - Damaging vegetation prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to cut trees, tree limbs, shrubbery, flowers or other vegetation or dig up or damage trees, flowers, or shrubbery or other vegetation in a recreation facility. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 7; Code 1991, § 2.20.130) 
2.50.140. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited generally. 
It is unlawful for any person to possess, use or consume any alcoholic beverage in a recreation facility located in Hall County, except as may be specifically authorized for professional sporting events, pursuant to chapters 5.10, 5.30 and 5.60 of title 5 of the Official Code of Hall County. However, alcoholic beverages may be allowed in a recreation facility located in Hall County for events that are approved by the Hall County Board of Commissioners and licensed or permitted by the Hall County Business License Director. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 8; Code 1991, § 2.20.140; Res. of 2-11-10(1), § 1; Res. of 4-26-12(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages prohibited at Corps of Engineers operated parks, § 2.50.260; open containers of alcoholic beverages in vehicles, ch. 9.10. 
2.50.150. - Alcoholic beverage advertising prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to advertise any alcoholic beverage either on uniforms or by public display in a recreation facility. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 9; Code 1991, § 2.20.150) 
Cross reference— Malt beverages and wine, ch. 5.30. 
2.50.160. - Vehicles restricted to designated areas. 
It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in a recreation facility except upon roadways and paths constructed, designated and maintained for vehicular traffic. Recreation facility employees whose duties require them to drive maintenance vehicles and equipment shall be exempt from the limitations set forth in this section. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 10; Code 1991, § 2.20.160) 
Cross reference— Vehicles and traffic, tit. 10. 
2.50.170. - Parking restricted to designated areas. 
It is unlawful to park a vehicle in a recreation facility except in those areas designated by appropriate signs as vehicle parking areas. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 11; Code 1991, § 2.20.170) 
Cross reference— Vehicles and traffic, tit. 10. 
2.50.180. - Parking limited to facility users. 
It is unlawful for any person to park in a recreation area if the person is not utilizing the recreation facility. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 12; Code 1991, § 2.20.180) 
Cross reference— Vehicles and traffic, tit. 10. 
2.50.190. - Commercial activity restricted. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any merchandise or operate a concession or engage in any commercial activity in a recreation facility without written authorization of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 13; Code 1991, § 2.20.190) 
Cross reference— Business licenses and regulations, tit. 5. 
2.50.200. - Hours open to public restricted. 
It is unlawful for any person to enter or be within a recreation facility between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily except as follows: 
A.  Authorized recreation facility personnel; 
B.  Overnight campers who are within officially designated overnight camping areas only. Use of a recreation facility may be further restricted in those areas where the county recreation and parks board shall from time to time designate by posting on the affected premises the time the facilities are available for public use. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 14; Code 1991, § 2.20.200) 
2.50.210. - Hours for vehicles restricted. 
It is unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle in or on a recreation facility or attempt to park or park a vehicle on any of the streets, avenues, or parking areas or at any location within a recreation facility between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily except as follows: 
A.  Authorized recreation facility personnel; 
B.  Overnight campers who are within officially designated overnight camping areas only. Use of a recreation facility may be further restricted in those areas where the county recreation and parks board shall from time to time designate by posting on the affected premises the time the facilities are available for public use. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 15; Code 1991, § 2.20.210) 
Cross reference— Vehicles and traffic, tit. 10. 
2.50.220. - Use of recreation facilities. 
It is unlawful for any person to use or attempt to use any of the facilities within a recreation facility except during the hours and in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the recreation authority. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 16; Code 1991, § 2.20.220) 
2.50.230. - Interference with use prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in any activity within a recreation facility that could cause injury to other persons or interfere with the use and enjoyment of the recreation facility by other persons. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 17; Code 1991, § 2.20.230) 
2.50.240. - Compliance with rules and regulations. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any rules or regulations relating to the use of the recreation area as established by the recreation authority where such rules and regulations have been approved and adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 18; Code 1991, § 2.20.240) 
2.50.250. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 3-12-84, § 19; Code 1991, § 2.20.250; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
2.50.260. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited at Corps of Engineers operated parks. 
A.  For the purposes of this section, certain words or terms used in this section shall be defined as follows: 
Alcoholic beverages means intoxicating beverages, malt beverages, wine or any other beverage containing any alcohol whatsoever. 
Person includes the words "individuals," "firms," "partnership," "corporation," "associations," and governmental bodies and all other legal entities. 
B.  Consumption, possession or the use of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in all posted park locations operated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
C.  Pursuant to a cooperative law enforcement contract between the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and Hall County, Georgia, Hall County Sheriff's Department personnel shall have authority to enforce, as a County resolution, Corps of Engineers regulations prohibiting alcoholic beverage consumption, possession, and use in Corps of Engineers operated parks where so posted. 
D.  1.  Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this ordinance [section] shall be guilty of a violation of a county ordinance and shall be amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, Georgia. 
2.  Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this section as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this section as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 11-15-91; Code 1991, § 2.20.260; Res. of 12-12-96, § 1; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages prohibited in recreation facilities, § 2.50.140; open containers of alcoholic beverages in vehicles, ch. 9.10. 
CHAPTER 2.60. - PLANNING COMMISSION[5] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of March 27, 2003, § 2, repealed Ch. 2.60, in its entirety, which pertained to the planning commission. Section 3 of said resolution added provisions designated as a new Ch. 2.60, to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. Also, it should be noted that the provisions of Ch. 2.60 are printed both in title 2 and in appendix A to title 17. When future amendments to the chapter are incorporated in the Code, the provisions should be updated at both locations. 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, tit. 16; zoning regulations, tit. 17; uses subject to approval of planning commission or zoning board of adjustment, ch. 17.350. 

2.60.010. - Membership. 
The Hall County Planning Commission shall consist of five members, who shall be residents of the county, appointed by the board of commissioners. The current members are reappointed to terms expiring on January 31, 2005. Beginning February 1, 2005, and every two years thereafter, each member of the Hall County Board of Commissioners shall appoint one member for a two-year term to the planning commission. Each two-year term will begin February 1, and expire January 31, or continue until his or her successor is appointed. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the board of commissioners who shall have the authority to remove any member for cause on written charges after a public hearing. The unexcused absence of a planning commission member from three consecutive regularly scheduled meetings without prior notice to the chairman of the planning commission or the planning commission staff office shall terminate said member's appointment. Members of the planning commission shall be reimbursed and/or compensated for their services pursuant to direction and approval of the Hall County Commission. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
2.60.020. - Organization; proceedings. 
The chairman of the planning commission shall be elected from its members and approved by the board of commissioners. The term of the chairman shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the county. The planning commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
2.60.030. - Powers and duties. 
The planning commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  To accept applications and make findings and recommendations at a public hearing for all amendments to Title 17 and forward said recommendations to the county board of commissioners. (See Chapter 17.370 of this Code); 
B.  To grant application for all conditional uses, site plan review as specified by Title 17 and uses subject to the approval of the planning commission, provided that the standards and requirements of Title 17 are met. (See Chapter 17.350 of this Code). If a public hearing is required by Title 17 for a particular use or amendment, a sign shall be posted at least 15 days prior to said public hearing in a conspicuous place on the property and shall state the nature of the request and the time and place of said public hearing. Further, the staff shall notify each adjoining property owner at their address, as shown by the records of the board of tax assessors, by mail postmarked at least five days prior to said planning commission hearing on the application; 
C.  To review preliminary subdivision plats and grant development approval for same when required under the provisions of Titles 16 and 17; 
D.  To review final subdivision plats and grant recording and approval permits for subdivision when required under the provisions of Titles 16 and 17; 
E.  To initiate, direct and review from time to time a study of the provisions of Title 17 and to make reports of its findings and recommendations as to amendments to the board of commissioners of the county; 
F.  To investigate and make recommendations to the county commission regarding the acceptance and classification of county roads; 
G.  To accept and determine requests regarding unclassified uses as per Chapter 17.330; 
H.  To hear and take action on appeals of determinations and decisions made by the planning department as specified by Title 17; 
I.  The planning commission shall make such determinations, shall investigate such matters relating to the planning and development of the county and take such action as required by Title 17 and the laws of the state. 
J.  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of Title 17 will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of Title 17 shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. In cases involving requests for variances from the building setback standards, a plat or survey of the property is required. In cases involving setback variances for commercial or industrial uses of land, a site plan of the property in question prepared by a registered land surveyor, architect, landscape architect or engineer shall be required. The authority to grant such variances shall be limited to variances from the following requirements: 
1.  Setbacks from property lines. 
2.  Planted buffers and vision clearance requirements. 
3.  Off-street parking space requirements. 
4.  Other requirements where the granting of a variance is specifically authorized. 
K.  Such variances may be granted in such individual cases of unnecessary hardship upon a finding of the board that: 
1.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular lot in question because of its size, shape or topography (the hardship must relate to the physical character of the lot and not to a personal or economic hardship); 
2.  The application of the requirements of this Title 17 to this particular piece of property would create an unusual hardship; 
3.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved and are not common to other properties in the neighborhood; and 
4.  Such conditions are not the result of any actions of the property owner; and 
5.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of Title 17; provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by Title 17 or for a conditional use which has been denied by the county planning commission. 
L.  To hear and decide such conditional uses as the board is required to act upon under the terms of Title 17. 
M.  To receive and act upon applications for the change, continuance and/or enlargement of a nonconforming use as provided in Chapter 17.340 of these regulations. 
N.  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of Title 17. 
O.  To perform other duties as from time to time may be delegated by the Hall County Commission. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
2.60.040. - Actions by planning commission. 
A.  From the effective date of this chapter, forward, all references to the zoning board of adjustment as found in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, shall be understood to refer to the Hall County Planning Commission. 
B.  In all actions or decisions of the planning commission, three members being present shall constitute a quorum with a majority vote of the quorum constituting an official action or decision of the planning commission. Each official action, with the full text of the motion and record of members' votes shall be incorporated in the minutes of the planning commission. If an application for a conditional use or a use permitted subject to approval of the planning commission is denied by the planning commission, then the same property may not again be considered for any zoning application and no application shall be filed until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the denial of the application and may not be considered for an application of the same type, and no application shall be filed (conditional use, etc.) until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the denial of the application. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
2.60.050. - Deadline for applications for appeals. 
All applications for proposed appeals, whether an appeal for a variance from the building setback standards, conditional use, a nonconforming use or an appeal of a decision by an administrative official, shall be submitted to the office of the planning department at least 15 working days in advance of the next regular meeting of the planning commission. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
2.60.060. - Effective period of approved applications. 
All applications approved by the board, whether a request for variance from the terms of Title 17, a request for conditional use, a request for the enlargement, change or continuance of a nonconforming use or a request to appeal a decision by an administrative official in the enforcement of Title 17, shall be effective for a period of six months. If no action is taken by the applicant to implement the purpose of the application by obtaining the proper permit and/or license and proceeding with the building, occupancy or establishment of business within six months from the date of approval by the board, said approval shall become null and void. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
2.60.070. - Exercise of planning commission powers. 
In exercising the above powers, the planning commission may, in conformity with the provisions of Title 17, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may have all powers of the officer from whom the application is taken, and may direct the issuance of a building permit, occupancy permit or certificate of zoning compliance. In no case shall the powers of the board be construed to include authority to reclassify use zones. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
2.60.080. - Conditions of planning commission decisions. 
In exercising the above powers, the planning commission may place any reasonable conditions or stipulations upon a conditional use, variance, etc., as deemed necessary (such as hours of operation, parking, maximum building size, outside displays, time limits, etc.) to further insure the orderly operation of the proposed use and its compatibility with the surrounding properties. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
2.60.090. - Appeal of planning commission decisions. 
Any decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the board of commissioners in accordance with Chapter 17.370 of this Code. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
CHAPTER 2.70 - HALL COUNTY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[6] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of July 8, 2010, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), deleted former Ch. 2.70, §§ 2.70.010—2.70.100, and enacted a new Ch. 2.70 as set out herein. Former Ch. 2.70 pertained to emergency management and civil defense. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

2.70.010. - Definitions. 
Contractor(s) means individuals, partnerships, corporations, and other legal entities engaging in the construction trade industry or providing services related thereto such as the sale of building supplies and materials. 
Disaster means any natural, technological, civil emergency or threat thereof that causes or has the potential to cause damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by the Governor or the President of the United States. 
Emergency means any natural or manmade event requiring the activation of the local emergency operations plan (LEOP). 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services; police services; medical and health services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, and other special weapons; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; nuclear or electric power plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Governing bodies means, unless otherwise specified, the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia and the city councils or board of commissioners of the municipalities with any part of its municipal boundaries within Hall County, Georgia. 
Hall County Emergency Operations Center shall mean that designated facility to be used as a command center in the event of a state of emergency as declared by the governor. 
Local emergency management director means the person nominated in accordance with section 2.70.020 of this chapter and appointed by the state emergency management director to implement the LEOP. 
Local emergency operations plan (LEOP) means a comprehensive plan or program for emergency management within Hall County and the municipalities, any part of which is located within Hall County. 
Overcharging means the charging of prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which prices are substantially in excess of the customary charges or, in applicable cases, substantially in excess of the suppliers' or providers' costs for such goods, materials, services, or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price after which the merchandise or cost/rental of housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in cost to the suppliers directly attributable to the higher cost of materials, supplies and labor resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency is defined pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(7) and means the condition declared by the Governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency in any part of the state is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by the state to supplement the efforts and available resources of the several localities and relief organizations in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
State emergency management director means the person appointed by the Governor to head the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruption in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three months after the emergency declaration has been terminated. 
(Res. of 7-8-10, § 2(Exh. A)) 
2.70.020. - Hall County Emergency Management Agency; powers and duties. 
A.  The Hall County Emergency Management Agency created by resolution of the Hall County Commission on December 13, 1982, by agreement with the governing officials within the county shall continue as created in said resolution subject to the operation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The chairperson of the Hall County Commissioners, with the concurrence of a majority of the governing bodies of the cities within Hall County, shall nominate, for appointment by the state emergency management director, a director of the Hall County Emergency Management Agency. 
C.  Upon appointment, the Hall County Emergency Management Agency Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operations of the local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the chairman of the board of commissioners of Hall County and shall serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners of Hall County. 
D.  When appointed, the Hall County Emergency Management Agency Director is charged with the following duties: 
1.  Represent the governing officials of the county on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
2.  Assist governing officials in organizing county departments for emergency operations. 
3.  Develop, in conjunction with county and city departments, the LEOP for emergency functions. Such plan will be consistent with the Georgia Emergency Operations Plan and shall be submitted for approval to the board of commissioners of Hall County and the cities with any municipal jurisdiction in Hall County, and thence to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency for approval. 
4.  Maintain the Hall County Emergency Management Agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the Hall County Emergency Management Agency Program, including the submission of required reports, to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
5.  Submit reports as required by the Hall County Board of Commissioners in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activities, etc. 
6.  Obtain, with the approval of Hall County Board of Commissioners, a facility to be used as the Hall County Emergency Operations Center. 
7.  Coordinate the activities of the Hall County Emergency Operations Center staff during periods of emergency, and under the supervision of the Hall County Board of Commissioners. 
(Res. of 7-8-10, § 2(Exh. A)) 
2.70.030. - Hall County Emergency Management Agency organization functions. 
A.  The Hall County Emergency Management Agency shall be established around existing county and city departments. The emergency support functions (ESFs) and department/agency assignments shall be as set forth in the LEOP approved pursuant to subsection 2.70.020D.3. above. 
B.  Heads of Hall County's departments listed above are responsible for developing appropriate annexes and standard operating procedures (SOPs) to the local emergency operations plan (LEOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes and SOPs will be submitted to the emergency management agency director for inclusion in the LEOP for submission to appropriate governing officials for approval. 
(Res. of 7-8-10, § 2(Exh. A)) 
2.70.040. - Emergency powers, generally. 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of Hall County, the chairperson of the Hall County Commissioners separately, or jointly with the mayors of the municipalities with any municipal boundaries inside of Hall County, or, in their absence, their legally appointed successors may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such periods as such emergency or disaster continues, the following powers: 
A.  To appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, and to obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for emergency management purposes; 
B.  To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of any emergency or disaster resulting from manmade or natural causes or enemy attack and to direct and coordinate the development of emergency management plans and programs in accordance with the policies and plans set by the federal and state emergency management agencies; 
C.  To appoint, employ, remove, or provide, with or without compensation, chiefs of services, warning personnel, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, and other emergency management workers; 
D.  To establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers to serve as command posts during an emergency or disaster; 
E.  Subject to the order of the governor or the chairman of the board of commissioners of Hall County, to assign and make available for duty the employees, property, or equipment of the subdivision relating to fire- fighting, engineering, rescue, health, medical and related services, and to police, transportation, construction, and similar items or services for emergency management purposes, within or outside of the physical limits of the Hall County; 
F.  In addition to the heretofore stated powers and authorities, to acquire, temporarily or permanently, by purchase, lease, or otherwise, sites required for installation of temporary housing units for disaster victims; and to enter into whatever arrangements, including purchase, of temporary housing units and payment of transportation charges, which are necessary to prepare or equip such sites to utilize the housing units. 
(Res. of 7-8-10, § 2(Exh. A)) 
2.70.050. - Emergency powers of chairman of board of commissioners. 
In addition to any and all powers enumerated in the resolutions and ordinances of the Hall County, the chairman of the board of commissioners of Hall County shall have further emergency powers as follows: 
A.  The chairman shall have the right to request that the Governor declare an emergency to exist when, in his opinion, one or more of the following conditions exist: 
1.  There is extreme likelihood of danger of destruction of life or property due to an unexpected occurrence or set of circumstances demanding immediate action; 
2.  Unusual or extreme weather conditions, making use of Hall County's streets or areas difficult or impossible; 
3.  Civil unrest, commotion, or uprising is imminent or exists; or 
4.  There is a stoppage or loss of electrical power affecting a major portion of Hall County's jurisdiction. 
B.  The declaration of an emergency as to a portion of Hall County shall specify with exactness the area in which the emergency is declared to exist. 
C.  After declaration of such emergency by the governor, the chairman of the board of commissioners of Hall County shall have the right to exercise any or all of the following powers: 
1.  The power to use Hall County employees to assist in the safety and preservation of life, limb, and property of citizenry of Hall County; 
2.  The power to close roads and to delineate areas within the jurisdiction of Hall County wherein an emergency exists; 
3.  The power to impose emergency curfew regulations; 
4.  The power to close business establishments within affected areas; 
5.  The power to close any and all governmentally owned buildings and other facilities to the use of the general public; and 
6.  The power to do any and all acts necessary and incident to the preservation of life, limb, and property of the citizenry of Hall County. 
D.  No emergency power as set forth herein shall remain in effect for more than 72 hours after the declaration of an emergency by the governor and the assumption of powers by the chairman. However, upon declaration of a second or further emergencies to exist, the emergency powers as set forth herein may be extended for additional successive 72-hour periods. 
(Res. of 7-8-10, § 2(Exh. A)) 
2.70.060. - Emergency interim successors. 
A.  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-50, the following are designated by title as emergency interim successors in the order listed for the designated governing official: 
1.  Emergency interim successor for the chairman of the Hall County Board of Commissioners: 
a.  ___________ 
b.  ___________ 
c.  ___________ 
B.  At the time of their designation, emergency interim successors shall take such oath as may be required for them to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office to which they may succeed. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person, as a prerequisite to the exercise of the powers or discharge of the duties of an office to which he succeeds, shall be required to comply with any other provision of law relative to taking office. 
C.  Emergency interim successors shall receive the same compensation as is paid the officer by whom they are appointed. The compensation shall be paid to the successor only during such time as a successor shall exercise the powers of the officer by whom he has been designated. 
D.  Governmental powers shall be exercised by emergency interim successors appointed under this Code section only during a period of emergency or disaster, as defined by this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-8-10, § 2(Exh. A)) 
2.70.070. - Registration of contractors during state of emergency. 
A.  Purpose. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, individuals, businesses, corporations, or other entities, including contractors, which do business in the jurisdiction of the governing authority during a state of emergency as declared by the Governor or subsequent recovery periods are hereby required to comply with the provisions of emergency registration of this section. 
B.  Agent. The governing authority hereby designates the Hall County Business License Director and the Hall County Building Inspector as its agents in requiring and providing for emergency registration information of businesses as provided herein. 
C.  Required registration information. The Hall County Business License Director and the Hall County Building Inspector shall specify which businesses shall be required to register including but not limited to all businesses or just a certain type such as contractors. If not so specified, then all businesses unless otherwise exempted in this section shall register. The emergency registration information required hereby shall include, but shall not be limited to, the official business address, telephone number, names of key personnel to include the agent for service if any, licensing and other information relevant to the history and certification of such entity as well as any other information required by the business license director or the building inspector. Such information shall be provided on forms or a format to be determined by the business license director or building inspector. Contractors and other entities holding a valid business license from Hall County or any municipality with municipal boundaries within the county shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. All others affected hereunder shall not be authorized to do business in Hall County or any municipality with municipal boundaries within the county until and unless said registration has been completed. 
(Res. of 7-8-10, § 2(Exh. A)) 
2.70.080. - Price overcharging during state of emergency. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property within the declared disaster area, it shall be unlawful, during the duration of the state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which any portion of the jurisdiction of Hall County has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business within Hall County to overcharge for any goods, materials, services, motel/hotel rooms, temporary lodging or housing, sold or rented, within the jurisdiction of Hall County. 
(Res. of 7-8-10, § 2(Exh. A)) 
2.70.090. - Unified command system. 
The standardized, verifiable, performance based unified command system established and maintained by the Georgia Emergency Management Agency pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-57 shall be implemented and utilized by the governing authority and all of its public safety and emergency response organizations, including emergency management agencies, law enforcement agencies, fire departments, and emergency medical services. 
(Res. of 7-8-10, § 2(Exh. A)) 
2.70.100. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the governing authority, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as the officers and employees of the governing authority. Immunity does not apply in cases of willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith. 
(Res. of 7-8-10, § 2(Exh. A)) 
2.70.110. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the magistrate or state court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Res. of 7-8-10, § 2(Exh. A)) 
CHAPTER 2.80. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT 

 

2.80.010. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term: 
Agency means any county office, department, division, board, bureau, commission, authority or other separate unit of county government created or established by law. 
Records means all documents, papers, letters, maps, books (except books in formally organized libraries), microfilm, magnetic tape, or other material, regardless of physical form or characteristics, made or received pursuant to law or ordinance or in performance of functions by any agency. 
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, utilization, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records undertaken to reduce costs and improve efficiency of record keeping. Records management includes management of filing microfilming equipment and supplies; filing and information retrieval systems; files, correspondence, reports, and forms management; historical documentation; micrographics; retention programming; and vital records protection. 
Retention schedule means a set of disposition instructions prescribing how long, where and in what form a record series shall be kept. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 1; Code 1991, § 2.32.010) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 
2.80.020. - County agency record management duties. 
It shall be the duty of each agency to: 
A.  Cause to be made and preserved records containing adequate and proper documentation of the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures, and essential transactions of the agency and designed to furnish the information necessary to protect the legal and financial rights of the county and of persons directly affected by the agency's activities; 
B.  Cooperate fully with the county in complying with this chapter; 
C.  Establish and maintain an active and continuing program for the economical and efficient management of records and assist the county in the conduct of records management surveys; 
D.  Implement records management procedures and regulations issued by the county; 
E.  Establish necessary safeguards against the removal or loss of records and such further safeguards as may be required by regulations of the county. The safeguards shall include notification to all officials and employees of the agency that no records in the custody of the agency are to be alienated or destroyed except in accordance with this chapter; 
F.  Designate an agency records management officer who shall establish and operate a records management program. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 2; Code 1991, § 2.32.020) 
2.80.030. - Authority to determine form of records; storage and disposition of confidential records. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to divest agency heads of the authority to determine the nature and form of records required in the administration of their several agencies. 
B.  Any records designated confidential by law shall be so treated by the agency in the maintenance, storage, and disposition of such confidential records. These records shall be destroyed in such a manner that they cannot be read, interpreted, or reconstructed. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 3; Code 1991, § 2.32.030) 
2.80.040. - Outline of records management plan; retention schedule. 
A.  As used in this section, the term "office or officer" means any county office or officer or any office or officer under the jurisdiction of the county. 
B.  All records created or received in the performance of a public duty or paid for by public funds by the county are deemed to be public property and shall constitute a record of public acts. 
C.  Each office or officer shall establish a retention schedule. The schedule shall include an inventory of the type of records maintained and the length of time each type of record shall be maintained in the office or in a record-holding area. These retention periods shall be based on the legal, fiscal, administrative, and historical needs for the record. 
D.  The county shall approve a records management plan which shall include but not be limited to: 
1.  The name of the person or title of the officer who will coordinate and perform the responsibilities of the county under this chapter; 
2.  Each retention schedule submitted to the county; and 
3.  Provisions for maintenance and security of the records. 
E.  Except as otherwise provided by law, ordinance, or policy adopted by the office or officer responsible for maintaining the records, all records shall be open to the public or the state or any agency thereof. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 4; Code 1991, § 2.32.040) 
2.80.050. - Access to confidential records. 
A.  Records that by law are confidential, classified, or restricted may be used for research purposes by private researchers providing that: 
1.  The researcher is qualified to perform such research; 
2.  The research topic is designed to produce a study that would be of potential benefit to the state or its citizens; and 
3.  The researcher will agree in writing to protect the confidentiality of the information contained in the records. 
When the purpose of the confidentiality is to protect the rights of privacy of any person or persons who are named in the records, the researcher must agree not to refer to the persons, either in his notes or in his finished study or in any manner, in such a way that they can be identified. 
When the purpose of the confidentiality is to protect other information, the researcher must agree not to divulge that information. 
B.  The head of the agency that created the records, or his designee, shall determine whether or not the researcher and his research topic meet the qualifications set forth in subsection A of this section prior to accepting the signed agreement from the researcher and granting permission to use the confidential records. 
C.  The use of such confidential records for research shall be considered a privilege and the agreement signed by the researcher shall be binding on him. Researchers who violate the confidentiality of these records shall be punished in the same manner as would government employees or officials found guilty of this offense. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 5; Code 1991, § 2.32.050) 
2.80.060. - Destruction of records. 
A.  All records created or received in the performance of duty and paid for by public funds are deemed to be public property and shall constitute a record of public acts. 
B.  The destruction of records shall occur only through the operation of an approved retention schedule. The records shall not be placed in the custody of private individuals or institutions or semiprivate organizations unless authorized by retention schedules. 
C.  The alienation, alteration, theft, or destruction of records by any person or persons in a manner not authorized by an applicable retention schedule is punishable as provided in chapter 1.40. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 6; Code 1991, § 2.32.060) 
CHAPTER 2.90. - AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAM[7] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Civil service system act, ch. 2.120. 

2.90.010. - Policy statement. 
A.  Identification and elimination of any discriminatory practices through specific remedial action is the major or primary thrust of the county government's affirmative action plan. 
B.  As an employer, the governing bodies of the county government have a continuing responsibility to set an example of equal employment practices for all of its citizens regardless of race, religion, color, national origin, sex, age, marital status, political party affiliation, or the presence of any physical, mental or sensory handicap/disability. 
C.  The county's personnel administration is based upon merit principles and scientific methods governing the classification of positions and the employment, conduct, movement, and separation of public officers and employees. 
D.  The county continues to develop an aggressive, ambitious goal-setting program that should produce tangible evidence of measurable results. 
E.  Also, the purpose of this policy shall be to build a career service in county government which will attract, select, and retain the best of our citizens on merit, free from coercive political influences, with incentives in the form of fringe benefits, salary increases based upon merit, and genuine opportunities for promotions in the service. 
F.  The declared policy of the county shall be to establish a personnel system that shall be applied and administered in accordance with the following merit principles: 
1.  Equal opportunity for all, regardless of race, religion, color, national origin, sex, age, marital status, or political affiliation. No person shall be discriminated against in any case because of any physical, mental, or sensory handicap/disability in examination, appointment, reinstatement, reemployment, promotion, transfer, demotion, or removal, with respect to any position the duties of which, in the opinion of the county administrator or elected official, may be efficiently performed by a person with such handicap; provided that the employment will not be hazardous to the appointee or endanger the health or safety of his fellow employees or others; 
2.  Impartial selection of the ablest person for government service by means of competitive tests which are fair, objective, and practical; 
3.  Just opportunity for competent employees to be promoted within the service; 
4.  Reasonable job security for the competent employee, including the right of appeal from personnel actions; 
5.  Proper management balance in employer/employee relations to achieve a well-trained, productive, and happy work force. 
G.  Nothing in this affirmative action policy statement and program shall be deemed to: 
1.  Repeal or affect any law or ordinance or government rule or regulation having the force and effect of law which prohibits, restricts, or controls the employment of minors; 
2.  Prohibit or prevent the establishment and maintenance of bona fide occupational qualifications; 
3.  Prohibit or prevent the termination of, or change the employment of, any person who is unable to perform his duties; 
4.  Affect the operation of the terms or conditions of any bona fide retirement, pension, employee benefit, or insurance plan; 
5.  Repeal or affect any federal or state laws prescribing minimum and/or maximum age limits for employees; or 
6.  Conflict with or affect the application of law enforcement and/or security regulations in public employment established by the United States or the State of Georgia. 
H.  This affirmative action program shall be reviewed and updated as deemed necessary to continue an effective program. 
I.  This affirmative action program will be made available for inspection to any citizen, employee, or applicant for employment upon request at the county administrator's office or the personnel office between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Exception will be made for legal holidays or emergency/weather-related closings. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 1; Code 1991, § 2.36.010) 
2.90.020. - Applicable law generally. 
The county government will be guided by the intent and mandates of all applicable laws, including but not limited to the following laws in sections 2.90.030 through 2.90.110. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 2; Code 1991, § 2.36.020) 
2.90.030. - Civil Rights Act of 1964, title VII, section 703(a). 
A.  It is an unlawful employment practice of an employer to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge an individual, or otherwise discriminate against any individual with respect to his or her compensation, because of the individual's race, color, religion, sex, nationality, or handicap; or to limit, segregate, or classify his or her employees or applicants for employment in any way which would deprive, or tend to deprive, any individual of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect his or her status as an employee because of such individual's race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. 
B.  It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employment agency to fail or refuse to refer for employment or otherwise to discriminate against any individual because of his or her race, color, religion, sex, or national origin; or to classify or refer for employment any individual on the basis of his or her race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or handicap. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 2; Code 1991, § 2.36.030) 
2.90.040. - Civil Rights Act of 1964, title VI. 
The nondiscrimination clause in federally assisted programs requires that no person in the United States shall, on the grounds of race, color, or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving federal financial assistance. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 2; Code 1991, § 2.36.040) 
2.90.050. - Executive Order 11246. 
This order, issued by the President in 1965, required affirmative action programs by all federal contractors and subcontractors, and requires that firms with contracts over $50,000.00 and 50 or more employees develop and implement written programs which are monitored by an assigned federal compliance agency. Specific requirements for such "result-oriented" programs are spelled out in Revised Order No. 4 issued by the Office of Federal Contract Compliance, U.S. Department of Labor. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 2; Code 1991, § 2.36.050) 
2.90.060. - Fourteenth Amendment, section 1. 
The Fourteenth Amendment, section 1, declares that all persons born or naturalized in the United States and subject to the jurisdiction thereof are citizens of the United States and of the state wherein they reside and that no state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any state deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law; nor deny persons within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 2; Code 1991, § 2.36.060) 
2.90.070. - Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and section 402 of Vietnam Era Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974. 
The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and section 402 of the Vietnam Era Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974 prohibit discrimination based upon handicap for both employment and the provision of service and include disabled veteran applicants and employees who believe themselves to be covered under these sections. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 2; Code 1991, § 2.36.070) 
2.90.080. - Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967. 
The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 seeks to prevent employment discrimination because of age against persons 40 to 70 years of age. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 2; Code 1991, § 2.36.080) 
2.90.090. - Equal Pay Act of 1963. 
The Equal Pay Act was the first federal law specifically aimed at correcting discrimination in employment. Basically, it mandates equal pay for equal work, regardless of sex. The law's three benchmarks for a job are skill, effort, and responsibility. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 2; Code 1991, § 2.36.090) 
2.90.100. - Equal Employment Opportunity Commission sexual harassment regulations. 
Sex discrimination guidelines [have been] issued by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, effective November 10, 1980. This amendment reaffirms that sexual harassment is an unlawful employment practice. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 2; Code 1991, § 2.36.100) 
2.90.110. - Georgia Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978. 
The Georgia Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978 seeks to protect and safeguard the right and opportunity of all persons to seek, obtain, and hold employment without discrimination on account of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, an age of 40 and above, and marital status. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 2; Code 1991, § 2.36.110) 
2.90.120. - Personnel policy review. 
All personnel whose duties include recruitment and employment will continue to regularly review the implementation of personnel policies to assure that equal employment opportunities, based upon valid job requirements, are being actively observed. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 3; Code 1991, § 2.36.120) 
2.90.130. - Affirmative action generally. 
Hall County will continue to expand its efforts to attract minority group applicants. This policy applies to all county departments. All elected officials, department heads, and supervisory personnel are aware of this policy. Monitoring and evaluation of departmental efforts to promote affirmative action will be conducted on a recurring basis. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 3; Code 1991, § 2.36.130) 
2.90.140. - Recruitment sources. 
Recruitment sources will continue to be advised periodically of the county's equal employment opportunity policy. The county includes, among its recruitment sources, organizations and media which are utilized by and are available to minority group candidates. Detailed information concerning job openings, including the county's hiring processes, will continue to be provided to these recruitment sources. Employees, including minority group employees, are encouraged to refer friends for employment with the county. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 3; Code 1991, § 2.36.140) 
2.90.150. - Employment advertising. 
Employment advertising shall continue to contain assurance of equal employment opportunity, and shall comply with statutes regarding sex, age, and other qualifications. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 3; Code 1991, § 2.36.150) 
2.90.160. - Applications on file. 
All applicants are provided the opportunity for employment. All applicants are informed as to the possibility (or probability) of current or future job openings. Applications of all job applicants will be maintained on file for a three-year period, the first year to be considered as active applications. To the extent that it is practical, reference to these files will be made periodically in connection with the county's employment requirements. This program is designed to insure equal consideration to both minority and non-minority applicants. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 3; Code 1991, § 2.36.160) 
2.90.170. - Hiring qualifications. 
The county's personnel policy is that hiring qualifications for both entry-level and experience-level jobs are fair, and shall continue to be fairly administered. These qualifications are subject to regular review to assure that they conform to the actual job performance requirements and to changing situations. It must be recognized that the county has continuing responsibilities to perform its services and functions, which dictates that employment shall be on a well-qualified basis. In accordance with these responsibilities, the county will continue to make every effort to hire minority group applicants who may not meet the fully qualified requirements for a particular job; provided that the deficiency is such that it can be eliminated through orientation and on-the-job training. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 3; Code 1991, § 2.36.170) 
2.90.180. - Tests generally; review. 
Tests which may be administered by the county shall be such as to measure the skills actually required on the job. Tests are tools employed solely to aid in the selection of the right person for the right job. Tests shall be subject to regular review for content and minimum passing grades. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 3; Code 1991, § 2.36.180) 
2.90.190. - Evaluation of tests. 
All tests given to applicants are administered and evaluated by qualified employees who are fully acquainted with the county's policy as to equal employment opportunity. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 3; Code 1991, § 2.36.190) 
2.90.200. - Pay policy. 
The policy of the county is to pay compensation for work performed, which is competitive with local comparable rates, so that compensation does not create a barrier to the recruitment of minority group personnel. It is the policy of the county to compensate all employees equally on the basis of job classification, experience, and ability. The compensation plan shall be reviewed at least every two years for updating and improvement. Consideration shall be given to such factors as rises in living costs, the competitive wage situation in government and private sectors, and such other factors as may be deemed relevant. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 3; Code 1991, § 2.36.200) 
2.90.210. - Promotion considerations. 
The policy of the county is to assure that employees are successful on the job and are provided opportunities to prepare themselves for full use of their talents and potential. Candidates for promotion are chosen on their qualifications and work record, without regard to age, sex, race, color, religion, or national origin. Performance appraisals and work records for all personnel, including minority groups, will continue to be examined when openings for higher-level positions occur. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 3; Code 1991, § 2.36.210) 
2.90.220. - Employee records. 
The county maintains up-to-date records. These records reflect the county's efforts in maintaining its policies, as addressed in this statement of practices and procedures. The records shall include: 
A.  Statistics on current employment in the county departments; 
B.  Schedule of job classifications and salary ranges; 
C.  Records of all employees hired, including job classifications and salary ranges. These records will identify women and minority group employees, and other related statistical data in accordance with applicable laws and for the sole purpose of this affirmative action program; 
D.  Job and salary records of employees promoted, including old and new job classifications and salaries; 
E.  Records of employees resigned or terminated with reasons for termination or resignation; 
F.  Register of names of certified applicants for the classified positions under the civil service system; 
G.  Data information on applications placed for employment according to position(s) applied for, salary range of position(s), sex, age range, minority or non-minority, veteran status, and handicap (if known); 
H.  Copies of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission report which the county submits each year, along with supporting data. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 3; Code 1991, § 2.36.220) 
2.90.230. - Program of outreach and recruitment. 
The program of outreach and recruitment, as conducted by the county, will enlist the assistance and support of the county civil service system, State of Georgia employment agencies, State of Georgia vocational rehabilitation agencies, women's development and placement agencies, college and vocational technical school placement officers, veterans' counselors and coordinators on school campuses, veterans' groups, and minority group oriented civil and fraternal organizations to fulfill the affirmative action obligation. All elected officials, department heads, supervisors, and other employees of the county will cooperate and assist in meeting this obligation. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 4; Code 1991, § 2.36.230) 
2.90.240. - Internal dissemination of policy. 
A.  A copy of this affirmative action program will be posted in a conspicuous place in each departmental office, available to employees and applicants for employment. 
B.  All employees will assume personal responsibility for equitable treatment of fellow employees. 
C.  A continuing program of communication will be accomplished to demonstrate that women and minorities are all an important part of the county's work force. 
D.  The county's policy and methods of implementing this policy will continue to be discussed at appropriate staff meetings and management meetings. 
E.  Changes in equal opportunity legislation, rulings or regulations will be publicized to insure that each supervisor is aware of changes in the civil rights area. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 5(A); Code 1991, § 2.36.240) 
2.90.250. - External dissemination of policy. 
A.  All recruiting sources will be informed of the county's policy. These sources will be instructed to actively recruit and refer applicants for all positions listed. 
B.  Subcontractors, vendors, and suppliers will be notified and appropriate action requested of them. 
C.  The county will include a civil rights clause in all labor agreements. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 5(B); Code 1991, § 2.36.250) 
2.90.260. - Assignment of responsibility for implementation. 
A.  The county administrator has overall responsibility for insuring that the affirmative action policy is communicated throughout the personnel structure by all concerned, and carried out. He/she will also periodically review the affirmative action program with special emphasis on the results being achieved to insure its completeness and operational effectiveness. He/she will enlist the cooperation and active support of all elected officials, department heads, supervisory personnel, and employees. 
B.  The county personnel director will be the affirmative action officer and will be responsible for the preparation and implementation of the county's overall affirmative action program: 
1.  He or she should develop policy statements, as deemed necessary, to further the principles of affirmative action. 
2.  He or she should initiate an aggressive, workable, and measurable affirmative action program. Included in the job will be the promotion of internal and external communication contacts with the media. 
3.  The personnel director shall assist departments in arriving at solutions to problems and design and implement monitoring and reporting systems that will measure the effectiveness of the program, indicate the need for remedial action, and determine the degree to which the county's goals and objectives have been attained. 
4.  It will be the additional duty of the personnel director to serve as liaison between the county and various enforcement and regulatory agencies, minority organizations, women's organizations, and community action groups concerned with employment opportunities of both minorities and women. 
5.  The personnel director shall keep abreast of the latest developments in the equal employment field and insure that the county's practices are in harmony with both legislation and the needs of the community. 
C.  Each section director and all supervisory personnel must assure equal opportunity for all his or her employees in regard to work assignments, training, transfer, advancements, and other conditions and privileges of employment. Responsibility of all management personnel will include: 
1.  Assist in the identification of problem areas and the establishment of programs aimed at solving the areas of concern; 
2.  Active involvement with local minority organizations and community groups; 
3.  Periodic audit of recruitment, hiring, training, promotion, and transfer pattern to insure that affirmative action objectives are met; 
4.  Discussion with supervisory personnel and employees to insure that policies and programs are being followed; 
5.  Periodic review of the qualifications and treatment of all employees supervised to make certain minority and female employees, veterans, and handicapped employees are being given full opportunities for transfers, training, and promotion; 
6.  Periodic checks to insure that facilities are desegregated in policy and in use, and that minority and female employees, veterans, and handicapped employees are being given equal opportunities to participate in all county-sponsored educational and training activities. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 6; Code 1991, § 2.36.260) 
2.90.270. - Execution of affirmative action; recruitment. 
The county will actively seek qualified minority and female applicants, veterans, and handicapped applicants for employment through the county personnel director. This will be accomplished by informing State of Georgia employment agencies, state vocational rehabilitation agencies, civil rights organizations, veterans' groups and organizations, schools, community leaders, and recognized minority social and religious groups of the county's interest in fair employment practices and of openings that exist. The phrase "an equal employment opportunity employer" will continue to be used in all employment advertisements. Individuals will be selected for employment wholly on the basis of ability to perform. Employment and selection procedures will be regularly reviewed to insure that nothing in these procedures discriminates against any individual. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 7(A); Code 1991, § 2.36.270) 
2.90.280. - Execution of affirmative action; promotion. 
Affirmative efforts will be made to place minority individuals on all levels of employment in all county departments. All qualified employees will be given equal consideration for promotion. No job categories are closed, or will be closed, to individuals because they are members of a minority group. The county personnel director will periodically review the qualifications and progress of its minority employees to insure that the affirmative action plan is fully implemented. When positions are to be filled, including those of a supervisory level, all applicants shall continue to be considered without regard to race, color, creed, ancestry, national origin, sex, age (except where age is a bona fide occupational qualification), marital status, and political affiliation. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 7(B); Code 1991, § 2.36.280) 
2.90.290. - Execution of affirmative action; training. 
The county will utilize on-the-job training programs to the fullest extent and devise new training programs, where needed, to help in the upgrading of the qualifications of minority employees for more responsible positions within the county. When it is noted that a deficiency in academic education constitutes a handicap, the employee will be encouraged to take advantage of the local educational institutions to enhance his/her opportunity for advancement. The county will continue to expand and improve the internal training efforts for more effective development of all employees. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 7(C); Code 1991, § 2.36.290) 
2.90.300. - Execution of affirmative action; testing. 
In the administration of any testing procedures, the county shall review all tests to insure accurate measure of the skills actually required for the respective job classification. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 7(D); Code 1991, § 2.36.300) 
2.90.310. - Execution of affirmative action; internal audit and reporting. 
The major objectives of the equal employment opportunity programs evaluation is to assess the effectiveness of management in identifying the factors and problems bearing on equal employment and to develop and implement action programs to meet and overcome obstacles to full equality of opportunity. The program of evaluation will provide the data upon which to base recommendations or directions for further remedial action. The program audit will further assure that action has been taken on prior recommendations and directions. The EEO program will be reviewed and evaluated against the affirmative action program during each six-month period. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 7(E); Code 1991, § 2.36.310) 
2.90.320. - Execution of affirmative action; personnel policies concerning sex discrimination. 
A.  It is the stated policy of the county that there will not be discrimination against female applicants in regard to recruitment, hiring, training, promotion, compensation and benefits, transfers, dismissals, and educational and recreational activities. 
B.  Decisions for employment will be based upon policies and practices that further the principle of equal employment opportunity. Promotion, transfers, and training opportunities will be afforded all employees, based upon their qualifications and ability to perform. 
C.  Women will be included in all management and staff development training programs to enhance employment and advancement opportunities for women in county government. 
D.  This program is designed to coordinate job opportunities within the administrative framework of the county to achieve the equality of opportunity without regard to sex, and to promote awareness by women of opportunities available within the county's personnel program. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 7(F); Code 1991, § 2.36.320) 
2.90.330. - Execution of affirmative action; women, minorities, veterans, and the handicapped. 
A.  In our continuing objective to provide equal employment opportunities, we are committed to employ, and advance in employment, qualified women, minorities, veterans and/or handicapped individuals. 
B.  Hall County government will not discriminate against any qualified employee because he or she is handicapped, female, or a minority. 
C.  The county invites persons who are minorities, veterans, women, and/or handicapped, who desire to have this data made a part of his/her employment record for use in the program, to inform county administrative staff of such. The information received will be treated with confidentiality. 
D.  Submission of this information will be voluntary, and refusal to provide it will not subject one to punitive action. 
E.  This program will contain data of each known woman, minority, veteran, and handicapped individual in county government. This data will be maintained in such a manner as to expedite retrieval. The personnel records will include the identification of each promotion and training program for which the employee was considered. In each case where a woman, minority, veteran, or handicapped individual is rejected for employment, promotion, or training, a statement of the reasons will be placed in the personnel file or attached to the job application. 
F.  The skills or expertise required for the position the applicant is seeking will be included in the report before placement in the files. 
G.  Reasonable attempts will be made to appropriately accommodate limitations of any employee or applicant for employment, unless determined to be completely economically prohibitive, or such an accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the conduct of county business. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 7(G); Code 1991, § 2.36.330) 
2.90.340. - Sexual harassment prohibited; defined. 
A.  The Hall County government will not tolerate sexual harassment or pressures by supervisors or co-workers. 
B.  In accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Commission guidelines, sexual harassment shall be defined as follows: "Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature constitute sexual harassment when (1) submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment; (2) submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or (3) such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment." 
C.  Any employee who receives unwelcome sexual advances is encouraged by the county government to report the conduct immediately to his/her department head or to the personnel director. Department heads and supervisors who observe potential harassment, or who become aware of past or ongoing harassment, shall take immediate corrective action. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 8(A); Code 1991, § 2.36.340) 
2.90.350. - Sexual harassment complaint procedure. 
A.  Any employee of Hall County government who suspects that he/she has encountered sexual harassment as defined herein may report the incident(s) to the affirmative action officer. Confidentiality shall be assured such employee. 
B.  If the reporting employee wishes to seek a remedy for an instance of sexual harassment, then the affirmative action officer shall explain the avenues of recourse that are available. 
C.  The reporting employee shall be assisted in taking the complaint through a formal procedure, if desired. 
D.  If further examination of the case or situation is warranted, then the affirmative action officer, with the permission of the complainant, shall: 
1.  Conduct an investigation to ascertain the pertinent facts; and 
2.  Make a good faith effort to resolve the complaint through informal processes. 
E.  After conducting the investigation authorized herein, if the affirmative action officer believes the complaint lacks sufficient evidence to support the accusation, then the affirmative action officer shall dismiss the complaint. 
F.  If, after conducting the investigation authorized herein, the affirmative action officer believes that an alleged act of sexual harassment is valid, then the affirmative action officer shall inform the county administrator or, if appropriate, elected official. The county administrator or elected official shall take the disciplinary action deemed necessary, based upon the facts presented; such disciplinary action shall be in accordance with the disciplinary provisions of the county civil service rules and regulations. The respondent shall follow the hearing procedures set out in the civil service rules and regulations. Grievance or appeals must be in writing and must be filed with the board within ten days of the date of sexual harassment action in question. The civil service board shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the rules and regulations of the civil service board of Hall County government, except that testimony may be heard in confidence, if such testimony would cause undue humiliation, undue ridicule, or undue hardship to the complainant. The civil service board shall render a decision in accordance with the rules and regulations of the civil service board of Hall County government, but need not mention the complainant, if such mention would cause undue humiliation, undue ridicule, or undue hardship to such complainant. Any appeal from the civil service board's decision shall be made in accordance with the appeal procedure set out in the Hall County civil service rules and regulations. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 8(B); Code 1991, § 2.36.350) 
Cross reference— Civil service system act, ch. 2.120. 
CHAPTER 2.100. - EMPLOYEE PENSION AND RETIREMENT PROGRAM[8] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Civil service system act, ch. 2.120. 

2.100.010. - Adopted. 
A retirement program for the employees and elected officials of the county, not participating in a pension plan partially or wholly funded with public funds, is created. 
(Res. of 12-26-72; Code 1991, § 2.40.010) 
2.100.020. - Conformance of plan to county regulations. 
The retirement program shall be in accordance with and conform to the plan approved by the board of managers of the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia, and all future amendments to the plan; and in accordance with and in compliance and pursuant to the Declaration of Trust dated October 23, 1968, establishing the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia Pension Trust. 
(Res. of 12-26-72, § B; Code 1991, § 2.40.020) 
2.100.030. - Plan is noncontributory. 
The program shall be on a noncontributory basis. 
(Res. of 12-26-72, § C; Code 1991, § 2.40.030) 
CHAPTER 2.110. - CODE OF ETHICS[9] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of March 25, 2010, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), amended Ch. 2.110 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 2.110, §§ 2.110.010—2.110.150, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Res. of 6-26-08(1), § 1. 

PART I. - GENERALLY 

2.110.1.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish ethical standards of conduct for all county commissioners, officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the county and by directing disclosure by such county commissioners, officials and employees of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the county; and the proper operation of democratic government requires that county commissioners, officials and employees act in a manner that is impartial and responsive to the people; and it is important that government decisions and policy be made through the proper channels of the governmental structure and be transparent to the public. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.1.2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A.  Business entity means any business of whatever nature regardless of how designated or formed, whether a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, association, trust, corporation, limited liability company, or any other type of business enterprise, and whether a person acting on behalf of, or as a representative or agent of, the business entity; 
B.  Confidential information means any information that is exempt from disclosure under the open records and open meetings acts; 
C.  County commissioner means a member of the county governing authority; 
D.  County official and official means any member of a board or authority appointed by the board of commissioners, the county attorney, the county administrator/assistant administrator/county clerk or any other appointed officer or official of the county. For the purposes of this chapter, the term shall not apply to any other county elected or state elected official unless that elected official or officials agree that he or she will be subject to coverage under this chapter in writing. Such coverage may also apply to the employees of such other county or state elected officials when so agreed in writing. 
E.  Employee means all those persons employed on a regular or part-time basis by the county, as well as those persons whose services are retained under the terms of a contract with the county; provided, however, that employees under the direction of other elected officials are not subject to the provisions of this chapter unless designated in writing by the elected official; 
F.  Family means the spouse, parents, children, and siblings, related by blood, marriage, or adoption, of a county official or employee; See also "interest". 
G.  Interest means direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a county commissioner, official or employee as a result of a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the county, except for such contracts or transactions which, by their terms and by the substance of their provisions, confer the opportunity and right to realize the accrual of similar benefits to all other persons and/or property similarly situated. The term "interest" shall not include any remote interest. For purposes of this chapter, a county commissioner, official or employee shall be deemed to have an interest in the affairs of: 
1.  His or her family; 
2.  Any business entity in which the county commissioner, official or employee is a member, officer, director, employee, or prospective employee; and 
3.  Any business entity as to which the stock, legal ownership, or beneficial ownership of a county commissioner, official or employee is in excess of five percent of the total stock or total legal and beneficial ownership, or which is controlled or owned directly or indirectly by the county commissioner, official or employee; See also "family". 
H.  Remote interest means the interest of: 
1.  A nonsalaried director, officer, or employee of a nonprofit corporation; 
2.  A holder of less than five percent of the legal or beneficial ownership of the total shares of a business; 
3.  Any person in a representative capacity, such as a receiver, trustee, or administrator; or 
4.  Any person who, by determination of the board of ethics, is deemed to have such an interest. See also "interest". 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.1.3. - Interpretation; severability. 
A.  This chapter shall be construed broadly to effectuate its purposes and policies and to supplement such existing laws as may relate to the conduct of a county commissioner or official. 
B.  The propriety of any official act taken by or transaction involving a county commissioner, official or employee immediately prior to the time the ethics ordinance shall take effect shall not be affected by the enactment of the ethics ordinance. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of the court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
PART II. - ETHICAL STANDARDS 

2.110.2.1. - General ethical standards. 
All county commissioners, officials and employees shall: 
A.  Uphold the Constitution, laws, regulations and ordinances of the United States, the State of Georgia and Hall County therein and never be a party to their evasion. 
B.  Put loyalty to the highest moral principles and to county above loyalty to persons, party, or county government department. 
C.  Give a full day's labor for a full day's pay. 
D.  Give to the performance of his or her duties his or her earnest effort and best thought. 
E.  Use efficient and economical ways of getting tasks accomplished. 
F.  Never discriminate unfairly by the dispensing of special favors or privileges to anyone, whether for remuneration or not. 
G.  Never accept or solicit, personally or for family, favors or benefits under circumstances which might be construed by reasonable persons as influencing the performance of his governmental duties. 
H.  Make no private promises of any kind binding upon the duties of office. 
I.  Engage in no business with the government, either directly or indirectly, that is inconsistent with the conscientious performance of governmental duties. 
J.  Report corruption wherever discovered. 
K.  Uphold these principles, ever conscious that public office is a public trust. 
L.  Never engage in other conduct which is unbecoming to a member or which constitutes a breach of public trust. 
M.  Never take any official action in which he or she has a direct or indirect monetary interest. 
N.  Take steps to avoid the appearance of a conflict of interest, which may exist in the absence of an actual conflict. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.2.2. - Compliance with applicable law. 
A.  No county commissioner, official or employee shall engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law, now existing or hereafter enacted, which is applicable to him or her by virtue of his or her office or employment. 
B.  Pursuant to the decision of the Georgia Court of Appeals in the case of Johnson v. Board of Commissioners of Bibb County, (Civil Case No. A10A0398) (February 10, 2010), the board of commissioners under the provisions of the Georgia Open Meetings Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3) may in executive session not only discuss the future acquisition of real estate but may vote to acquire same. However, once the purchase is complete, the board will make known publicly the details of the purchase. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.2.3. - Conflict of interest transactions. 
A.  No county commissioner, official or employee shall have an interest in any contract or transaction affected by official acts or actions of the county commissioner, official or employee, except consistent with the disclosure and abstention provisions set forth in this chapter. 
B.  No county commissioner, official or employee may purchase goods, property, or services of any kind for county purposes from any business entity in which such county official or employee is an employee, or in which he is interested, unless by sanction of the majority of the members of the county commission and unless the goods, property services are provided at the same quality and for a lower price than can be obtained elsewhere. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.2.4. - Impartiality. 
A.  No county commissioner, official or employee shall by his or her conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him or her in the performance of any official acts or actions. 
B.  No county commissioner, official or employee shall, by virtue of his or her position within the county, except as necessary in the performance of his or her official duties, directly or indirectly influence or attempt to influence the decision of any other officer or employee who must act to further any county procurement, policy, contract, matter, or transaction. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.2.5. - Withholding of information. 
No county commissioner, official or employee shall knowingly withhold any information that would impair the proper decision-making of any of the county's boards, agencies, authorities, or departments. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.2.6. - Disclosure of information. 
A.  No county commissioner, official or employee shall without proper legal authorization disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the county, or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or herself or others. 
B.  No county commissioner, official or employee shall without proper legal authorization disclose confidential information discussed in a properly closed meeting or executive session. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.2.7. - Incompatible service. 
No county commissioner, official or employee shall engage in or accept private or public employment or render service for any private or public entity when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.2.8. - Nepotism. 
A.  No county commissioner, official or employee shall advocate for or cause, directly or indirectly, the hiring, advancement, promotion, or transfer of a member of his or her family to any office or position with the county or a county agency. 
B.  No county commissioner, official or employee having authority to appoint or recommend for appointment members of any county board, commission, or authority shall appoint or recommend for appointment a member of his or her family. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.2.9. - Unauthorized use of public property. 
No county commissioner, official or employee shall request or permit the unauthorized use of county owned vehicles and equipment, including but not limited to computers, printers, copiers and related office equipment, wireless hand held devices, telephones, materials, networks, intraoffice mail or property for personal convenience or profit. De minimis personal use of electronic communication equipment, such as wireless hand held devices and telephones is not prohibited. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.2.10. - Political recrimination and activity. 
No county commissioner, official or employee, whether elected or appointed, shall either cause the dismissal or threaten the dismissal from any county position as reward or punishment for any political activity. No county commissioner, official or employee shall direct any person employed by the county to undertake political activity on behalf of any county commissioner, official or employee, or any other individual, political party, group, or business organization during such time that the employee is required to conduct county business. This section does not prohibit incidental telephone calls made for the purpose of scheduling an official's daily county business. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.2.11. - Organizational integrity. 
County commissioners, as policy-makers, shall refrain from unduly interfering in the daily administrative affairs of department supervisors. Commissioners shall not give directions or make suggestions to the department supervisors or other employees on an individual basis. All directions should be made as a board to the county administrator, who, in turn, shall communicate with the department supervisor. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.2.12. - Appearance before county entities. 
No county official or employee shall appear on behalf of any private person, other than himself or herself, his or her spouse or minor children, before any county department, authority, or board. However, a member of the board of commissioners may appear before such groups on behalf of his or her constituents in the course of his or her duties as a representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic obligations. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.2.13. - Special treatment. 
No county commissioner, official or employee shall grant or receive any special consideration, treatment or advantage for themselves or any other citizen beyond that which is generally available to other citizens in the same or similar circumstances. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.214. - Timely payment of taxes and debts to the county. 
All county commissioners, officials and employees shall pay and settle, in a timely and prompt fashion, all accounts with the county, including the prompt payment of all taxes. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.215. - Solicitation or acceptance of gifts. 
A.  County commissioners, officials and employees shall not accept gifts, gratuities, or loans from organizations, businesses, or individuals with whom he or she has official relationships arising from the business of the county government. These limitations are not intended to prohibit the acceptance of articles of negligible value which are distributed generally, nor to prohibit employees from accepting social courtesies which promote good public relations, or to prohibit officials or employees from obtaining loans from regular lending institutions. It is particularly important that inspectors, contracting officers, and enforcement officers guard against relationships which might be construed as evidence of favoritism, coercion, unfair advantage, or collusion. 
B.  There shall be no violation of this chapter in the following circumstances: 
1.  Meals and beverages given in the usual course of entertaining associated with normal and customary business or social functions; 
2.  Ceremonial gifts or awards; 
3.  Gifts of advertising value only or promotional items generally distributed to county commissioners and officials; 
4.  Awards presented in recognition of public service; 
5.  Reasonable expenses of food, travel, lodging, and scheduled entertainment for a meeting that is given in return for participation in a panel or speaking engagement at the meeting; 
6.  Meals, beverages, lodging, travel and related expenses that is given in return for participating in an educational program; 
7.  Courtesy tickets or free admission extended for an event as a courtesy or for ceremonial purposes, given on an occasional basis, and not to include season tickets of any nature; 
8.  Gifts from families or members of the county commissioner, official or employee's household; 
9.  Honorariums or awards for professional achievement; 
10.  Courtesy tickets or free admission to educational seminars, educational or informational conventions, or similar events. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.2.16. - Disclosure of interest. 
A.  Any member of the board of commissioners who has an interest in any proposed ordinance, resolution or other action before the board of commissioners shall immediately disclose publicly the nature and extent of such interest. 
B.  Any other county commissioner, official or employee who has an interest in any ordinance, resolution, or other action before the board of commissioners and who participates in discussion with or gives an official opinion or recommendation to the board of commissioners in connection with such proposed legislation or action shall disclose publicly the nature and extent of such interest. 
C.  Any county commissioner or official shall also comply with the provisions of chapter 17 of the Official Code of Hall County who has an "interest," as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1, in any proposed ordinance, resolution or other zoning decision and shall immediately disclose publicly the nature and extent of such interest and otherwise comply with the conflict of interest in zoning in O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.2.17. - Abstention to avoid conflicts of interest. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided by law, no county commissioner, official or employee shall participate in the discussion, debate, deliberation, vote, or otherwise take part in the decision making process on any item before him or her in which the county commissioner, official or employee has a conflict of interest as set forth in this chapter. 
B.  In the event of a conflict of interest, the county commissioner, official or employee shall announce his or her intent to abstain prior to the beginning of the discussion, debate, deliberation, or vote on the item, and shall abstain from casting a vote. The vice-chair shall preside over any part of a meeting in which the chair has a conflict of interest. No commissioner or other official shall abstain from voting on any matter except for the purpose of avoiding a conflict of interest or as otherwise provided or required by law. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.2.18. - Misuse of the power of office. 
A county commissioner, official or employee shall not intentionally use the power of his or her office or official title or position for his or her own personal gain or that of another. The performance of usual and customary constituent services, without additional compensation, does not constitute the misuse of the power of office prohibited by this section. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.2.19. - Coercion. 
No county commissioner, official or employee shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, take action against, or attempt to intimidate, threaten, coerce, or take action against any employee, county commissioner or official for the purpose of interfering with that person's discretion in the regular discharge of his or her official duties. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.2.20. - Improper influence. 
No county commissioner, official or employee shall influence or attempt to influence any county commissioner, official or employee to violate the standards of ethical conduct set forth in this chapter. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
PART III. - VIOLATIONS 

2.110.3.1. - County employees. 
Employees are subject to any one or combination of the following penalties and actions for a violation of this chapter: 
A.  Written warning or reprimand; 
B.  Suspension without pay; 
C.  Termination of employment; 
D.  Required repayment to the county of any unjust enrichment; 
E.  Referral to the proper criminal authorities if criminal prosecution is warranted. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.3.2. - County officials. 
County officials are subject to any one or combination of the following penalties and actions for a violation of this chapter: 
A.  Written warning, censure, or reprimand; 
B.  Repayment to the county of any unjust enrichment; 
C.  Requested resignation; 
D.  Termination of county officials that are appointed or employed at the pleasure of the board of commissioners. 
E.  Referral to the proper criminal authorities if criminal prosecution is warranted. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.3.3. - County commissioners. 
County commissioners are subject to any one or combination of the following penalties and actions for a violation of this chapter: 
A.  Written warning, censure, or reprimand; 
B.  Repayment to the county of any unjust enrichment; 
C.  Requested resignation. 
D.  Referral to the proper criminal authorities if criminal prosecution is warranted. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.3.4. - Protection for reporting violations. 
No county employee, official or commissioner shall use or threaten to use their position or any power or authority related to that position to discourage, restrain, or interfere with any other person for the purpose of preventing such person from acting in good faith to report or otherwise bring to the attention of the board of ethics information relating to an ethics violation or investigation. No official or county commissioner shall use or threaten to use any official authority or influence to effect any action as a reprisal against anyone who reports, initiates a complaint, or otherwise brings to the attention of the board of ethics information relating to a board investigation or an ethics violation. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
PART IV. - COMPLAINTS AGAINST EMPLOYEES AND COUNTY OFFICIALS OTHER THAN COMMISSIONERS 

2.110.4.1. - Ethics complaints involving county employees and officials other than commissioners. 
A.  Any person may initiate a complaint of a violation of chapter 2.110 against a county employee or county official by submitting to the clerk of the Hall County Commission a written, verified and sworn complaint under penalty of perjury. 
B.  The complaint shall be supported by affidavits based on personal knowledge, shall set forth such facts as would be admissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively that the complainant or the affiant if different that the complainant is competent to testify to the matters stated therein. All documents referred to in the complaint and any affidavit shall be attached to the complaint. 
C.  Upon receipt of the complaint, the clerk of the Hall County Commission shall immediately deliver such complaint to the county attorney and to all parties named in the complaint. 
1.  The county attorney shall review the complaint to determine if it involves a county employee, county commissioner, county official, or any combination thereof. 
2.  If upon review by the county attorney, it is determined that the complaint alleges a violation of Hall County Civil Service Rules by an employee covered under those rules, the matter will be referred to the director of the human resources department for investigation and disposition under such rules. 
D.  In the event that the complaint involves a county commissioner, the county attorney shall forward the complaint directly to the special master as provided under section 2.110.5.1C. herein, who shall follow the requirements set forth in section 2.110.5.1. of this chapter. 
E.  If the complaint applies to county employees or officials, the county attorney (or other designee in the event that the county attorney is unable to review the complaint or is otherwise disqualified) shall determine if the complaint has met all the technical requirements set forth in section 2.110.4.1. of this chapter. If the complaint does not meet the technical requirements set forth in section 2.110.4.1A. of this chapter, the county attorney (or other designee) shall notify the person or persons who filed the complaint and they shall have ten days to correct and re-file the complaint with the county clerk, or board designee. If a complaint satisfies the, technical requirements of section 2.110.4.1., the county attorney (or other designee) shall notify the board of commissioners that a complaint has been filed. 
F.  Upon receipt of a complaint alleging misconduct, the county employee or official against whom the complaint was filed may reply to the complaint within 30 days, unless such time for reply is extended by the board of commissioners upon the showing of good cause. The response of the county employee or official shall be supported by affidavits based on personal knowledge, shall set forth such facts as would be admissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively that the affiant is competent to testify to the matters stated therein. All documents referred to in an affidavit shall be attached to the affidavit. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.4.2. - Hearings by board of commissioners. 
A.  If the board of commissioners, serving in their capacity as the board of ethics, determines that the complaint provides material facts for which a remedy can be given, a formal hearing shall be scheduled to consider the complaint. The board of commissioners shall notify all involved parties in writing of the time and place of the hearing, which hearing shall not be held sooner than ten days following notice of same. If the board of commissioners serving in their capacity as the board of ethics determines that the complaint is without merit, the complaint will be dismissed and all parties will be notified of the dismissal. 
B.  Hearings shall be public, and all parties shall have the opportunity to be heard, to summon witnesses, and to present evidence. Persons alleged to have violated the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to be represented by counsel at their own expense. 
C.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the board of commissioners shall deliberate upon its findings in public and shall determine its findings by majority vote. Findings that a violation of this chapter has occurred shall be based upon clear and convincing evidence. The board of commissioners' decision shall be reduced to writing and provided to the parties; the decision shall be final; provided, however, that the decision shall be subject to review by writ of certiorari to the superior court. 
D.  All ethics complaints involving county employees or officials shall be heard by the board of commissioners unless a commissioner is involved in the complaint, in which case the complaint shall be heard by the special master. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
PART V. - SPECIAL MASTER 

2.110.5.1. - Ethics complaints involving county commissioners. 
A.  Any person may initiate a complaint of a violation of this chapter against a county commissioner by submitting to the clerk of the Hall County Commission a written, verified and sworn complaint under penalty of perjury. The complaint shall be supported by affidavits based on personal knowledge, shall set forth such facts as would be admissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively that the complainant or the affiant if different that the complainant is competent to testify to the matters stated therein. All documents referred to in the complaint or any affidavit shall be attached to the complaint. 
B.  A special master shall be designated by chief judge of the Hall County Superior Court. The special master shall be an attorney other than the county attorney and shall be responsible for carrying out the duties specified herein. The designation of a special master shall be made within 30 days of the effective date of the ethics ordinance. 
C.  Upon receipt of the complaint, the clerk of the Hall County Board of Commissioners shall immediately deliver such complaint to the county attorney (or other person designated by the board of commissioners) and to all parties named in the complaint. The county attorney (or other designee) shall review the complaint to determine if it involves a county employee, county commissioner, county official, or combination thereof. 
D.  In the event that the complaint involves a county commissioner, the county attorney (or other designee) shall immediately forward the complaint directly to the special master who shall review the complaint to determine if it meets the technical requirements set forth in section 2.110.5.1.A. and B. of this chapter. If the complaint fails to meet these requirements, the special master shall notify the person or persons who filed the complaint and they shall have ten days to correct and re-file the complaint with the office of the special master. If the special master determines that material facts for which a remedy can be given exists, he/she shall proceed as provided in section 2.110.5.1.E. below. 
E.  Upon receipt of a copy of the complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, the county commissioner against whom the complaint was filed may reply to the complaint within 30 days unless such time for reply is extended by the special master upon a showing of good cause. The response of the county commissioner shall be supported by affidavits based on personal knowledge, shall set forth such facts as would be admissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively that the affiant is competent to testify to the matters stated therein. All documents referred to in the complaint or any affidavit shall be attached to the complaint. 
F.  If the special master determines that the complaint provides material facts for which a remedy can be given, he/she shall schedule a formal hearing to consider the complaint. The special master shall notify all involved parties in writing of the time and place of the hearing, which hearing shall not be held sooner than ten days following notice of same. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.5.2. - Hearings. 
A.  Hearings shall be public, and all parties shall have the opportunity to be heard, to summon witnesses, and to present evidence. Persons alleged to have violated the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to be represented by counsel at their own expense. 
B.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the special master shall deliberate upon his/her findings in public. Findings that a violation of this chapter has occurred shall be based upon clear and convincing evidence. The special master decision shall be reduced to writing and provided to the parties; the decision shall be final; provided, however, that the decision shall be subject to review by writ of certiorari to the superior court. 
C.  All ethics complaints involving county commissioners shall be heard by the special master. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.5.3. - Unavailability of the special master. 
The chief judge of the Hall County Superior Court shall have the authority to appoint an alternate to replace the special master in the event that he or she cannot fulfill his or her duties as provided in this chapter. The alternate special master shall fulfill the duties of the previous special master for the duration of his/her term. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.5.4. - Qualifications of special master. 
A person is eligible to be appointed as special master if the person: 
A.  Is a member of the State Bar of Georgia in good standing and does not reside in Hall County, Georgia; 
B.  Is not an employee or official of the county or any municipalities within the county and has not been an employee or official of the county during the three months immediately preceding his or her appointment, and is not the spouse, parent, child, or sibling of an employee, official, or county commissioner of the county; 
C.  Is not the employee official or appointee of any political party; 
D.  Does not hold any elected or appointed office and is not a candidate for office of the United States, this state, or the county, and has not held any elected or appointed office during the three months immediately preceding his appointment. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.5.5. - Terms and vacancies. 
Once appointed the special master, will serve for a term of one year or until action on the complaint for which he/she was appointed has been completed or until all complaints filed within the scope of his/her term have been resolved. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.5.6. - Removal of special master. 
The chief judge of the Superior Court may remove a special master on the grounds of neglect of duty or misconduct in office in violation of this chapter. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.5.7. - Compensation. 
The special master shall be compensated at the rate of $200.00 per hour for his/her services. Service for less than a full hour shall be compensated on a pro rata basis. The compensation of the special master may be adjusted by the Hall County Commission from time to time as deemed necessary. The special master shall be authorized to assess all costs, including, but not limited to, the fee of the special master against the losing party or to apportion such assessment as he/she may deem appropriate. The special master shall also have the authority to make a recommendation to the Hall County Commission as to the payment of attorney fees. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.5.8. - Duties and powers. 
The special master shall have the following duties and powers: 
A.  Receive and hear complaints of violations of standards required by this chapter. 
B.  Take such action as provided in this chapter as deemed appropriate because of any violation of this chapter as provided in part III (violations) of the ethics ordinance. 
C.  Perform any other function authorized by this chapter. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.5.9. - Staffing and expenses. 
Subject to budgetary constraints and procedures, the special master shall be provided sufficient meeting space and other reasonable supportive services by the county governing authority to carry out its duties required under this chapter. The board of commissioners shall designate an administration employee who shall serve as the filing clerk for the special master and who shall be authorized to receive all filings before the special master to publish notices of all meetings and to serve as the recording clerk for the special master. The board of commissioners shall provide adequate funding for such purpose. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
2.110.5.10. - Limitation of liability. 
The special master nor any person acting on behalf of the special master shall be liable to any person for any damages arising out of the enforcement or operation of this chapter, except in the case of willful or wanton conduct. This limitation of liability shall apply to the county, the special master, the employees of the special master, and any person acting under the direction of the special master. 
(Res. of 3-25-10, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
CHAPTER 2.120. - CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM ACT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Affirmative action program, ch. 2.90; sexual harassment complaint procedure, § 2.90.350; employee pension and retirement program, ch. 2.100. 

2.120.010. - Act revised in entirety. 
An Act of the General Assembly of Georgia entitled "Hall County Civil Service System Act," approved April 4, 1967 (1967 Georgia Laws, pages 2556—2561), is amended in entirety by deleting all existing provisions and inserting in lieu thereof a new "Hall County Civil Service System Act" to read as follows: 
CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM ACT 
Section I. PURPOSE. 
This action shall be known and may be cited as the "Hall County Civil Service Act". The general purpose of this Act is to establish a Civil Service System for Hall County, Georgia, providing for the recruitment, selection, development, and retention of an effective work force of capable, diligent, and honest employees. The Civil Service System shall include policies for employee hiring and advancement, training, career development and performance evaluation, employee relations, and the disposition of employee grievances, discipline, discharge, and related activities. It shall be the purpose of the Act to establish a Civil Service System in which all personnel matters shall be determined solely on the basis of merit and qualifications, without regard to race, color, sex, age, national origin, disability, or political affiliation. 
Section II. MEMBERSHIP AND EXEMPT INDIVIDUALS. 
There is hereby created and established a civil service system to be known as the Hall County Civil Service System. All Hall County employees, now employed or hereafter employed, and all employees and deputies, now employed or hereafter employed, of the Hall County Sheriff, the Hall County Probate Judge, the Hall County Clerk of Superior Court, and the Hall County Tax Commissioner shall be members of the Hall County Civil Service System. The following shall not be members of the Hall County Civil Service System: elected officers of the County, employees of the Magistrate, Juvenile, State and Superior Courts; the District Attorney; the Hall County Solicitor; members of appointed boards, members of commissions and authorities, part-time employees, temporary employees, interns, and all employees, who as of the date of adoption of this amendment, currently have a contractual employment relationship with Hall County and all employees in the future, who, at the time of hire, by agreement with the hiring authority and with approval of the County Administrator, will enter into a contractual employment agreement instead of the Civil Service System. 
Section III. APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER. 
A.  The Hall County Board of Commissioners shall select an independent, impartial attorney who has been a member of the State Bar of Georgia for at least five (5) years to serve as Administrative Hearing Officer in matters for which a hearing is allowed under Section IV. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall not be a current or former employee of Hall County and shall receive such per diem compensation, if any, as deemed appropriate by the Hall County Board of Commissioners. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Commissioners of Hall County. 
B.  Duties of the Administrative Hearing Officer shall include: 
1.  To conduct hearings and render decisions on charges preferred against persons employed in the several departments and offices included in said Civil Service System and to hear appeals from any employee included in the Civil Service System who claims to have been improperly suspended without pay, demoted, or dismissed. All testimony before the hearing officer shall be transcribed, rendered under oath or affirmation, by oral testimony, depositions, or interrogatories, and with the right of cross examination. All decisions of the hearing officer shall be entered into a written record which shall be open to inspection by the public during regular office hours. The authority of the hearing officer while hearing employee appeals shall be limited to determining if management's decision is supported by the evidence, lies within the lawful discretion of management, and is consistent with County policies and procedures. 
2.  The Administrative Hearing Officer shall keep and maintain an accurate written record of his/her hearings and proceedings and shall be furnished clerical assistance by the governing authority to keep and maintain his/her records. 
3.  The Administrative Hearing Officer shall be authorized to make recommendations as to amendments, additions to, and changes in the Hall County Government Employee's Handbook and Policy Guidelines from time to time, and when said amendments, changes, or additions are adopted by the governing authority of Hall County, said amendments shall have the force of law and be binding on all parties affected by said Civil Service System. 
Section IV. ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER HEARINGS. 
A.  It shall be the duty, function and responsibility of the Administrative Hearing Officer to represent the interest of the public in the improvement of personnel administration and the selection and retention of qualified personnel. All hearings before the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be open and held in offices provided, therefore, by the governing authority of Hall County. The governing authority of said County is hereby authorized to provide necessary clerical assistance to the Administrative Hearing Officer. Said Administrative Hearing Officer shall conduct scheduled hearings, and may hold additional hearings as may be required for the proper discharge of his/her duties. 
B.  In any appeal by an employee, it shall be the burden of the employee to establish and verify the action in question: 
1.  does not substantially comply with sound management principles, consistent with the rules and regulations of the Hall County Civil Service Act; 
2.  is not supported by a preponderance of the evidence; and 
3.  is not reasonable or relative to the severity of the offense. 
Section V. HALL COUNTY DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RESOURCES. 
The duties and functions of the Hall County Director of Human Resources shall be as follows: 
A.  To prepare and submit proposed rules and regulations and standards of the Civil Service System or amendments thereto and thereafter, recommend to the governing authority of Hall County the adoption of rules, regulations, standards and amendments effectuating the Civil Service System established under the provisions of this Act. If the governing authority shall fail to adopt such rules, regulations and standards within 45 days, they shall become of full force and effect unless the governing authority shall conduct public hearing thereon in which event the governing authority may change, modify, or disapprove such rules, regulations, or standards. Such rules and regulations shall include provisions for the establishment and maintenance of job classification and compensation plans, the conduct of 
examinations for appointment under the Civil Service System, the certification of eligible persons, appointment, promotions, transfers, demotions, separations, tenure, service ratings, reinstatements, appeals and such additional regulations as may be deemed to be in the best interest of impartial selection of efficient personnel and improvement of public administration. Such rules and regulations shall prohibit political activity by any employee covered by the Civil Service System or the Administrative Hearing Officer. Said rules and regulations when adopted by the governing authority of Hall County or otherwise becoming effective, shall have the force of law and be binding upon all departments and offices of the County as may be covered under the Hall County Civil Service System Act. 
Section VI. SUSPENSION WITHOUT PAY, DEMOTION, DISMISSAL AND APPEAL. 
A.  No employee of any department or office of the County who is covered under the Hall County Civil Service System Act may be suspended without pay, demoted, or dismissed from employment in said department or office except for good cause and in accordance with the Hall County Government Employee Handbook and Policy Guidelines as approved by the governing authority of Hall County. Any employee who is suspended without pay, demoted, or dismissed shall have the right of appeal pursuant to the terms of the rules and regulations prescribed for appeal. Such appeal shall be heard and determined by the Administrative Hearing Officer within forty-five (45) days of the date that said appeal was filed with the Hall County Department of Human Resources; provided, however, that such employee must file his/her appeal with the Hall County Department of Human Resources in writing within ten (10) days from the date of his/her suspension without pay, demotion or dismissal. The decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be binding upon the governing authority of Hall County, the Hall County Sheriff, the Hall County Probate Judge, the Hall County Clerk of Superior Court, and the Hall County Tax Commissioner as to whether such suspension without pay, demotion, or dismissal was for proper cause. 
B.  All appeals under this Section VI shall be heard by the Administrative Hearing Officer. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing, make evidentiary rulings and prepare final orders of the decision. 
Section VII. EXPENSES OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER. 
All costs for expenses, supplies for the establishment an operation of the Civil Service System and the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be borne by the County and paid out of County funds as a cost of administration. 
Section VIII. EFFECTIVE DATE. 
The provisions of this Act shall become effective July 1, 2015. 
(Res. of 8-8-77, § 1; Code 1991, § 2.48.010; Res. of 6-25-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
CHAPTER 2.130. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS AND REGISTRATION 

 

2.130.010. - Board of elections—Generally. 
The board shall be authorized and empowered to organize itself, may elect from its membership a vice chairperson, shall determine its procedural rules and regulations, adopt by-laws, specify the functions and duties of staff as they relate to the policies, performance and execution of matters within its jurisdiction, and shall otherwise take such actions as are appropriate for the management of its affairs; provided, however, that no such action shall conflict with state law. 
(Res. of 7-26-18(1), § 1) 
2.130.020. - Board of elections—Duties. 
The commissioners shall be authorized to expend public funds to provide the board of elections and registration with such proper and suitable administrative offices and with such clerical assistance and staff to include a director of elections as the commissioners shall deem appropriate. The director of elections shall administratively supervise the "day to day" operations of the elections office and shall report to the county administrator. The director of elections shall assist the board in planning, directing and coordinating the activities required to conduct fair and impartial elections for Hall County in compliance with all applicable laws. The director of elections also shall assist in registering voters, and maintaining accurate records. In addition, but not limited to the foregoing, the director of elections shall assist the board of elections and registration in carrying out the policies, duties and responsibilities of the board as to all other matters within its jurisdiction. In such capacity, the director of elections shall support the board of elections and registration. Compensation for such clerical and administrative staff shall be paid by the commissioners under the personnel system wholly from county funds. This section shall not be construed so as to require the commissioners to expend any funds simply because they are authorized to do so under this Act. 
(Res. of 7-26-18(1), § 2) 
CHAPTER 2.200. - GAINESVILLE-HALL COUNTY LAND BANK 

 

2.200.010. - Purpose, Programs and Functions. 
1.  Georgia Land Bank Act permits any county or counties and at least one city located in each participating county to enter into an intergovernmental contract establishing a land bank, the purpose of which would be to acquire dilapidated, abandoned and tax delinquent properties in order to foster the public purpose of returning property which is nonrevenue generating and nontax-producing to an effective utilization status in order to provide affordable housing, new industry and jobs for the citizens of the state. 
2.  The purpose of this Chapter is to create and empower the land bank to exercise the powers, duties, functions and responsibilities of a land bank under the Georgia Land Bank Act, this Chapter, and the intergovernmental contract entered into between the City of Gainesville, Georgia and Hall County, Georgia. 
3.  The land bank shall endeavor to carry out the powers, duties, functions and responsibilities of a land bank under the Georgia Land Bank Act consistent with this Chapter, including, but not limited to, the power, privilege and authority to acquire, manage and dispose of interests in real property, and to do all other things necessary or convenient to implement the purposes, objectives and provisions of the Georgia Land Bank Act and the powers, duties, functions and responsibilities delegated to the land bank under other laws or executive orders, and the intergovernmental contract between the City of Gainesville, Georgia and Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 6-14-2018, Exh. A) 
2.200.020. - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter, the term: 
1.  Board of directors or board means the board of directors of the Gainesville-Hall County Land Bank. 
2.  Effective date means the latter of the dates upon which the Resolution is approved by the governing body of the City of Gainesville and the governing body of the county. 
3.  Fiscal year means the fiscal year of the land bank, which shall begin on July 1st of each year and end on the following June 30th. 
4.  Georgia Land Bank Act means Section 48-4-100 et seq. of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated as it exists on the effective date, and as it may be hereafter amended or replaced. 
5.  Land bank means the public body corporate and politic established pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Land Bank Act, this Resolution known as the Gainesville-Hall County Land Bank. 
6.  Party or parties means either individually or collectively, as applicable, the county or the City of Gainesville, and any other city, county or consolidated government that joins the land bank after the effective date. 
7.  Person means an individual, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, organization, association, joint venture, trust, government, any governmental entity, authority or agency, or any other legal entity. 
8.  Quorum means a simple majority of the board members then in office. 
9.  Real property means all lands and the buildings thereon, all things permanently attached to land or to the buildings thereon, and any interest existing in, issuing out of, or dependent upon land or the buildings thereon. 
10.  Resolution means the Resolution creating the Gainesville-Hall County Land Bank. 
11.  School district advisor means any non-voting representative to the board appointed by the board of education of a school district for purposes of deliberation. 
12.  State means the State of Georgia. 
(Res. of 6-14-2018, Exh. A) 
2.200.030 - Creation of Land Bank 
1.  Creation and legal status of land bank. The land bank is established as a separate legal entity and public body corporate, to be known as the "Gainesville-Hall County Land Bank," for the purposes of acting as a land bank under the Georgia Land Bank Act and implementing and administering this Chapter. 
2.  By-laws, and policies and procedures. The board shall adopt by-laws consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and the Land Bank Act within 30 days after the board is appointed. The board shall adopt policies and procedures consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and the Georgia Land Bank Act within 90 days after the board is appointed and prior to acquiring any real property or other assets. 
3.  Principal office. The principal office and regular meeting location of the land bank shall be at a location within the geographical boundaries of the county, as determined by the board. Special called meetings may be held outside the geographical boundaries of the county, as determined by the board. 
4.  Title to land bank assets. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the land bank shall have title to all of its real property, and no party shall have an ownership interest in real property owned by the land bank. 
5.  Tax-exempt status. The parties intend the activities of the land bank to be governmental functions carried out by an instrumentality or political subdivision of the state as described in Section 115 of Title 26 of the United States Internal Revenue Code, or any corresponding provisions of any future tax code. The parties also intend the activities of the land bank to be governmental functions carried out by a political subdivision of this state, exempt to the extent provided under state law from taxation by this state, including, but not limited to, ad valorem property tax exemption pursuant to Section 48-5-41 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or corresponding provisions of future state tax laws. 
6.  Waiver of special assessments. Upon the request of the land bank and for the purposes of fostering the goals and objectives of the land bank, any party, at its option and in its discretion, may extinguish special assessments levied by the party prior to the date of acquisition by the land bank against real property owned by the land bank, or may exempt real property owned by the land bank from the imposition of special assessments. 
7.  Compliance with law. The land bank shall comply with all federal and state laws, rules, regulations and orders applicable to this Chapter. 
8.  Obligations of the land bank. The land bank shall not obligate any party nor shall any obligation of the land bank constitute an obligation of any party. 
9.  No third-party beneficiaries. Except as otherwise specifically provided, this Chapter does not create in any person, other than a party, and is not intended to create by implication or otherwise, any direct or indirect benefit, obligation, duty, promise, right to be indemnified (such as contractually, legally, equitably or by implication), right to be subrogated to any party's rights under this Chapter, or any other right or benefit. 
10.  Additional parties to land bank. At any time subsequent to the effective date, in accordance with the Georgia Land Bank Act, an additional city located in whole or in part within the county, or a consolidated government, or an additional county and at least one participating city located in that county may join the lank bank created by this Chapter upon completion of the following requirements: 
A.  Unanimous approval of the board as it exists before the addition of the applicable city within the county, additional county and one or more city located in that additional county, or consolidated government; and 
B.  Amendment of this Chapter and the execution of an amendment to any existing intergovernmental contract between the parties and the applicable city within the county, additional county and one or more cities located in that additional county, or consolidated government. 
(Res. of 6-14-2018, Exh. A) 
2.200.040 - Board, Executive Director and Staff 
1.  Board composition. The land bank shall be governed by a board of directors that shall be appointed within 90 calendar days of the effective date. Each member shall serve at the pleasure of his/her appointing party and shall serve without compensation. The members shall be residents of their respective appointing party and may be employees of the parties. 
2.  The board shall consist of the following members: 
A.  Two members appointed by the county board of commissioners, one of which will serve for an initial term of two years, and one of which will serve for an initial term of four years. 
i. __________________ (Two-year term) 
ii. __________________ (Four-year term) 
B.  Three members appointed by the City of Gainesville mayor and confirmed by the city council, one of which will serve for an initial term of two years, and two of which will serve for an initial term of four years. 
i. __________________ (Two-year term) 
ii. __________________ (Four-year term) 
iii. _________________ (Four-year term) 
C.  If other municipalities located wholly or partially within the county or an additional county and city located in that additional county join the land bank after the effective date, the county and the City of Gainesville shall then amend this Chapter, including Section 2.200.040(2) regarding the composition of the land bank board as necessary to accommodate the additional municipal partner but in keeping with the Georgia Land Bank Act. Any adjustments to the board composition shall result in an odd number ranging between 5 and eleven members. 
3.  Term of office. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the members of the board appointed under Section 2.200.040(2) shall be appointed for staggered terms as indicated above. After the initial terms set forth in Section 2.200.040(2)(A) and 2.200.040(2)(B) above, all subsequent board appointments and re-appointments shall be for terms of four years. The first term of the initial board members shall commence on the date of the first board meeting. Each board member at the election of his or her appointing entity may serve an unlimited number of terms. In the event state law is amended to provide for different terms or composition of the board, then the board as it exists at the time of such amendment shall be authorized to take any action required such that the board complies with any requirements of state law. Board members serve at the pleasure of their appointing party and may be removed by the appointing party at any time with or without cause, or may be removed pursuant to any other provision of state law. 
4.  Vacancies. A vacancy among the members of the board appointed under Section 2.200.040(2), whether caused by the death, resignation, or removal of a board member, shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the balance of the unexpired term. Such vacancy shall be filled as soon as practicable. 
5.  Participation by school districts. Each school district containing within its geographical boundaries real property owned by the land bank shall be given advance notice of each board meeting and may designate a school district advisor to the board, who shall be a non-voting member. 
6.  Meetings. The board shall conduct its first meeting no later than 30 calendar days after the board is appointed. The board shall meet at least annually and hold such other meetings at the place, date and time as the board shall determine. All meetings of the board shall comply with the provisions of Sections 50-14-1 et seq. of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, including, but not limited to, the provisions requiring public notice of the time, place and date of the meetings. 
7.  Records of meetings. The board shall maintain a written record of each meeting. Meeting summaries and minutes shall be kept in accordance with Sections 50-14-1 et seq. and 50-18-70 et seq. of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
8.  Quorum and voting. Presence for both quorum and voting at a board meeting may include electronic communication by which such member of the board is both seen and heard by the members of the board and any members of the public at the meeting. All actions of the board shall be approved by the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the board present and voting; provided, however, that no action of the board shall be authorized on the following matters unless approved by a majority of the entire board membership: 
A.  Adoption of by-laws and other rules and regulations for conduct of the land bank's business; 
B.  Hiring or firing of any employee or contractor of the land bank. This function may, by a majority vote of the total board membership, be delegated to a specific officer or committee of the land bank, under such terms and conditions and to the extent that the board may specify; 
C.  The incurring of debt; 
D.  Adoption or amendment of the annual budget; 
E.  Sale, lease, encumbrance, or alienation of real property, improvements or personal property with a value of more than $50,000.00; and 
F.  Discharge and extinguishment of liens or claims for real property taxes owed to one or more of the parties on real property acquired by the land bank. 
9.  Board responsibilities. The board shall have all powers necessary to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this Chapter and the Georgia Land Bank Act, including, but not limited to, the powers set forth in Sections 48-4-100 and 48-4-112 of the Georgia Land Bank Act. 
10.  Fiduciary duty. The members of the board are under a fiduciary duty to conduct the activities and affairs of the land bank in the best interests of the land bank, including the safekeeping and use of all land bank monies and assets. The members of the board shall discharge their duties in good faith, with the care an ordinarily prudent person in a like position would exercise under similar circumstances. 
11.  Compensation. The members of the board shall receive no compensation for the performance of their duties. A board member may engage in private or public employment, or in a profession or business, including employment by a party to this agreement, except to the extent prohibited by state law. The land bank may reimburse members of the board for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the discharge of their official duties on behalf of the land bank. 
12.  Employees. The board may employ an executive director, its own counsel and legal staff, and such technical experts, other agents, and employees, permanent or temporary, as it may require and may determine the qualifications and fix the compensation and benefits of those persons. The services of such staff may also be retained pursuant to contracts or agreements with any or all parties. 
A.  An executive director selected and retained by the land bank board shall administer the land bank in accordance with the operating budget adopted by the board, general policy guidelines established by the board, other applicable governmental procedures and policies, and this Chapter. The executive director shall be responsible for the day-to-day operations of the land bank, the control, management, and oversight of the land bank's functions, and supervision of all land bank employees. All terms and conditions of the executive director's length of service shall be specified in a written contract between the executive director and the board, provided that the executive director shall serve at the pleasure of the board. The board may delegate to the executive director any powers or duties it considers proper, under such terms, conditions and to the extent that the board may specify. 
B.  The staff of the land bank, whether employed by the land bank or retained through contracts with the parties, should be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in urban planning, community development, real estate, law, finance or related areas. 
13.  Ethics. The board shall adopt ethics policies governing the conduct of board members, officers, appointees, employees and independent contractors. The policies shall be no less stringent than those provided for public officers and employees under Section 45-10-1 et seq. of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or corresponding provisions of future state code of ethics. 
14.  Conflicts of interest. Members of the board and officers, appointees, employees and independent contractors of the land bank shall be deemed to be public officials for the purposes of Section 45-10-20 et seq. of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or corresponding provisions of future state conflicts of interest law, and are subject to any other applicable law with respect to conflicts of interest. In addition, members of the board, and all officers, agents, appointees, employees and independent contractors shall comply with Section 48-4-111 (b) of the Georgia Land Bank Act, as it may be amended from time to time. The land bank shall establish policies and procedures requiring the disclosure of relationships that may give rise to a conflict of interest. The board shall require that any member of the board with a direct or indirect interest in any matter before the board disclose the member's interest to the board before the board takes any action on the matter. 
(Res. of 6-14-2018, Exh. A) 
2.200.050. - General Powers of Land Bank. 
1.  General powers under Land Bank Act. The land bank may exercise all of the powers, duties, functions and responsibilities of a land bank under the Georgia Land Bank Act to the extent authorized by the Georgia Land Bank Act and any other state law; including but not limited to: 
A.  To adopt, amend, and repeal bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business; 
B.  To sue and be sued in its own name and plead and be impleaded in all civil actions, including, but not limited to, actions to clear title to property of the land bank; 
C.  To adopt a seal and to alter the same at pleasure; 
D.  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real or personal property of every kind and character, or any interest therein, in furtherance of the public purposes of the land bank; 
E.  To acquire, accept, or retain equitable interests, security interests, or other interests in any real property, personal property, or fixtures by loan agreement, note, mortgage, deed to secure debt, trust deed, security agreement, assignment, pledge, conveyance, contract, lien, loan agreement, or other consensual transfer in order to secure credit extended by the land bank; 
F.  To borrow from private lenders, from municipal corporations, counties, or consolidated governments, from the state, or from federal government funds, as may be necessary, for the operation and work of the land bank; 
G.  To borrow money to further or carry out its public purpose and to execute notes, other obligations, leases, trust indentures, trust agreements, agreements for the sale of its notes or other obligations, loan agreements, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds, security agreements, assignments, and such other agreements or instruments as may be necessary or desirable, in the judgment of the land bank, to evidence and to provide security for such borrowing; 
H.  To issue notes or other obligations of the land bank and use the proceeds thereof for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any land bank projects and otherwise to further or carry out the public purpose of the land bank and to pay all costs of the land bank incidental to, or necessary and appropriate to, furthering or carrying out such purpose; 
I.  To make application directly or indirectly to any federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or to any other source, whether public or private, for loans, grants, guarantees, or other financial assistance in furtherance of the land bank's public purpose and to accept and use the same upon such terms and conditions as are prescribed by such federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or other source; 
J.  To enter into agreements with the federal government or any agency thereof to use the facilities or services of the federal government or any agency thereof in order to further or carry out the public purposes of the land bank; 
K.  The land bank shall have no authority to lend money to a nongovernmental entity; provided, however, that the land bank may administer funds in the form of a loan to a nongovernmental entity when such funds are received from federal, state, and local government entities for the purpose of making such loans; provided, further, that only such transactions which are fully consistent with the purpose of the land bank shall be permitted. In those transactions, a land bank may extend credit to any person, corporation, partnership, whether limited or general, or other entity for the costs of any land bank projects which credit may be evidenced or secured by loan agreements, notes, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds, security agreements, assignments, or such other instruments, or by rentals, revenues, fees, or charges, upon such terms and conditions as the land bank shall determine to be reasonable in connection with such extension of credit, including provision for the establishment and maintenance of reserve funds, and, in the exercise of powers granted by this article in connection with any land bank projects the land bank shall have the right and power to require the inclusion in any such loan agreement, note, mortgage, deed to secure debt, trust deed, security agreement, assignment, or other instrument of such provisions or requirements for guaranty of any obligations, insurance, construction, use, operation, maintenance, and financing of a project, and such other terms and conditions, as the land bank may deem necessary or desirable; 
L.  As security for repayment of any notes or other obligations of the land bank, to pledge, mortgage, convey, assign, hypothecate, or otherwise encumber any property of the land bank, including, but not limited to, real property, fixtures, personal property, and revenues or other funds, and to execute any lease, trust indenture, trust agreement, agreement for the sale of the land bank's notes or other obligations, loan agreement, mortgage, deed to secure debt, trust deed, security agreement, assignment, or other agreement or instrument as may be necessary or desirable, in the judgment of the land bank, to secure any such notes or other obligations, which instruments or agreements may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the land bank upon default in any obligation of the land bank, either in payment of principal, premium, if any, or interest or in the performance of any term or condition contained in any such agreement or instrument. The state, on behalf of itself and each county, municipal corporation, political subdivision, or taxing district therein, waives any right it or such county, municipal corporation, political subdivision, or taxing district may have to prevent the forced sale or foreclosure of any property of the land bank upon such default and agrees that any agreement or instrument encumbering such property may be foreclosed in accordance with law and the terms thereof; 
M.  To receive and administer gifts, grants, and devices of money and property of any kind and to administer trusts; 
N.  To use any real property, personal property, or fixtures or any interest therein or to rent or lease such property to or from others or make contracts with respect to the use thereof, or to sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, or otherwise dispose of or grant options for any such property in any manner as it deems to be in the best interests of the land bank and the public purpose thereof; 
O.  To procure insurance or guarantees from the general assembly or federal government of the payments of any debts or parts thereof incurred by the land bank and to pay premiums in connection therewith; 
P.  To enter into contracts and other instruments necessary, incidental, or convenient to the performance of its duties and the exercise of its powers, including, but not limited to, intergovernmental contracts for the joint exercise of powers under this article. Intergovernmental contracts with municipal corporations, counties, or consolidated governments may include contracts for the performance of services by municipal corporations, counties, or consolidated governments on behalf of the land bank or by the land bank on behalf of municipal corporations, counties, or consolidated governments, whether or not such counties, consolidated governments, or municipal corporations are located inside or outside the geographical boundaries of the land bank members; 
Q.  To procure insurance against losses in connection with the real property, assets, or activities of the land bank; 
R.  To accept and issue deeds in its name, including without limitation the acceptance of real property in accordance with the provisions of subsection (f) of Section 9-6-19 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; 
S.  To finance by loan, grant, lease, or otherwise, refinance, construct, erect, assemble, purchase, acquire, own, repair, remodel, rehabilitate, modify, maintain, extend, improve, install, sell, equip, expand, add to, operate, or manage real property or rights or interests in property, and to pay the costs of any such project from the proceeds of loans by persons, corporations, partnerships, whether limited or general, or other entities, all of which the land bank is authorized to receive, accept, and use; 
T.  To fix, charge, and collect rents, fees, and charges for the use of real property of the land bank and for services provided by the land bank; 
U.  To grant or acquire a license, easement, lease, as lessor or lessee, or option with respect to real property of the land bank; 
V.  To enter into partnerships, joint ventures, and other collaborative relationships with municipalities and other public and private entities for the ownership, management, development, and disposition of real property; 
W.  To hold title to real property for purposes of establishing contracts with nonprofit community land trusts, including, but not limited to, long-term lease contracts; 
X.  To organize and reorganize the executive, administrative, clerical, and other departments of the land bank and to fix the duties, powers, and compensation of all employees, agents, and consultants of the land bank; and 
Y.  To do all other things necessary or convenient to achieve the objectives and purposes of the land bank or other laws that relate to the purposes and responsibilities of the land bank. 
2.  The exercise of a specific power by a land bank may be limited or withdrawn by a land bank member when the land bank is acting with respect to real property within the jurisdiction of such member. Procedures for the exercise of such limitation or withdrawal of power shall be provided in the intergovernmental contract. 
3.  Tax limitation. The land bank shall not levy any type of tax or special assessment. 
4.  Eminent domain prohibited. The land bank shall neither possess nor exercise the power of eminent domain. 
5.  Limitation on political activities. The land bank shall not spend any public funds on political activities. Subject to the foregoing, this section is not intended to prohibit the land bank from engaging in activities authorized by applicable law. 
6.  No Waiver of Governmental Immunity. The Parties agree that no provision of the Ordinance is intended, nor shall it be construed, as a waiver by any Party of any governmental immunity provided under any applicable law. 
7.  Non-discrimination. The land bank shall comply with all applicable law prohibiting discrimination. 
A.  The land bank shall not provide services in a manner that discriminates against an individual because of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, sexual orientation, height, weight, marital status, partisan considerations, disability or genetic information. 
B.  The land bank shall not fail or refuse to hire, recruit, promote, demote, discharge or otherwise discriminate against an individual with respect to employment, compensation, or a term, condition or privilege of employment because of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, sexual orientation, height, weight, marital status, partisan considerations, disability or genetic information. 
(Res. of 6-14-2018, Exh. A) 
2.200.060. - Specific Powers of the Land Bank. 
1.  Acquisition of real property. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter or under the Georgia Land Bank Act, the land bank shall have the following powers with respect to acquisition or transfer of property: 
A.  The land bank shall hold in its own name all real property acquired by the land bank without regard to the identity of the transferor of the property. 
B.  The land bank shall maintain and make available for public review and inspection an inventory of all real property held by the land bank. 
C.  The land bank may convey, exchange, sell, transfer, lease as lessor, grant, and mortgage as mortgagor any and all interests in, upon, or to real property of the land bank in some form and by such method as determined by the board to be in the best interest of the land bank. 
D.  The land bank shall determine the terms, conditions, form, and substance of consideration necessary to convey, exchange, sell, transfer, lease as lessor, grant, and mortgage as mortgagor any interests in, upon, or to real property. 
E.  Consideration may take the form of monetary payments and secured financial obligations, covenants, and conditions related to the present and future use of the property, contractual commitments of the transferee and such other forms of consideration as determined by the board to be in the best interest of the land bank. 
F.  The board shall determine and state in the land bank policies and procedures the general terms and conditions for consideration to be received by the land bank for the transfer of real property and interests in real property. 
G.  The disposition of property by the land bank shall not be governed or controlled by any regulations or laws of the parties unless specifically provided in the applicable intergovernmental contract. Land bank real property shall be conveyed in accordance with the Georgia Land Bank Act and according to criteria determined in the discretion of the board and contained in the policies and procedures adopted by the board. The following constitutes the hierarchical ranking of priorities for the use of real property conveyed by the land bank, including but not limited to: 
i.  Elimination of slum and blight particularly within residential neighborhoods; 
ii.  Use for quality, affordable housing for the community workforce; 
iii.  Use for purely public spaces and places; 
iv.  Use as conservation areas; 
v.  Use for retail, commercial, and industrial activities; and 
vi.  Such other uses and in such hierarchical order as determined by the board, with the consent of the parties. 
H.  Hall County's neighborhood stabilization program (NSP) and community home investment program (CHIP) is under the state department of community affair's administration and since land banking is not one of the approved NSP or CHIP activities, the county's NSP and CHIP properties would not be eligible for holding or administration by the land bank. 
2.  Tax delinquent real property. Subject to the notice provided to school districts pursuant to Section 48-4-112(a) of the Georgia Land Bank Act, and by resolution of the board subject to the requirements of Section 2.200.040.8F of this Chapter, the land bank may discharge and extinguish real property tax liens and claims owed to one or more of the parties that encumber real property owned by the land bank. The land bank may bid on and acquire title to real property in judicial and non-judicial tax enforcement proceedings in accordance with Section 48-4-112 of the Georgia Land Bank Act or such other general, special or local laws as may be applicable to the property tax enforcement procedures of the parties. The land bank may negotiate the acquisition of tax executions in accordance with Section 48-4-112 of the Georgia Land Bank Act or such other general, special or local laws as may be applicable to the property tax enforcement procedures of the parties. 
3.  Civil action to protect land bank real property. The land bank may institute a civil action to prevent, restrain or enjoin the waste of or unlawful removal of any real property held by the land bank. 
4.  Environmental contamination. If the land bank has reason to believe that real property held by the land bank may be the site of environmental contamination, the land bank shall provide the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources with any information in the possession of the land bank that suggests that the real property may be the site of environmental contamination. The land bank shall cooperate with the state department of natural resources with regard to any request made or action taken by the department of natural resources, including remediation to the extent financially feasible. 
5.  Structure of conveyances. Transactions shall be structured in a manner that permits the land bank to enforce contractual agreements, covenants and the provisions of any subordinate financing held by the land bank pertaining to development and use of the real property. 
6.  Disposition of proceeds. Any proceeds from the sale or transfer of real property by the land bank shall be retained, expended, or transferred by the land bank as determined by the board in the best interests of the land bank and in accordance with the Georgia Land Bank Act. 
(Res. of 6-14-2018, Exh. A) 
2.200.070. - Books, Records, and Finances. 
1.  Land bank records. The land bank shall keep and maintain at the principal office of the land bank all documents and records of the land bank. The records of the land bank, which shall be available to the parties and the public, shall include, but not be limited to, a copy of this Chapter along with any amendments to the Chapter, and any intergovernmental contract regarding the land bank between the county and any city that enters into the contract, along with any amendments to the contract, the real property inventory required by § 48-4-109(b) of the Georgia Land Bank Act, all minutes of meetings of the board and any committee of the board, annual budget with any amendments thereto, and policies and procedures containing the general terms and conditions for consideration to be received by the land bank for transfer of real property and any interest therein. The records and documents shall be maintained until the termination of this Chapter and/or intergovernmental contract regarding the land bank, and shall be delivered to any successor entity. 
2.  Financial statements and reports. The land bank shall cause to be prepared, at the land bank's expense, audited financial statements (balance sheet, statement of revenue and expense, statement of cash flows and changes in fund balance) on an annual basis. Such financial statements shall be prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and accompanied by a written opinion of an independent certified public accounting firm. 
3.  Annual budget. The board, or its designee upon the board's discretion, shall prepare annually a budget for the land bank. The board shall review and approve a budget for the land bank immediately preceding each fiscal year. 
4.  Deposits and investments. The land bank shall deposit and invest funds of the land bank, not otherwise employed in carrying out the purposes of the land bank, in accordance with an investment policy established by the board consistent with laws and regulations regarding investment of public funds. 
5.  Disbursements. Disbursements of funds shall be in accordance with guidelines established by the board. 
6.  Performance objectives. Each fiscal year, the board or other individual designated by the board shall prepare objectives for the land bank's performance that shall be approved by the board. 
(Res. of 6-14-2018, Exh. A) 
2.200.080. - Funding and Expenditures. 
1.  Budget contributions. The parties may contribute to the annual land bank budget in such manner as approved by the parties. 
2.  Tax allocation. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-4-110(c) of the Georgia Land Bank Act, 75 percent of the real property taxes collected on real property, exclusive of any state or school district ad valorem tax, conveyed by the land bank after the effective date shall be remitted to the land bank commencing with the first taxable year following the date of conveyance and shall continue for a period of five years. 
3.  Management of funds. The land bank board, or its designee, shall be designated the fiscal agent of the land bank's account established for the management of sales proceeds, monetary contributions made by the parties, and other land bank funds. Standard accounting procedures shall be used in the management of the accounts. 
4.  Authorized expenditures. The land bank shall in its sole discretion and within its budget expend such funds as necessary to carry out the powers, duties, functions and responsibilities of a land bank under the Georgia Land Bank Act consistent with this Chapter. 
(Res. of 6-14-2018, Exh. A) 
2.200.090. - Duration of Chapter. 
1.  Duration. This Chapter shall commence on the effective date and shall remain in full force and effect until such time as the land bank has been terminated by the parties. Any party may withdraw from the land bank upon six months prior notice in writing to the land bank and all parties as provided under Section 10.01 of the intergovernmental contract. Upon the effective withdrawal of any party to the intergovernmental contract, the party so withdrawing will no longer have any rights to funds or other assets of the land bank. The land bank shall not automatically dissolve upon the withdrawal of one or more parties except that no city may maintain the existence of a land bank if the county in which the city is located withdraws from the land bank, and no county may maintain the existence of a land bank if the single city that is both located within that county and a party withdraws from the land bank. 
2.  Termination. The land bank shall be terminated by: 
A.  Agreement by all parties; 
B.  By affirmative resolution approved by two thirds of the membership of the board and in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-4-111 of the Georgia Land Bank Act, or 
C.  By withdrawal of one or more parties such that only one party remains. 
3.  Disposition upon termination. As soon as possible after termination, the land bank shall finish its affairs as follows: 
A.  All of the land bank's debts, liabilities, and obligations to its creditors and all expenses incurred in connection with the termination of the land bank and distribution of its assets shall be paid first; 
B.  The remaining real property and personal property owned by the land bank, if any, shall be distributed to any successor entity, subject to approval by the parties. In the event that no successor entity exists, the remaining real property and personal property, and other assets of the land bank, shall become assets of the municipality or county in which the real property is located, unless provided otherwise in any applicable intergovernmental contracts. To the extent the land bank owns cash or other account assets, said cash and other assets shall be distributed equitably, as approved by a majority of the board of directors; 
C.  Responsibility for any outstanding liability not capable of being paid as provided in Paragraph 3 A and B of this Section shall be assigned to one or more of the parties or third party transferees as agreed upon by the board of the land bank. In the absence of agreement by the board, liability associated the responsibility of each property shall be with the party in which the property is located. 
D.  Any general liabilities not associated with a particular property and not capable of being paid as provided in this Section shall be shared equally between the parties upon dissolution of the land bank. 
(Res. of 6-14-2018, Exh. A) 
2.200.100. - Miscellaneous. 
1.  Notices. Any and all correspondence or notices required, permitted or provided for under this Chapter to be delivered to any party shall be sent that party by first-class mail. All such written notices, including any notice of withdrawal, shall be sent to each other party's signatory, or that signatory's successor. All correspondence shall be considered delivered to a party as of the date such notice is deposited with sufficient postage with the United States Postal Service. Any notice of withdrawal shall be sent via certified mail, return receipt requested. 
A.  Notices to Hall County shall be sent to: 
Hall County Board of Commissioners 
P. O. Drawer 1435 
Gainesville, Georgia, 30503-1435. 
B.  Notices to the City of Gainesville shall be sent to: 
City of Gainesville 
P. O. Box 2496 
Gainesville, Georgia, 30503-2496. 
C.  Notices to any additional city parties shall be sent in accordance with the terms of amendments to the agreement as adopted by the additional city parties. 
D.  Notices to the land bank shall be sent to the land bank principal office. 
E.  All notices sent to the parties to the land bank shall be binding unless said address is changed in writing. 
2.  Interpretation of Chapter. The parties intend that this Chapter shall be construed liberally to effectuate the intent and purposes of this Chapter and the legislative intent and purposes of the Georgia Land Bank Act. The statement of legislative intent and purpose shall be complete and independent authorization for the performance of each and every act and thing necessary or useful to the consummation of said purposes authorized by this Chapter and the Georgia Land Bank Act. All powers granted to the land bank under this Chapter and the Georgia Land Bank Act shall be broadly interpreted to effectuate the intent and purposes and not as a limitation of powers. 
3.  Severability of provisions. If any provision of this Chapter, or its application to any person, party or circumstance, is invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this Chapter and the application of that provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected but will be enforced to the extent permitted by law. 
4.  Governing law. The Resolution made and entered into in the state and shall in all respects be interpreted, enforced and governed under the laws of the state without regard to the doctrines of conflict of laws. The language of all parts of this Chapter shall in all cases be construed as a whole according to its plain and fair meaning. 
5.  Captions and headings. The captions, headings, and titles in this Chapter are intended for the convenience of the reader and are not intended to have any substantive meaning or to be interpreted as part of this Chapter. 
6.  Terminology. All terms and words used in this Chapter, regardless of the number or gender in which they are used, are deemed to include any other number and any other gender as the context may require. 
7.  Cross-references. References in this Chapter to any Section unless specifically noted otherwise, shall include all sections, subsections, and paragraphs in the Chapter, unless specifically noted. 
8.  Jurisdiction and venue. In the event of any dispute between the parties over the meaning, interpretation or implementation of the terms of this Chapter, the matter under dispute, unless resolved between the parties, shall be submitted to the superior courts of the county. 
9.  Amendments to Georgia Land Bank Act. The land bank and board shall have any powers authorized pursuant to any amendments, replacements or substitutions to the Land Bank Act, unless this Chapter is amended to provide otherwise. 
(Res. of 6-14-2018, Exh. A) 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE[1] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration and personnel, tit. 2; purchasing and contracts for parks and recreation purposes, § 2.50.030; code of ethics, ch. 2.110; business occupation tax, ch. 5.10; excise tax on wholesale sale of malt beverages and wine, § 5.30.200. 

CHAPTER 3.10. - COUNTY CONTRACTS[2] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Code of ethics, ch. 2.110; solid waste contracts, § 8.60.050. 

3.10.010. - Contract for services. 
The county, by and through the board of commissioners, may contract with individuals, private firms and corporations to provide services for the county and any special districts within the county. 
(Res. of 2-12-79, § 1; Code 1991, § 3.04.010) 
3.10.020. - Contract for use of county buildings and equipment by private individuals or companies. 
The county, by and through the board of commissioners, may contract for individuals, private firms and corporations to use county buildings and equipment so long as they are being used to provide services to the citizens of the county. 
(Res. of 2-12-79, § 2; Code 1991, § 3.04.020) 
CHAPTER 3.20. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY BONDS AND PROGRAMS 

 

3.20.010. - County to pass on revenue issues. 
The county shall pass on all revenue issues which are filed with the Gainesville and county development authority and which finance projects located in the county and outside the city limits of Gainesville. 
(Res. of 11-12-84, § 1; Code 1991, § 3.08.010) 
3.20.020. - Public hearings required. 
The authority or one or more of its members as selected by the authority shall hold joint public hearings for itself and the county on proposed revenue issues and projects. 
(Res. of 11-12-84, § 2; Code 1991, § 3.08.020) 
3.20.030. - Public hearings; participation of commission chairman. 
The chairman of the county commission, or his designee, in addition to the respective government's regular representatives, shall have the opportunity to participate in the holding of public hearings. 
(Res. of 11-12-84, § 3; Code 1991, § 3.08.030) 
3.20.040. - Public hearings; time and place, notification of commission chairman. 
The hearings shall be held no earlier than 5:00 p.m. in the grand jury room of the county courthouse or a conference room in the joint city-county administration building. The authority shall notify the chairman of the county commission in writing five days prior to the holding of any such hearing in order to enable him to be present or to designate someone to attend in his place. 
(Res. of 11-12-84, § 4; Code 1991, § 3.08.040) 
3.20.050. - Public hearings; advertisement, conduct. 
The authority shall be responsible for advertising the public hearings and shall also be responsible for conducting the hearings in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order. (It is also the authority's responsibility to coordinate either with the county sheriff in order to reserve the grand jury room for such hearings or the city-county planning department in order to reserve a conference room in the joint administration building.) 
(Res. of 11-12-84, § 5; Code 1991, § 3.08.050) 
3.20.060. - Submittal of project to county commission. 
Following the public hearings, the projects which are physically located in the county and outside of the city limits of Gainesville shall be submitted to the county commission for consideration. 
(Res. of 11-12-84, § 6; Code 1991, § 3.08.060) 
3.20.070. - Informational letter. 
The authority shall provide the county commission with an informational letter and excerpts from the minutes of the authority's public hearing pertaining to the project under consideration no less than five days prior to the matter being considered by the county commission. This requirement shall also apply to any specially called meetings of the county. 
(Res. of 11-12-84, § 7; Code 1991, § 3.08.070) 
3.20.080. - County approval required. 
In the event the county shall vote not to approve an issue or project, the authority shall not proceed with such issue or project. 
(Res. of 11-12-84, § 8; Code 1991, § 3.08.080) 
CHAPTER 3.30. - GROSS PREMIUM TAX ON INSURANCE[3] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Business licenses and regulations, tit. 5. 

3.30.010. - Levied; amount. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual tax upon each insurer doing insurance business within the unincorporated area of the county, in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2), (3), (4) and (5). Gross direct premiums shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Res. of 8-8-83, § 1; Code 1991, § 3.12.010) 
CHAPTER 3.40. - EXCISE TAX ON ROOMS, LODGINGS AND ACCOMMODATIONS[4] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Business licenses and regulations, tit. 5. 

3.40.010. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below, except when the context clearly indicates a contrary meaning: 
County means the area contained within the boundaries of unincorporated Hall County and required to pay business or occupation taxes to the county for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value excluding only those areas within the corporate limits of any municipality as provided by Georgia law. 
Due date means from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio, hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, private club or vacation home containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. Such term does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention center, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person, who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, or use, or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the county, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for more than 30 consecutive days. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, [including] the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the county is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Vacation home means a residential structure as defined in section 17.20.1305 of this Code. 
(Res. of 4-8-2010, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— Res. of Apr. 8, 2010, § 1(Exh. A), deleted former § 3.40.010, and enacted a new § 3.40.010 as set out herein. Former § 3.40.010 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 
3.40.020. - Tax levied; amount. 
There is set and levied on each occupant of a guest room of any hotel located within unincorporated Hall County, a tax in the amount of five percent of the rent for such occupancy. The tax authorized by this section shall apply to the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations during the first 30 days of continuous occupancy and shall not apply to charges imposed for any continuous occupancy thereafter. 
(Res. of 4-8-2010, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— Res. of Apr. 8, 2010, § 1(Exh. A), deleted former § 3.40.020, and enacted a new § 3.40.020 as set out herein. Former § 3.40.020 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
3.40.030. - Effective date; limit on aggregate taxes. 
The tax herein imposed shall be paid upon any occupancy occurring on or after March 25, 1985, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease or other agreement entered into prior to such date. No tax shall be levied under this section for the use of meeting rooms, and the aggregate of taxes levied upon the rent for such occupancy shall not exceed eight percent of such rent. 
(Res. of 3-25-85, § 2; Code 1991, § 3.16.030) 
3.40.040. - Collection. 
It shall be the duty of every operator of a hotel located within the county to collect the tax on occupants hereinabove imposed. 
(Res. of 3-25-85, § 3; Code 1991, § 3.16.040) 
3.40.050. - Exemptions. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no tax shall be imposed hereunder on accommodations furnished to a permanent resident, furnished for use as meeting rooms, or furnished for a period of one or more days for the use by the state or local government offices or employees traveling on official business. 
B.  The tax authorized by this chapter shall not apply to charges made for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 3; Code 1991, § 3.16.050; Res. of 9-26-02(1), § 3) 
3.40.060. - Registration required; procedure. 
A.  Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the county shall immediately register the business with the county business license director, on a form provided by the license director for such purpose. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date this section becomes effective; but such grace period for registration after the effective date of the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of such tax on and after the date of imposition thereof. The required registration hereunder shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business, and such other information as would facilitate the collection of the tax by the county business license director. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person, by a member or partner in case of ownership by an association or partnership, or by an officer in the case of ownership by a corporation. 
B.  A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
(Res. of 3-25-85, § 5; Code 1991, § 3.16.060) 
3.40.070. - Issuance of certificate of authority. 
Upon the registration of an operator as hereinabove provided, the business license director shall issue to such operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax on occupants. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it relates. 
(Res. of 3-25-85, § 6; Code 1991, § 3.16.070) 
3.40.080. - Payment dates; information required on return. 
All taxes levied by this section [chapter] shall be due and payable to the business license director monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the business license director. 
(Res. of 3-25-85, § 7; Code 1991, § 3.16.080) 
3.40.090. - Reimbursements for tax collectors. 
Operators collecting the tax levied hereunder shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and payment of the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the state sales and use tax, 1978 Ga. Laws, pages 309, 628, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Res. of 3-25-85, § 8; Code 1991, § 3.16.090) 
3.40.100. - Failure to file; tax estimate; notice of determination. 
If any hotel operator fails to file a return as required under the provisions of this section [chapter], the business license director shall make an estimate of the amount of gross rentals of such operator which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in which the operator failed to file the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the business license director. 
A.  Notice of determination. The business license director or his designated representative shall give to the hotel operator written notice of his determination as herein provided. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the business license director. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
B.  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination made hereunder shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(Res. of 3-25-85, § 9; Code 1991, § 3.16.100) 
3.40.110. - Records. 
Each hotel operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this section [chapter] shall keep for a period of at least three years all records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers setting forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the business license director may require. 
(Res. of 3-25-85, § 10; Code 1991, § 3.16.110) 
3.40.120. - Authority of business license director; examination of records. 
The business license director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter for the collection of the tax herein imposed, and in so doing shall have the following powers: 
A.  To examine, or authorize the examination of, the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms to persons subject to the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid; 
B.  To require the filing of reports by any person or persons having in his or their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax herein levied. 
(Res. of 3-25-85, § 11; Code 1991, § 3.16.120) 
3.40.130. - Action for collection. 
At any time within three years after any tax or any portion of such tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, the county attorney may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the county to collect such amount due together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(Res. of 3-25-85, § 12; Code 1991, § 3.16.130) 
3.40.140. - Liability of purchaser of business for payment of tax. 
If any hotel operator becomes liable for any amount required to be paid by this chapter and subsequent thereto sells out his business or quits the business, the successors or assignees of such operator shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount due. In the event the purchaser of the business fails to withhold the required amount, he shall become personally liable therefor to the extent of the purchase price. 
(Res. of 3-25-85, § 13; Code 1991, § 3.16.140) 
13.40.145. - Proceeds of tax. 
The proceeds of the hotel motel tax will be used in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(Res. of 2-22-07, § 1) 
3.40.150. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 3-25-85, § 14; Code 1991, § 3.16.150; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 3.50. - SALES AND USE TAX[5] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Business licenses and regulations, tit. 5. 

3.50.010. - Imposed. 
The local option sales tax is imposed pursuant to Ga. Code Ann. sec. 91A-4603 (O.C.G.A. § 48-8-83) as amended, effective January 1, 1980. 
(Res. of 12-21-79; Code 1991, § 3.20.010) 
CHAPTER 3.60. - AD VALOREM TAX REFUND CLAIMS 

 

3.60.010. - Delegation of authority for processing claims. 
The Hall County Board of Commissioners under the authority granted in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380(e) does hereby delegate to the Hall County Board of Tax Assessors the authority to process ad valorem tax refund claims which are based on an obvious error and which do not exceed the sum of $1,000.00. The effective date of this section is January 27, 1992. 
(Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 3.22.010) 
CHAPTER 3.70. - PRISON CONSTRUCTION FUND 

 

3.70.010. - State statutes adopted by reference. 
The county adopts all provisions in chapter 21, title 15 of the Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 15-21-1 et seq.] relating to payment and disposition of fines and forfeitures, so as to provide funds for construction, operating and staffing county jails, county correctional institutions, and county detention facilities, as passed by the General Assembly of Georgia, and signed by the Governor of Georgia, including any subsequent amendments thereto, unless specifically rejected by subsequent resolution herein. A copy of said act as codified with amendments is attached to the resolution codified in this section as exhibit A and made a part hereof. 
(Res. of 8-28-89, § 1; Code 1991, § 3.24.010; Res. of 2-8-96, § 1) 
CHAPTER 3.80. - TRANSFER OF TAX EXECUTIONS 

 

3.80.010. - Scope. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-3-19(d) and subsequent to a public hearing held on June 27, 1996, the board of commissioners of Hall County has approved property for exemption from the transfer of a tax execution(s) based upon a determination that such execution is in the best interest of the public. 
(Res. of 6-27-96, § 1) 
3.80.020. - Exemptions. 
1.  No execution shall be transferred where a valid payment agreement between the taxpayer and the county exists and payments under such agreement are current. 
2.  No execution shall be transferred where the subject property is entitled to a senior citizen or veterans' exemption. 
3.  No discounts as to the principal amount or interest then due shall be authorized on any execution transferred by the Hall County Tax Commissioner. 
4.  No execution shall be transferred by the Hall County Tax Commissioner prior to 120 days after the last date upon which payment of the tax is due. 
(Res. of 6-27-96, § 1) 
3.80.030. - Effective date. 
The effective date of this chapter shall be July 1, 1996. 
(Res. of 6-27-96, § 1) 
CHAPTER 3.90. - MOBILE HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME DECALS 

 

3.90.010. - Definitions. 
The same definitions set out in section 15.10.120 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Res. of 12-9-99, § 1) 
3.90.020. - Decal required for mobile home and/or manufactured home. 
A.  All persons owning a mobile home and/or manufactured home based in Hall County on January 1 of each year shall obtain from the Hall County Tax Commissioner a decal before April 1, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492. This requirement pertains to all mobile homes and/or manufactured homes including those exempt from taxation by homestead exemption or other provisions of state law. 
B.  Such decals shall be affixed to the mobile homes and/or manufactured homes in such a manner as to cause them to be easily visible for inspection. 
C.  Owners of manufactured homes locating in Hall County after January 1 of any year shall be required to report their manufactured homes to the office of the tax commissioner within ten working days. 
(Res. of 12-9-99, § 1; Res. of 2-8-2018(1), § 1) 
3.90.030. - Reports by mobile home and/or manufactured home park operators. 
A.  Every owner and operator of a mobile home and/or manufactured home park is required to give the Hall County Tax Commissioner an inventory of all mobile homes and/or manufactured homes based in the park as of October 1 of each year. This shall be done no later than October 15 of each year. The Hall County Tax Commissioner will make available an inventory of records as of October 1. 
B.  Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile home and/or manufactured home park is required to report any mobile home and/or manufactured home removal from the park prior to said home being removed, if known to the park manager, operator or owner. 
C.  Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile home and/or manufactured home park shall furnish to the Hall County Tax Commissioner an updated lot map of each park, and any changes shall be reported by January 1 of each year. 
D.  Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile home and/or manufactured home is required to notify the Hall County Tax Commissioner of any change in ownership or of name of any mobile home and/or manufactured home park within 30 days of such change. 
(Res. of 12-9-99, § 1) 
3.90.040. - Failure to attach and display decal; penalties; venue for prosecution. 
A.  Failure to attach and display on a mobile home and/or manufactured home the decal as required by section 3.90.020 herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. However, the violation shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00, nor more than $200.00, except that upon proof of purchase of a decal prior to the date of the issuance of the citation, the fine shall be $25.00. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to move or transport any mobile home and/or manufactured home which is required to and which does not have attached and displaced thereon the decal provided for in this chapter. 
C.  Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of section 3.90.040(B) as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 12-9-99, § 1; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 3.100. - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE 

 

3.100.010. - Short title. 
Chapter 3.100 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, shall be known and may be cited as "development impact fees." 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.020. - Authority. 
A.  This chapter has been prepared and adopted by the Board of Commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, in accordance with the authority provided by Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 3 of the constitution of the State of Georgia, the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. 36-71-1, et. seq. as amended), and such other laws as may apply to the provision of public facilities and the power to charge fees for such facilities. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to limit the power of Hall County, Georgia, to use any other legal methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this chapter. 
C.  This chapter shall apply to all areas under the regulatory control and authority of Hall County, Georgia, and such other areas as may be included by intergovernmental agreement. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.030. - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to impose impact fees, as hereinafter set forth, for certain public facilities, as hereinafter defined. 
B.  It is also the purpose of this chapter to ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development in Hall County and to provide that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve them. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.040. - Intent. 
This chapter is intended to implement and be consistent with the Hall County Comprehensive Plan, as it may be adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. 50-8-1 et seq.) and the Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs and amended from time to time. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.050. - Rules of construction. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall be construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Hall County. 
B.  Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this chapter: 
1.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between words or phrases as used in this chapter and as used in other codes, regulations or laws of Hall County, such difference shall not affect the meaning or implication of such words or phrases as used in this chapter. 
2.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
3.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
4.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
5.  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other legal or similar entity. 
6.  The conjunction "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
7.  The conjunction "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
8.  The use of "either/or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly and not in combination. 
9.  The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
10.  The article, section, and paragraph headings and enumerations used in this chapter are included solely for convenience and shall not affect the interpretation of this chapter. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.060. - Definitions. 
A.  As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below. 
1.  Administrator means the County Administrator of Hall County, Georgia, or the County Administrator's designee, who is hereby charged with implementation and enforcement of this Chapter. 
2.  Board of commissioners means the Board of Commissioners of Hall County, Georgia. 
3.  Building permit is the permit required for new construction, completion of construction, or an interior finish pursuant to the applicable building code. As used herein, the term shall not include permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure provided there is no increase in the demand placed on those public facilities as defined herein. 
4.  Capital improvement means an improvement with a useful life of ten years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of a public facility. 
5.  Capital improvements element means that portion of the Hall County Comprehensive Plan that sets out projected needs for system improvements during the planning horizon established therein, which provides a schedule that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and which provides a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement, as most recently adopted or amended by the Board of Commissioners. 
6.  Commencement of construction, for private development, means initiation of physical construction activities as authorized by a development permit and leading to completion of a foundation inspection or other initial inspection and approval by a public official charged with such duties; and for public projects, means expenditure or encumbrance of any funds, whether they be development impact fee funds or not, for a public facilities project, or advertising of bids to undertake a public facilities project. 
7.  Completion of construction means the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy by the appropriate governmental jurisdiction. The date of completion is the date on which such certificate is issued. 
8.  Comprehensive plan means the Hall County Plan or Planning Elements as adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. 50-8-1 et seq.) and the Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs. 
9.  County means Hall County, a legal subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
10.  Day means a calendar day, unless otherwise specifically identified as a "work" day or other designation when used in the text. 
11.  Developer means any person or legal entity undertaking development. 
12.  Development means any action which creates demand on or need for public facilities, as defined herein, and includes any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use; any change in use of land, a building, or structure; or the connection of any building or structure to a public utility. 
13.  Development approval means written authorization, such as issuance of a building permit, approval for grading or site development, or other forms of official action required by local law or regulation prior to commencement of construction. 
14.  Development impact fee means the payment of money imposed upon and paid by new development as a condition of development approval as its proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve it. 
15.  Encumber means to legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of Hall County, Georgia. 
16.  Excess capacity means that portion of the capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities which is beyond that necessary to provide adequate service to existing development at the adopted level-of-service standard. 
17.  Feepayor means that person or entity who pays a development impact fee, or his legal successor in interest when the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees which is required by this chapter has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. 
18.  Individual assessment determination means a finding by the administrator that an individual assessment study does or does not meet the requirements for such a study as established by this chapter or, if the requirements are met, the fee calculated therefrom. 
19.  Individual assessment study means the engineering, financial, or economic documentation prepared by a feepayor or applicant to allow individual determination of a development impact fee other than by use of the applicable fee schedule. 
20.  Level of service means a measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for specified public facilities as established by Hall County, Georgia in terms of demand to capacity ratios or the comfort and convenience of use or service of such public facilities or both. 
21.  Present value means the current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions, or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money, as calculated using accepted methods of financial analysis for determination of "net present value." 
22.  Project means a single improvement or set of interrelated improvements undertaken together within a finite time period at a specific location. With regard to land development, a project may be identified as those construction activities authorized collectively by a building permit or tap-on authorization, or for an interrelated collection of buildings and common public facilities such as a residential subdivision or an office park. 
23.  Project improvements means site specific improvements or facilities that are planned, designed, or built to provide service for a specific development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of that project only, and that are not "system" improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a project improvement or a "system" improvement, and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement. A project improvement may provide no more than incidental service or facility capacity to persons other than users or occupants of the particular project they serve. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities and approved for public funding by Hall County, Georgia shall be considered a project improvement. 
24.  Property owner means that person or entity that holds legal title to property. 
25.  Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements that is reasonably and fairly related to the service demands and needs of a project. 
26.  Public facilities mean: 
a.  Parks, open space, and recreation areas and related facilities; 
b.  Public safety facilities, including police, fire, emergency medical, and rescue facilities; 
c.  Libraries and related facilities. 
27.  Service area means a geographically defined area as designated in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan in which a defined set of public facilities provide or are proposed to provide service to existing or future development. 
28.  System improvement costs means costs incurred to provide public facilities capacity to serve new growth and development, including the costs of planning, design, engineering, construction, land acquisition, and land improvement for the construction or reconstruction of facility improvements or expansions. System improvement costs include the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvements element, and administrative costs of up to three percent of the total of all other costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued to finance system improvements, but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
29.  System improvements means capital improvements that are public facilities designed to provide service to more than one project or to the community at large, in contrast to "project" improvements. 
30.  Unit of development means the standard incremental measure of land development activity for a specific type of land use upon which the rate of demand for public service and facilities is based, such as a dwelling unit, square foot of floor area, motel room, etc. 
31.  Unused or excess impact fee means any individual impact fee payment from which no amount of money or only a portion thereof has been encumbered or expended according to the requirements of this Chapter. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.070. - Imposition of development impact fees. 
Any person who after the effective date of the development impact fee resolution engages in development shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this chapter. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.080. - Construction not subject to impact fees. 
A.  The following projects and construction activities do not constitute "development" as defined in this chapter, and are therefore not subject to the imposition of impact fees: 
1.  Rebuilding no more than the same number of units of development as defined in this chapter that were removed by demolition, or destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, on the same lot or property. 
2.  Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not result in an increase in the number of units of development. 
3.  Replacing a residential housing unit with another housing unit on the same lot or property. 
4.  Placing a temporary construction or sales office on a lot during the period of construction or build-out of a development project. 
5.  Constructing a unit that does not increase the number of housing units. 
6.  Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses and intended for the personal use of the residents, such as a deck or patio, satellite antenna, pet enclosure, or private recreational facilities such as a swimming pool. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.090. - Grandfathered projects. 
A.  Any building for which a valid and complete application for a building permit has been received prior to the effective date of the development impact fee resolution may proceed without payment of fees otherwise imposed by this Chapter, provided that: 
1.  All fees and development exactions in effect prior to the effective date of the development impact fee resolution shall be or have been paid in full; 
2.  Said construction shall be commenced, pursued and completed within the time established by the building permit, or within 180 days, whichever is later. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit or has been issued prior to the effective date of the development impact fee resolution shall not be subject to development impact fees so long as the permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.100. - Method of calculation. 
A.  Any development impact fee imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed a project's proportionate share of the cost of system improvements, shall be calculated on the basis of the establishment of service areas, and shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities that are the same for existing development as for new growth and development, as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
B.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the calculation of impact fees shall be net of the present value of ad valorem tax or other revenues, if any, which: 
1.  Are reasonably expected to be generated by new development; 
2.  Are reasonably expected on the basis of historical funding patterns be made available to pay for system improvements of the same category and in the same service area for which an impact fee is imposed. 
C.  The method of calculating impact fees for public facilities under this chapter shall be maintained for public inspection as a part of the official records of Hall County, Georgia, and may be amended from time to time by official act. 
D.  In addition to the cost of new or expanded system improvements needed to be built to serve new development, the cost basis of a development impact fee shall also include the proportionate cost of existing system improvements to the extent that such public facilities have excess service capacity and new development will be served by such facilities. 
E.  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs, as set forth in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.110. - Fee schedule. 
A.  Payment of a development impact fee pursuant to the fee schedule attached hereto as Attachment A for a property located outside of the City of Gainesville or the fee schedule attached hereto as Attachment B for a property located inside of the City of Gainesville, shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has been made includes two or more buildings, structures or other land uses in any combination, including two or more uses within a building or structure, the total development impact fee shall be the sum of the fees for each and every building, structure, or use, including each and every use within a building or structure. 
C.  In the event that an applicant contends that the land use category of the proposed development is not shown on the fee schedule or fits within a different category, then: 
1.  The administrator in his sole discretion shall make a determination as to the appropriate land use designation and the appropriate development impact fee. 
2.  In making such determination, the administrator may require such additional information from the applicant as necessary to form a logical fee determination relative to the impact fees shown on the adopted fee schedule. 
3.  If a land use designation is not in a category contained in this chapter, then an appropriate new category may be added by the administrator and an appropriate fee established under the county's current impact fee methodology, subject to annual confirmation by the board of commissioners. 
4.  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the board of commissioners within 30 days of the administrator's decision. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.120. - Timing of assessment. 
A.  Development impact fees shall be assessed and paid at the time of application for a building permit or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy at the option of the applicant. 
B.  If the final use of a building cannot be determined at the time of the initial building permit, the administrator shall have the authority to assess a development impact fee based on the most likely use of the building, and shall adjust the fee in accordance with the actual use prior to issuance of an interior finishes permit or approval of a certificate of occupancy. 
C.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any future change in demand for public facilities in excess of the average demand anticipated at the time of issuance of the building permit or the certificate of occupancy shall require the assessment of such additional fee as would otherwise have been due. Future changes in demand may result from a change in the land use category of the occupant of the building or property, the expansion of a building or use on a property that results in an increase in the units of development (as defined herein), or the subsequent discovery of facts unknown or misrepresented at the time of issuance of the building permit. 
(Res. of 6-9-11, § 1) 
Editor's note— Res. of June 9, 2011, § 1, repealed the former § 3.100.120, and enacted a new § 3.100.120 as set out herein. Former § 3.100.120 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Res. of April 10, 2003, § 1. 
3.100.130. - Individual assessment determinations. 
Individual assessments of development impact fees may be established as follows: 
A.  At their option, an applicant for development approval may petition the Administrator for an individual assessment determination of development impact fees due for their project. 
B.  In the event that an applicant elects an individual assessment, the applicant shall submit an individual assessment study. Each individual assessment study shall: 
1.  Be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source of engineering or planning data; 
2.  Be based on actual, relevant, and credible studies or surveys of facility demand conducted in Hall County or its region, carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to accepted methodology; 
3.  Provide any other written specifications as may be reasonably required by the Administrator to substantiate the individual assessment determination. 
C.  The administrator in his sole discretion shall determine whether the content of an individual assessment study satisfies the requirements of this chapter. A negative determination by the administrator may be appealed to the board of commissioners for a final decision. 
D.  Any fee approved as an individual assessment determination shall have standing for 180 days following the date of approval. Payment of such an approved individual assessment determination shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.140. - Timing of fee payment. 
A.  All development impact fees shall be collected no later than the time of issuance of a building permit, except that for a single-family detached house the feepayor may delay payment of the impact fee until prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
B.  For projects not involving issuance of a building permit, all development impact fees shall be collected at the time of approval of the development permit or such other authorization to commence construction or to commence use of a property. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.150. - Fee certification. 
Upon application to the Administrator, a developer may receive a certified schedule of development impact fees for categories of development or a certified fee for a particular project, as applicable. Such certified schedule or fee shall establish the development impact fee due for a period of 180 days from the date of certification, even if new or revised rate schedules are adopted in the interim. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.160. - Maintenance of funds. 
A.  All development impact fee funds collected for future expenditure on construction or expansion of facilities pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained in one or more interest-bearing accounts until encumbered or expended. Restrictions on the investment of development impact fee funds shall be the same that apply to investment of all such funds generally. 
B.  Separate accounting records shall be maintained for each category of system improvements within each service area wherein fees are collected. 
C.  Interest earned on development impact fees shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact fees under this chapter. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.170. - Expenditures; restrictions. 
A.  Expenditures from the impact fee accounts shall be made only for the category of system improvements within the service area for which the development impact fee was assessed and collected. 
B.  Except as provided below, development impact fees shall not be expended for any purpose that does not involve building or expanding system improvements that create additional capacity available to serve new growth and development. 
C.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the following shall be considered general revenue of the system, and may be expended accordingly: 
1.  Impact fees collected to recover the present value of excess capacity in existing system improvements; 
2.  Any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by Hall County for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee; 
3.  Any portion of the impact fee (but not to exceed three percent of the total) collected and allocated by the administrator for administration of the impact fee chapter, and such additional amount assessed for repayment of the cost of preparing the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.180. - Annual report. 
A.  The administrator shall prepare an annual report to the board of commissioners as part of the annual audit describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and used during the preceding fiscal year by category of public facility and service area. 
B.  Such annual report shall be prepared following guidelines of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), and submitted to DCA in conjunction with the annual update of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.190. - Credits. 
When eligible, fee payers shall be entitled to a credit against impact fees otherwise due and owing under the circumstances and in the manner set forth in this chapter. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.200. - Credits; restrictions 
A. Except as provided in paragraph B. below, no credit shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of the development impact fee resolution. 
B. If the value of any construction, dedication of land, or contribution of money made by a developer (or his predecessor in title or interest) for system improvements that are included for impact fee funding in the Capital Improvements Element of the Hall County Comprehensive Plan, prior to the effective date of the development impact fee resolution, is greater than the impact fee that would otherwise have been paid for the project, then the developer shall be entitled to a credit for such excess construction, dedication, or funding. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, any credit due under this section shall not constitute a liability of Hall County, and shall accrue to the developer to the extent of impact fees assessed for new development for the same category of system improvements within the same service area. 
C. In no event shall credit be given for project improvements. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.210. - Granting of credits. 
A.  Credit shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, contribution or dedication of land, or payment of money by a developer or his predecessor in title or interest for system improvements of the same public facilities category and in the same service area for which a development impact fee is imposed, provided that: 
1.  The system improvement is included for impact fee funding in the Capital Improvements Element of the Hall County Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  The amount of the credit does not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding, as shown in the capital improvements element; 
3.  The board of commissioners shall have explicitly approved said improvement, contribution, dedication, or payment and the value thereof prior to its construction, dedication, or transfer. 
B.  The credit allowed pursuant to this Article shall not exceed the impact fee due for such system improvement unless a greater credit is allowed under a private agreement executed under the provisions of this chapter. In the event that a developer enters into such a private agreement with the Hall County, Georgia to construct, fund, or contribute system improvements such that the amount of the credit created is in excess of the impact fee which would otherwise have been paid for the development project, the developer shall be reimbursed for such excess construction, funding, or contribution from impact fees paid by other development located in the service area which is benefitted by such improvements. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.220. - Guidelines for credit valuation. 
Credits under this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: 
A.  For the construction of any system improvements by a developer or his predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the county, the developer must present evidence satisfactory to the board of commissioners of the original cost of the improvement, from which present value may be calculated. 
B.  For any contribution or dedication of land for system improvements by a developer or his predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the county, the original value of the land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the validated tax appraisal at the time of dedication, from which present value may be calculated. 
C.  For any contribution of capital equipment that qualifies as a system improvement by a developer or his predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the county, the value shall be the original cost to the developer of the capital equipment or the cost that Hall County, Georgia would normally pay for such equipment, whichever is less. 
D.  For any contribution of money for system improvements from a developer or his predecessor in title or interest accepted by the county, the original value of the money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution, from which present value may be calculated. 
E.  In making a present value calculation, the discount rate used shall be the net of the interest returned on a State of Georgia, AA rated or better municipal bond less average annual inflation, or such other discount rate as the board of commissioners in its sole discretion may deem appropriate. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.230. - Credits; application 
A.  Credits shall be given only upon written request of the developer to the administrator. A developer must present written evidence satisfactory to the administrator at or before the time of development impact fee assessment. 
B.  The administrator, in his or her sole discretion, shall review all claims for credits and make determinations regarding the allowance of any claimed credit, and the value of any allowed credit. 
C.  Any credit approved by the administrator shall be acknowledged in writing by the administrator and calculated at the time of impact fee assessment. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.240. - Credits; abandoned building permits. 
In the event that an impact fee is paid but the building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the present value of the impact fee against future impact fees for the same parcel of land, upon submission of adequate evidence to the administrator that an impact fee was received by the county, the amount paid, and that the building permit was abandoned. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.250. - Eligibility for refund. 
A.  Upon the request of a feepayor regarding a property on which a development impact fee has been paid, the development impact fee shall be refunded if: 
1.  Capacity is available in the public facilities for which the fee was collected but service is permanently denied; 
2.  The development impact fee has not been encumbered or construction has not been commenced within six years after the date the fee was collected. 
3.  In determining whether development impact fees have been encumbered, development impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.260. - Notice of entitlement to a refund. 
When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber the development impact fees, the administrator shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the feepayor who paid the development impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval or to a successor in interest who has given adequate notice to the administrator of a legal transfer or assignment of the right to entitlement to a refund and who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published in Hall County within 30 days after the expiration of the six year period after the date that the development impact fee was collected and shall contain a heading "notice of entitlement to development impact fee refund." No refund shall be made for a period of 30 days from the date of said publication. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.270. - Filing a request for a refund. 
All requests for refunds shall be made in writing to the administrator within one year of the time the refund becomes payable or within one year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. Failure to make a claim for a refund within said time period shall result in a waiver of all claims to said funds. Such funds together with the accrued interest thereon shall be transferred to the general revenue account of the Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.280. - Payment of refunds. 
A.  All refunds shall be made to the feepayor within 60 days after it is determined by the administrator that a sufficient proof of claim for refund has been made, but no sooner than 30 days after publication of the notice of entitlement to the refund. 
B.  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess impact fee collected. 
C.  In no event shall a feepayor be entitled to a refund for impact fees assessed and paid to recover the cost of excess capacity in existing system improvements, or for that portion of the fee payment that was assessed for administration of the impact fee or for recovery of the cost of preparation of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.290. - Private agreements; authorized. 
A. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the voluntary mutual approval of a private contractual agreement between the county and any developer or property owner or group of developers and/or property owners in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements and providing for credits or reimbursement for system improvement costs incurred by a developer, including interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvement costs which are used or shared by more than one development project, provided that: 
1.  The system improvements are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the Hall County Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  The amount of any credit granted shall not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.300. - Private agreements; provisions. 
A.  A private contractual agreement for system improvements may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions which: 
1.  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of impact fees, provided that any such agreement shall allow the county to assess additional development impact fees after the completion of construction according to schedules set forth in this chapter. 
2.  Permit construction of, dedication of property for, or other in-kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which development impact fees would be imposed in the same service area in lieu of or with a credit against applicable development impact fees. 
3.  Permit a schedule and method of payment appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this chapter, provided that acceptable security is posted ensuring payment of the development impact fees. Forms of security that may be acceptable include a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit from a bank authorized to do business within the State of Georgia, a surety bond, or lien or mortgage on lands to be covered by the building permit. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.310. - Private agreements; procedure. 
A.  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the administrator for review, negotiation, and submission to the board of commissioners. 
B.  Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the Board of Commissioners of Hall County, Georgia prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
C.  Any such agreement shall provide for execution by mortgagees, lien holders or contract purchasers in addition to the landowner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the clerk of superior court for recording. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.320. - Amendments. 
A.  This chapter may be amended from time to time as deemed appropriate or desirable. Any such amendment to this chapter, including an amendment to the development impact fee schedule attached hereto as Appendix A, shall follow the procedures for adoption of a Resolution imposing a development impact fee as set out and required under the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. 36-71-1 et seq. as amended). 
B.  No less often than once each year, as part of its annual capital improvement program process or as part of any other planning process, the board of commissioners may review the capital improvements element and calculation of development impact fees, and may amend the capital improvements element, fee calculation methodology, or development impact fee schedule as deemed appropriate and necessary. 
C.  Interim amendments to the impact fee schedule regarding the establishment of new land use categories by the administrator under section 3.100.110(C)(3) are expressly authorized, and shall be confirmed by the board of commissioners when this chapter is subsequently amended. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.330. - Capital improvements element update. 
A.  No less often than once each year, the board of commissioners may update the capital improvements element so as to maintain, at a minimum, a schedule of system improvements for each of the subsequent five years. The capital improvements element update may include changes in funding sources or project costs, or changes in the list or scheduling of projects. The capital improvements element update shall be submitted to the regional development center for their review, in accordance with the minimum standards and procedures for local comprehensive planning as adopted by the Board of Community Affairs of the state of georgia. 
B.  In conducting a periodic review of the capital improvements element and calculation of development impact fees, the board of commissioners may determine to amend the capital improvements element. Amendments to the capital improvements element shall comply with the procedural requirements of the minimum standards and procedures for local comprehensive planning as adopted by the Board of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia, and shall be required for any change to the capital improvements element that would: 
1.  Redefine growth projections, land development assumptions, or goals or objectives that would affect system improvements proposed in the capital improvements element; 
2.  Add new public facility categories for impact fee funding, modify impact fee service areas or make changes to system improvement projects 
3.  Change service levels established for an existing impact fee service area; 
4.  Make any other revisions needed to keep the capital improvements element up to date. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.340. - Continuation of validity. 
Failure of the board of commissioners to undertake a periodic review shall result in the continued use and application of the latest adopted development impact fee schedule and other data. The failure to periodically review such data shall not invalidate this chapter. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.350. - Eligibility to file an appeal. 
Only applicants or feepayors who have already been assessed an impact fee by the county or who have already received a written determination of refund or credit amount shall be entitled to an appeal. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.360. - Appeals process. 
A.  The aggrieved applicant or feepayor must file a written appeal with the administrator within 15 days of the receipt of written determination of the amount of the development impact fee due, or entitlement to an amount of a refund or credit, such written appeal to be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the appeal and the relief sought. 
B.  Within 15 days after receipt of the appeal, the administrator shall make a written decision with respect to the appeal, such decision to be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the determination. 
C.  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the board of commissioners within 30 days of the administrator's decision. The board of commissioners shall thereafter establish a reasonable date and time for a hearing on the appeal, give written notice thereof to the applicant or feepayor, and decide the issue within a reasonable time following the hearing. Any party making an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.370. - Payment of impact fee during appeal. 
A.  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to the issuance of development approval. 
B.  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a development approval, and by making such payment shall not be estopped from exercising this right of appeal or receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been collected in excess. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.380. - Enforcement authority. 
A.  The enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the administrator and such personnel as the administrator may designate from time to time. 
B.  The administrator shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this chapter and shall have the right to issue cease and desist orders and citations for violations. Refusal of written notice of violation under this chapter shall constitute legal notice of service. 
C.  The administrator may suspend any building permit or withhold the issuance of other development permits if the provisions of this chapter have been violated by the developer or the owner or their assigns. 
D.  For any violation, the administrator shall have the authority to issue a citation. The citation shall be in the form of a written official notice issued in person or by certified mail to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person performing the work. The receipt of a citation shall require that corrective action be taken within 30 working days unless otherwise extended at the discretion of the administrator. If the required corrective action is not taken within the time allowed, the Administrator may use any available civil or criminal remedies to secure compliance, including revoking a permit. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
3.100.390. - Violations. 
A.  Knowingly furnishing false information on any matter relating to the administration of this chapter shall constitute an actionable violation. 
B.  Proceeding with construction of a project that is not consistent with the project's impact fee assessment, such as the use category claimed or units of development indicated, shall constitute an actionable violation. 
C.  Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. However, in addition to or in lieu of criminal prosecution, the board of commissioners shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil court to enforce this chapter, including recourse to such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of this chapter and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the implementation of specific corrective actions. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
3.100.400. - Incorporation by reference of Georgia Law. 
It is the intent of the board of commissioners that the development impact fee resolution of Hall County, Georgia comply with the terms and provisions of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. 36-71-1 et seq. as amended). Therefore, said Chapter 36-71 of the Official Code of Georgia is incorporated by reference into this chapter. To the extent that any provision of this chapter is inconsistent with the provisions of said Chapter 36-71, the latter shall control. Furthermore, to the extent that this chapter is silent as to any provision of said Chapter 36-71 that is otherwise deemed mandatory by law, such provision shall control and shall be binding upon the county. 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1) 
Attachment A. Fee Schedule-Hall County Outside of Gainesville 

 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1; Res. of 7-14-05, § 1) 
Attachment B. Fee Schedule-Inside City of Gainesville 

 
(Res. of 4-10-03, § 1; Res. of 7-14-05, § 1) 
CHAPTER 3.110 - ENERGY EXCISE TAX 

 

3.110.010. - Energy excise tax definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the terms: "dealer", "energy", "local sales and use tax" and "purchaser" shall have the same meanings as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
(Res. of 10-11-12, § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.110.020. - Imposition; rate; remitting; recovery; liabilities. 
In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110 et seq., there is imposed within the territorial limits of the special district created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-111, an excise tax on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy when such sale, use, storage or consumption would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(Res. of 10-11-12, § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.110.030. - Excise tax rate; phase-in. 
A.  Such excise tax shall be levied and collected by the governing authority of Hall County pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-112 and 48-13-114 and as provided in this section. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the rate of such excise tax shall be phased in over a four-year period as follows: 
1.  For the period commencing January 1, 2013, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2013, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 25 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
2.  For the period commencing January 1, 2014, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2014, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 50 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
3.  For the period commencing January 1, 2015, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2015, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 75 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; and 
4.  On or after January 1, 2016, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 100 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
C.  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2 (c)(4), if a project of regional significance under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3(92) is started in the special district, it shall not be subject to the phase-in period contained in paragraphs 1., 2., and 3. of subsection B. of this section, and the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy in connection therewith shall be subject to the rate specified in paragraph 4 of subsection B. of this section notwithstanding the January 1, 2016 limitation in that paragraph 4. 
D.  1.  Following such initial imposition during the phase-in time period, on or after January 1, 2016, the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the governing authority of Hall County, Georgia shall be directed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(d). Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the special district, but in no event more than two percent. 
2.  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district decreases from two percent to one percent, the rate of the excise tax under this chapter shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
3.  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district increases from one percent to two percent, the rate of the excise tax under this chapter shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
(Res. of 10-11-12, § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.110.040. - Imposition; remittance; recovery. 
A.  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c), such excise tax shall be: 
1.  Imposed only at the time sales and use tax on the sale or use of such energy would have been due and payable under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-30 but for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
2.  Due and payable in the same manner as would be required under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., except as other provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; 
3.  A debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts; 
4.  Remitted to the governing authority of Hall County by the dealer collecting such excise tax; and 
5.  A liability of the dealer at the applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of excise taxes collected from purchasers, whichever is greater. 
(Res. of 10-11-12, § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.110.050. - Exemption certificates. 
A.  The governing authority of Hall County, Georgia, or the collecting officer appointed under section 3.110.080 of this chapter, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the special district and to ascertain whether such a purchaser has completed a uniform exemption certificate provided from the website of the Georgia Department of Revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this chapter. 
B.  An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates. No penalty shall attach to such provider for failure to collect the excise tax under this chapter when it has properly collected and remitted local sales and use taxes on such energy where the purchaser would have qualified for the uniform exemption certificate but failed to apply for such certificate or where the purchaser received such certificate but failed to file it with the energy provider. 
(Res. of 10-11-12, § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.110.060. - Commencement of collections. 
The excise tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall become effective on January 1, 2013, and shall be due and payable to the governing authority of Hall County, Georgia, monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month and each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross sales and purchases arising from all sales and purchases taxable under this chapter during the preceding calendar month. 
(Res. of 10-11-12, § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.110.070. - Distribution and expenditure of proceeds. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114, the excise tax proceeds shall be paid into the general fund of Hall County, Georgia, and shall not be subject to any use or expenditure requirements provided for under any of the local sales and use taxes but shall be authorized to be expended in the same manner as otherwise would have been required under such local sales and use taxes or may be expended for any lawful purpose as determined by the governing authority of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 10-11-12, § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.110.080. - Administrative provisions; audits; examinations; collecting officer. 
A.  The governing authority of Hall County, Georgia, shall be authorized to designate a collecting officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this chapter. 
B.  The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this chapter, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealers collecting and remitting the excise tax. The collecting officer, or the designee of the collecting officer, is specifically authorized to examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, or other facilities of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax under this chapter. 
C.  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-118, as part of the audit report required under O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this chapter. 
(Res. of 10-11-12, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Title 4 - ANIMALS[1] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of 9-24-2009, § 1(Exh. A), deleted former Title 4, §§ 4.10.010—4.10.500, and enacted a new Title 4 as set out herein. The former Title 4 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Health and safety, tit. 8; disposal of dead animals, § 8.60.170; noisy animals, § 8.80.020; abatement of nuisances, ch. 8.140; zoning regulations, tit. 17; setbacks for buildings or pens housing livestock or other animals, § 17.240.060; animals in residential districts, ch. 17.290. 

CHAPTER 4.10. - ANIMAL SERVICES (2009 REVISION)[2] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of 2-11-10(2), § 1(Exh. A), amended Ch. 4.10 title to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 4.10 title pertained to animal services. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

4.10.100. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandonment means to place upon public property, within a public building or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or attendant of the private property, any domesticated animal or agricultural animal that is unattended or uncared for. Any owner shall also be considered to abandon the domesticated animal or agricultural animal, for the purposes of this chapter, if the animal has been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of this animal for a period of time in excess of 36 hours unattended and without adequate food and water or if the owner of the animal was evicted from the premises where the domesticated animal or agricultural animal was kept and said owner fails to immediately remove the animal from the premises. 
Adequate food means food which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Adequate food shall not include garbage, spoiled, rancid or unhygienic food or food containing worms, insects or insect larvae. 
Adequate size means a structure or container of sufficient size to allow the animal to stand, turn around, lie down and go in and out of the structure or container comfortably. 
Adequate space means a sufficient space for adequate exercise suitable to the age, size, species and breed of animal, which, unless otherwise provided in this chapter, shall include at least: 
1.  An enclosure with a minimum of 144 square feet per animal except for an animal in transport by vehicle, an animal being boarded at a licensed facility, or any animal under 25 pounds that shall be provided with space of adequate size, or 
2.  A provision of at least a ten-foot metal chain or metal cable (does not include a rope) that cannot become tangled or prevent the animal from having access to adequate food, water or shelter for any animal tethered or chained outside. 
Adequate water means clear, drinkable water in adequate supply, but does not include snow, ice, rancid, unhygienic water or water containing worms, insects, or insect larvae. 
Aggravated habitual violator means a habitual violator as provided for in this chapter that has been found guilty of more than one violation of article III of this chapter or any other provision of this chapter wherein the animal involved in the violations inflicted a bite breaking the skin on another animal or human. 
Agricultural animal means any hoofed animal including, but not limited to, bovine, caprine, equine, ovine, and swine, and, more specifically, cows, donkeys, goats, horses, llamas, mules, sheep and pigs as well as all other animals used or suitable for either food, fiber or labor including chickens, roosters, turkeys, or other fowl on agricultural property. 
Agricultural property means, for the purpose of this chapter only, any parcel of land two acres or more in size or property that is less than two acres in size that is contiguous or adjacent to parcels of land that are at least five acres or more in size. 
Animal means any animal including those of the amphibian (amphibians), reptilian (reptiles), aves (fowl) and mammalia (mammals) classes. 
Animal at large means an animal not under restraint. 
Animal control officer means any officer; agent or employee of the Hall County Animal Services designated by the governing authority to perform the duties of animal control and enforcement of this chapter and to perform the duties of dog control officer pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c), as amended from time to time. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by or under contract for the state, county, a municipal corporation, or a political subdivision of the state for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats, and other animals; any veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians which operates for such purpose in addition to its customary purposes; and any facility operated, owned, or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, or other organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals. 
Animal under restraint means any domesticated animal or agricultural animal is considered under restraint unless otherwise provided herein if: 
1.  It is controlled within the property limits of its owner by: 
a.  A visible physical barrier that the animal cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape from on its own volition, that is securely locked by key or combination lock at any time the animal is left unattended and that is not an invisible electronic fence; or 
b.  A metal chain or metal cable of sufficient strength to restrain the animal; 
2.  It is controlled by a leash by a person physically able to control the animal; 
3.  It is entirely contained within the occupant enclosure of a vehicle; 
4.  If entirely contained within the cargo area of a truck being driven or parked on the streets, it is safely restrained by a harness or tether of sufficient strength to restrain the animal or confined in a kennel or cage; or 
5.  It is within the fenced enclosure of any dog park approved and operated by the governing authority. 
Board of health means the Hall County Board of Health. 
Canine shall mean a dog. 
Cock fighting tools means any instrument attached to the spur of a rooster intended for fighting. 
Dangerous animal means any animal other than livestock maintained on agricultural property, that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
1.  Has without provocation inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property; or 
2.  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans, domesticated animals or agricultural animals without provocation after the animal has been classified as a potentially dangerous animal and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Domesticated animal means an animal that is living in or about the habitation of people including, but not limited to, cats, chickens, dogs, ducks, cows, fowl, geese, horses, rabbits, swine and livestock whether or not they are further classified by this chapter as hazardous animals, dangerous animals or potentially dangerous animals but shall not include agricultural animals. Pen raised skunks are categorized as those skunks acceptable by the State of Georgia and may be kept in Georgia as pets. 
Feral animal means an animal that has escaped from a domestic or captive status and is more or less living as a wild animal, or is born of a feral animal. 
Fowl means chickens, ducks, geese, roosters, turkeys, poultry and other birds of the aves class. 
Governing authority means the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia. 
Guard animal means any animal which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon oral command and any animal which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which it is located. 
Habitual violator means any owner that is found guilty of violating two or more of the same sections of this chapter more than once in any six-month period when the violations for two or more of the same sections occur on separate days. 
Hall County Animal Shelter means the animal shelter operated by Hall County, Georgia. 
Hazardous animal means any animal: 
1.  For which a permit or license is required for possession of pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 27-5-1, et seq.; 
2.  That is a hybrid animal which is part wild animal in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia; or 
3.  That is a Reticulated Python (Python reticulatus), Amethystine Python (Morelia amethistina), Green Anaconda (Eunectes murinus), Indian Python (Python molurus—the Burmese python P. m. bivittata is a subspecies of the Indian) or African Rock Python (Python sebae). 
Hoarder means a person or entity that is the owner of more than one animal maintained without adequate food, water, sanitation or space. 
Humane society means the Humane Society of Hall County or any corporation, organization or association existing for the purpose of prevention of cruelty to animals, education for humane treatment of animals or animal adoption for stray animals. 
In distress means the condition of an animal that, because of lack of necessary veterinary care, is in pain, anxiety, or acute physical or mental suffering requiring immediate assistance to prevent death of the animal or an animal suffering to the extent that necessary veterinary care is required to prevent further physical harm to the animal. 
In heat means a female animal that is in her estrous cycle. 
Law enforcement agency means the Hall County Sheriff's Office, Hall County Enforcement Division or other law enforcement agency of the governing authority. 
Livestock means any hoofed animal including, but not limited to, bovine, caprine, equine, ovine, and swine, and, more specifically, cows, donkeys, goats, horses, llamas, mules, sheep and pigs. 
Necessary veterinary care means medical care of an animal from or under the direction of a licensed veterinarian and necessary to maintain the health of an animal based on the age, species, breed, etc., of the animal, or to prevent an animal from suffering from: 
1.  Ongoing infections; 
2.  Infestation of parasites; 
3.  Disease; or 
4.  Any other medical condition/injury where withholding or neglecting to provide such veterinary care would further endanger the health or welfare of the animal or promote the spread of communicable diseases. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership, firm, trust or parent or legal guardian of any minor, who or which: 
1.  Owns; 
2.  Possesses; 
3.  Harbors; 
4.  Keeps; 
5.  Cares for; 
6.  Feeds; 
7.  Maintains; 
8.  Has custody or control of; or 
9.  Knowingly permits to be harbored or kept or to remain on or about their premises an animal within the jurisdiction of the governing authority. If an animal has more than one owner, any one of such owners may be prosecuted for violations whether or not any other owners are also prosecuted. 
Potentially dangerous animal means any animal, other than livestock maintained on agricultural property, with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise threaten the safety of human beings, or any animal that when unprovoked: 
1.  Inflicts injury on a human being on public or private property; 
2.  Chases or approaches a human being upon the street, sidewalks or any public grounds or the private property of another in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack; or 
3.  On more than one occasion causes injury to or death of another domesticated animal or agricultural animal unless the other domesticated animal or agricultural animal was not under restraint at the time. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal while on the owner's property securely confined and enclosed in a manner suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping as specified in the criteria set forth in subsection 4.10.570B. of this chapter. 
Public or private animal refuge means harborers of unwanted animals of any breed, including crossbreeds, who provide food, shelter, and confinement for more than four animals of any kind. 
Records of appropriate authority means records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; records of a dog control officer as provided in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c); or records of an animal control officer as provided by this chapter. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery, or a physical injury that results in death. 
Sexually mature animal means any dog or cat that has reached the age of 180 days or six months or more. 
Sterilization means the surgical removal of the reproductive organs of a dog or cat in order to render the animal unable to reproduce. 
Unowned animal means any animal that is not wearing a collar or other identifying information such as a microchip, and no information is known about a possible owner. 
(Res. of 2-11-10(2), § 1(Exh. A); Res. of 10-25-18(1), § 1) 
Editor's note— Res. of 2-11-10(2), § 1(Exh. A), repealed former § 4.10.100, and enacted a new § 4.10.100 as set out herein. Former § 4.10.100 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
4.10.110. - Animal services division. 
The animal services division of Hall County shall be comprised of Hall County Animal Control and the Hall County Animal Shelter. Hall County Animal Control shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter and such other duties as assigned by the animal services director. The Hall County Animal Shelter shall be responsible for sheltering animals impounded by Hall County Animal Control, the adoption of animals released to it from Hall County Animal Control and such other duties as may be assigned in this chapter and the animal services director. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.120. - Dog control officer. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c), the duties of the dog control officer shall be vested in the animal services division director and his designees which shall include all individuals employed by said division to enforce the provisions of the chapter as animal control officers. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.130. - Cooperation with animal control officer. 
A.  An animal control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. All law enforcement agencies of the governing authority shall cooperate with the animal control officers in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  It shall be unlawful: 
1.  To interfere with, fail to cooperate with or fail to respond to any request of a Hall County Animal Control Officer or any law enforcement officer acting pursuant to this chapter; 
2.  To refuse to comply with any Hall County Animal Control Officer's command to place an animal in quarantine or to provide an animal to Hall County Animal Control for quarantine; 
3.  To take or attempt to take any animal from a Hall County vehicle, trailer or any other vehicle or trailer used by Hall County to transport an animal pursuant to this chapter without the authorization of Hall County Animal Services; 
4.  To take or attempt to take any animal from the Hall County Animal Shelter or other impounding area used by Hall County Animal Services for the purposes of this chapter without the authorization of Hall County Animal Services; 
5.  To relocate, interfere with, or alter the operation of any device, equipment, or item of Hall County Animal Services without the express authorization of Hall County Animal Services; 
6.  To place their own animal into or remove any animal confined within a trap or cage operated by Hall County Animal Control without the authorization of Hall County Animal Services; or 
7.  To give a false name, address or date of birth to any officer, employee or agent of Hall County Animal Services in the lawful discharge of his or her official duties with the intent to mislead such officer, employee or agent in any way. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.140. - Enforcement of chapter. 
The primary responsibility for the administration and implementation of this chapter shall be vested in Hall County Animal Services with the enforcement of all of said chapter except for article VII to be vested in Hall County Animal Control, which may call upon such other officers and employees of any law enforcement agency of the governing jurisdiction as may also be necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.150. - Summons. 
Upon information known to, or a complaint lodged with, any officer or member of Hall County Animal Control, or any law enforcement agency employee of the governing authority that any owner or possessor of an animal is in violation of this chapter, a summons or citation shall be issued requiring the owner or possessor of such animal to appear before the judge of the magistrate's court of the county on a day and time certain and to answer said summons or citation. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.160. - Violations; penalty. 
A.  Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the magistrate or state court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
B.  In addition to any other penalties allowed by law, the court, as a part of the sentence, may include conditions prohibiting the offender from owning, possessing, or having on the offender's premises any animal. 
C.  A habitual violator or aggravated habitual violator shall be sentenced to at least a fine of twice the amount imposed on the defendant's last conviction for a violation of this chapter. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE II. - DUTIES TOWARDS ANIMALS 

4.10.200. - Duty of owner to keep animals under control. 
It is unlawful for the owner of any domesticated animal or agricultural animal, or anyone having a domesticated animal or agricultural animal in his possession or control, to permit such domesticated animal or agricultural animal to be at large and not under restraint unless said animal is livestock and is maintained in accordance with § 4.10.230 of this chapter. However, on or after January 1, 2010, all hazardous animals shall be maintained in accordance with § 4.10.250D. of this chapter. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.210. - Rabies vaccination; vaccination fee; display of tag. 
A.  When any animal as may be required by state law to be vaccinated for rabies is being kept in the jurisdiction of the governing authority, it shall be the duty of any owner or possessor or custodian of said animal to procure current rabies vaccination if said animal is three months of age or older. The owner, possessor or custodian shall affix to the collar or harness of the animal the current vaccination tag as prescribed by the board of health. 
B.  The veterinarian administering the rabies vaccine required by this section shall collect, in addition to the charges for vaccination, the sum of $0.50 for each dog vaccinated. The fees collected under this provision shall be delivered to the general fund for the board of commissioners of Hall County by the veterinarian collecting said fees on or before the 20th day of the month following the month in which said fees were collected. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog, cat or other animal required to have a rabies vaccination by state law, to allow such animal in any area of the jurisdiction of the governing authority without a visible collar which shall have attached a valid and current rabies vaccination tag as required by the board of health. It shall be the duty of each animal owner required to have a rabies vaccination to provide a collar with a rabies vaccination tag for each animal, except when such animal is participating in an animal show or exhibition. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.220. - Limitation of ownership. 
A.  Any person who has been convicted of a violation of Article III of this chapter or who is a habitual violator under the provisions of this chapter shall not own, possess, or have on his premises with him any animal for one year from the date of conviction without a written waiver from the Hall County Animal Services Director. A nolo contendere plea is considered a conviction for the purpose of this section. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the court from imposing a greater length of time as a part of any sentence imposed for a violation of this chapter. 
B.  Any person who is an aggravated habitual violator under the provisions of this chapter shall not own, possess, or have on his premises with him any animal for three years from the date of conviction without a written waiver from the Hall County Animal Services Director. A nolo contendere plea is considered a conviction for the purpose of this section. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the court from imposing a greater length of time as a part of any sentence imposed for a violation of this chapter. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.230. - Maintaining livestock. 
A.  All livestock shall be: 
1.  Confined within the property limits of its owner by: 
i.  A visible fence enclosure(can be electric); or 
ii.  A metal chain, metal cable or rope of sufficient strength to restrain the animal; 
2.  Controlled by a leash or lead in the possession of a person physically able to control the animal; 
3.  Contained within the occupant enclosure of a vehicle or any D.O.T. approved trailer suitable for carrying and containing said animal; 
4.  Contained within the cargo area of a truck being driven or parked on the streets if it is safely restrained by a harness or tether of sufficient strength to restrain the animal or confined in a kennel or cage; or 
5.  If the livestock is otherwise restrained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for having an animal under restraint or as may otherwise be provided. 
B.  Any fenced enclosure containing livestock shall be maintained in such a manner as to keep any livestock from escaping the property of its owner. 
C.  Any person providing boarding or pasturing space or such services for hire shall have the same responsibility for maintaining the livestock and the enclosure it is kept within in accordance with paragraphs A. and B. of this section unless an applicable livestock owner lease agreement or other agreement between the livestock owner and the property owner specifies the livestock owner is responsible for maintaining livestock. 
D  No person shall tie, stake or fasten any livestock within any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place within the jurisdiction of the governing authority or in such manner that the animal has access to any portion of any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place. 
E.  Unless kept in accordance with standard agricultural practices and as otherwise permitted pursuant to §§ 17.290.010—17.290.040 of this Code, only one livestock animal shall be permitted for each 15,000 square feet of land area. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.240. - Guard animals. 
In addition to all other requirements of this chapter, any person maintaining a guard animal in an area for the protection of persons or property shall meet each of the following requirements: 
A.  The animal shall be confined to an enclosed area adequate to insure that the animal cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape from on its own volition and that is securely locked by key or combination lock at any time the animal is left unattended. 
B.  When not securely enclosed, the animal shall be under the absolute physical control of a handler at all times that is capable of restraining and controlling the dog, muzzled and restrained by a secure leash which is not in excess of six feet in length and which is of sufficient strength to prevent escape of the animal. 
C.  The owner or other persons in control of the premises upon which a guard animal is maintained shall post warning signs over or next to all exterior doors stating that a guard animal is on the premises. At least one such sign shall be posted at each driveway or entranceway to said premises. Such sign shall be in lettering clearly visible from either the curb line or at a distance of 50 feet, whichever is greater, and shall contain a telephone number where some person responsible for controlling such guard animal can be reached 24 hours a day. 
D.  The owner or custodian of any guard animal shall report to Hall County Animal Control within 24 hours any of the following: 
1.  Escape of the guard animal; 
2.  An attack on a human or animal by the guard animal; 
3.  Transfer of ownership of the guard animal by sale, gift or otherwise; 
4.  Any change in the location of the guard animal is being kept; or 
5.  Death of the guard animal. 
E.  Prior to the placing of a guard animal on any property, the person or persons responsible for the placing shall inform Hall County Animal Control, all law enforcement agencies of the governing authority as well as the fire chief, in writing, of their intention to post said animal, the number of animals to be posted, the location where said animal will be posted, the approximate length of time said animal will be guarding the area, and the breed, sex, age and rabies tag number of said animal. Said notice must be renewed in writing every 12 months. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.250. - Hazardous animals. 
A.  No person shall own, keep, harbor, house, or permit to be kept, harbored or housed any hazardous animal within the jurisdiction of the governing authority, unless said animal is registered in writing annually with the Hall County Animal Control Director or his designee in accordance with paragraph B. of this section. 
B.  Written registration shall be made to the Hall County Animal Control Director or his designee and shall include: 
1.  Photographic evidence that the animal will be kept under restraint or confined and will be provided adequate space as is common for the hazardous animal species being registered; 
2.  Proof that the animal is registered as required by state or federal law; and 
3.  Payment of any required registration fee for hazardous animals as set by the fee schedule adopted by the governing authority. 
C.  The owner of any hazardous animal shall keep the animal: 
1.  In a container, kennel, crate or fence that it cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape from on its own volition and that is securely locked by key or combination lock at any time the animal is left unattended; 
2.  Controlled by a leash or lead by a person physically able to control the animal; or 
3.  Entirely contained within the occupant enclosure of a vehicle. 
D.  The owner of the hazardous animal shall notify animal control: 
1.  Immediately if the animal has attacked a human or other animal; 
2.  Within 24 hours if the animal is on the loose, is unconfined, has died, or has been sold, transferred or donated; 
3.  Within 72 hours if the animal has been sold, transferred or donated and provide the animal control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the animal as well as the address for the location of the animal; and 
4.  Within 72 hours of any change in the property location where the hazardous animal is kept; and 
5.  Within 72 hours of the death of the hazardous animal. 
E.  The owner of any hazardous animal must obtain all necessary state and federal permits and meet all state and federal requirements for keeping such animal. 
(Res. of 2-11-10(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— Res. of 2-11-10(2), § 1(Exh. A), repealed former § 4.10.250, and enacted a new § 4.10.250 as set out herein. Former § 4.10.250 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
4.10.260. - Confining dogs and cats in heat. 
Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or other enclosure in such manner that such female animal cannot come into contact with another sexually intact animal of the same species except for planned breeding. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.270. - Loud noises prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any domesticated animal or agricultural animal that makes, continues or causes to be made or continues any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise which unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the jurisdiction of the governing authority and which is audible to a person of normal hearing ability more than 100 feet from the point of origin of this sound or noise. Anyone who keeps or maintains a domesticated animal or agricultural animal that unreasonably disturbs the comfort or repose of any person or persons because the domesticated animal or agricultural animal is emitting frequent or long continued sound or noise, and who continues to keep, maintain, or allow any domesticated animal or agricultural animal to so disturb the comfort or repose of any person or persons shall be deemed in violation of this section. This section shall apply to horses, livestock, poultry and other farm animals unless on agricultural property. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.280. - Sterilization of dogs and cats. 
A.  Any public or private animal shelter including the Hall County Animal Shelter, animal control agency operated by a political subdivision of this state including Hall County Animal Control, humane society, or public or private animal refuge shall make provisions for the sterilization of all dogs or cats acquired from such shelter, agency, society, or refuge by: 
1.  Providing sterilization by a licensed veterinarian before relinquishing custody of the dog or cat; or 
2.  Entering into a written agreement with the person acquiring such dog or cat guaranteeing that sterilization will be performed by a licensed veterinarian within 30 days after acquisition of such dog or cat in the case of a sexually mature animal or by the sexual maturity of the animal in the case of a sexually immature animal. 
Provided, however, that the requirements of this paragraph shall not apply to any privately owned dog or cat which any such shelter, agency, society, or refuge may have in its possession for any reason if the owner of such dog or cat claims or presents evidence that such dog or cat is the property of such person. 
B.  All costs of sterilization pursuant to this section shall be the responsibility of the person acquiring such dog or cat and, if performed prior to acquisition, may be included in any fees charged by the shelter, agency, society, or refuge for such dog or cat. 
C.  Any person acquiring a dog or cat from a public or private animal shelter including the Hall County Animal Shelter, an animal control agency operated by a political subdivision of this state including Hall County Animal Control, humane society, or public or private animal refuge, which dog or cat is not sterile at the time of acquisition, shall submit to the animal shelter, animal control agency, humane society, or public or private animal refuge from which the dog or cat was acquired a signed statement from the licensed veterinarian performing the sterilization required by paragraph A.2. of this section within seven days after such sterilization attesting that such sterilization has been performed. 
D.  Every public or private animal shelter including the Hall County Animal Shelter, an animal control agency operated by a political subdivision of this state including Hall County Animal Control, humane society, or public or private animal refuge selling or offering for sale or exchange any dog or cat that is not sterilized shall maintain and furnish to any person acquiring a dog or cat from such shelter, agency, society, or refuge, a current list of veterinarians licensed in this state who have notified the shelter, agency, society, or refuge that they are willing to perform sterilizations and the cost for such procedures. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.290. - Disposal of dead animals. 
A.  If a domesticated animal or agricultural animal other than livestock or fowl shall die: 
1.  The owner must bury the carcass within 24 hours after the death and discovery of the carcass; and 
2.  The animal shall be buried at least three feet below the ground level and have not less than three feet of earth over the carcass and must not contaminate the ground or surface water. 
B.  If livestock or fowl shall die, it shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
C.  In the event the public works director or his designee of the governing authority shall be designated by said governing authority to remove said carcasses, then it is unlawful to bury said carcass and said carcass shall be removed at the expense of the owner of the animal, if known, and the finance director of the governing authority shall collect the fee for the same as provided by law. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL ABUSE 

4.10.300. - Animal abuse—Abandonment. 
It is unlawful for the owner of any domesticated animal or agricultural animal to knowingly abandon the animal or commit the act of abandonment within the jurisdiction of the governing authority. However, the following exceptions shall apply: 
A.  A domesticated animal or agricultural animal that is deserted when premises are temporarily vacated for the protection of human life during a disaster or emergency hospitalization shall not be regarded as abandoned under this section where the owner or custodian lacked sufficient time or resources to make reasonable arrangements for the adequate care and custody of the animal. 
B.  A domesticated animal or agricultural animal left unattended when its sole owner dies shall not be deemed abandoned, and shall be impounded by Hall County Animal Control until animal control can locate a family member to take custody of the animal. If a family member cannot be located within a period of seven days or does not claim the animal within three days, then the animal will be held in compliance with article IV of this chapter. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.310. - Animal abuse—Physical harm. 
Any person who causes undue suffering, deprives their injured or sick animal of necessary veterinary care, tortures, torments, disfigures, maims, mutilates, kills without legal justification, beats, bruises, wounds or poisons any domesticated animal or agricultural animal or exposes the animal to any poisonous substance with the intent that the poisonous substance should physically harm any domesticated animal or agricultural animal, whether belonging to himself or another, shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.320. - Animal abuse—Food, exercise, space and air. 
Any person who confines any animal shall be in violation of this chapter if the person: 
A.  Fails to supply it with adequate food and adequate water; 
B.  Keeps the animal in an enclosure without adequate space; or 
C.  Keeps the animal without wholesome exercise and change of air. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a canine or one who has a canine in his possession to restrain or leave unattended by means of anchoring with a chain, cable, rope, leash, runner, cord or similar tethering device. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A); Res. of 10-25-18(1), § 2) 
4.10.330. - Animal abuse—Shelter and sanitation. 
A.  Any owner, custodian or possessor of any animal who fails to provide shelter of adequate size with at least a roof, a floor and three sides or an "igloo" type of structure for the animal it is intended for and sufficient to protect said animal from the elements shall be in violation of this chapter. Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to, lean-tos, metal or plastic drums, boxes, abandoned vehicles, porches, decks, or material that does not provide sufficient protection from the elements. All livestock maintained in pastures are exempt from this section. 
B.  Any owner, custodian or possessor of any animal who fails to maintain in a clean and sanitary condition and free from extreme and unreasonable objectionable odor all structures, pens, yards, and areas adjacent thereto wherein any animal is kept shall be in violation of this chapter. Unclean and unsanitary conditions shall include but not be limited to: 
1.  Crates, kennels and indoor premises where the animal is kept that are malodorous from more than a day's waste of urine and feces from said animal or whose floor of the container it is in is more than 25 percent covered in urine and feces; and 
2.  Premises where the animal is enclosed with garbage, trash outside of trash containers or sewage or effluent from human waste that can be reached by the animal. 
(Res. of 2-11-10(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— Res. of 2-11-10(2), § 1(Exh. A), repealed former § 4.10.330, and enacted a new § 4.10.330 as set out herein. Former § 4.10.330 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
4.10.340. - Animal abuse—Hoarder. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be a hoarder within the jurisdiction of the governing authority. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.350. - Animal abuse—Leaving in autos. 
A.  Any person who transports any animal in any vehicle or leaves an animal in a vehicle unattended with the outside temperature higher than 80 degrees shall be in violation of this chapter unless sufficient ventilation is provided to prevent the animal from being in distress. 
B.  No animal shall be transported in the closed trunk of a vehicle. 
C.  When the conditions inside a parked vehicle provide reasonable cause to believe the animal may die if not immediately removed as shown by the animal's physical appearance and a violation of paragraphs A. or B. is present, any animal left in a parked vehicle may be removed from that vehicle by animal control, any law enforcement agency or fire agency. Hall County shall not be liable for any damage caused to such vehicle in order to remove said animal. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.360. - Animal abuse—Fighting. 
No person shall: 
A.  Own, possess, keep or train any animal with the intent that such animal shall be engaged in an exhibition of fighting; 
B.  Build, make, maintain, or keep a pit on premises owned by him or occupied by him or allow a pit to be built, made, maintained or kept on such premises for the purposes of an exhibition of animal fighting; 
C.  In any manner encourage, instigate, promote or assist in an exhibition of animal fighting or intentional combat; 
D.  Charge admission, be an assistant, umpire or participant or be present as a spectator to any exhibition or animal fighting or combat; or 
E.  Own, possess, keep, or make any cock fighting tools. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.370. - Animal abuse—Dying or coloring certain animals for display, sale, gift, etc., prohibited. 
No person shall sell, offer for sale, give away, or display animal which has been dyed, colored or otherwise treated so as to impart to them an artificial color except for medically necessary reasons. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.380. - Animal abuse—Procuring another to do act. 
Any person who procures another person to do any of the acts prohibited in this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided for any other violation of this chapter. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.390. - Animal abuse—Exemptions. 
A.  A person who is: 
1.  Lawfully engaged in any sporting or hunting activity; 
2.  Slaughtering animal for the purpose of providing food; 
3.  Engaged in the lawful euthanasia of an animal; 
4.  Is a veterinarian or is working under the direction of a veterinarian and performs any procedure, handles or transports an animal pursuant to the standard practices for a veterinarian or their practice; or 
5.  Acting as a law enforcement officer or animal control officer in the line of duty to protect against a case of aggression of an animal shall not be charged with a violation of this chapter if a violation of this article is from any such lawful activity. 
B.  Any person who maintains agricultural animal on agricultural property that keeps the agricultural animal in accordance with standard agricultural practices shall not be charged with a violation of the following provisions of this chapter: 
1.  Subsection 4.10.320B. (adequate space); and 
2.  Section 4.10.330 (sanitation, adequate shelter and adequate size) and shall otherwise be exempt from the provisions of this article for the handling, treating and transporting of agricultural animals using accepted agricultural practices and procedures. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDMENT AND REQUIRED EUTHANASIA 

4.10.400. - Impoundment of animals, generally. 
A.  Any animal may be impounded if: 
1.  It is not under restraint or is at large as provided in section 4.10.200; 
2.  It is livestock and is not being maintained in accordance with section 4.10.230 of this chapter; 
3.  It is a hazardous animal that, on or after January 1, 2010, the owner has not registered with the Hall County Animal Services Director or his designee or the hazardous animal is not being confined as required pursuant to subsection 4.10.250D. of this chapter; 
4.  It is a guard animal and is not kept in accordance with the provisions of section 4.10.240 of this chapter; 
5.  It does not have a visible collar with a valid and current rabies vaccination tag affixed as required by subsection 4.10.210C. of this chapter; 
6.  It has been abandoned as prohibited in section 4.10.300 of this chapter; 
7.  It has bitten or is reasonably suspected of biting another animal or human and is being held for the required quarantine period under the rules of the board of health; or 
8.  It has been abused as prohibited in article III of this chapter. 
B.  Said animal shall be impounded according to such rules and regulations now or hereafter prescribed by law or by the resolutions and ordinances of the governing authority for the detention, control and disposition of animals. All impounded animals shall be housed and cared for at the Hall County Animal Shelter or such other facility as may be required to securely confine the animal if the animal cannot be maintained at the Hall County Animal Shelter. 
C.  Any animal impounded after a finding by an animal control officer that it has been abused pursuant to article III of this chapter or a violation of section 4.10.240 or section 4.10.250 of this chapter shall not be released to the owner unless the owner demonstrates to animal control that the animal will not be subjected to the same or different conditions upon its release that originally led to or will lead to a violation of article III of this chapter or section 4.10.240 or section 4.10.250 of this chapter within seven days of animal control's impoundment of the animal. 
D.  Any animal whose owner fails to comply with paragraph C. of this section within the required seven days shall be released by Hall County Animal Control to the Hall County Animal Shelter for adoption or euthanasia. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.410. - Impoundment, housing and care of dangerous or potentially dangerous animals. 
A.  Upon a finding by animal control that an animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous and that the owner knew the animal was dangerous or potentially dangerous or upon confiscation pursuant to section 4.10.640 of this chapter, the animal may be impounded by Hall County Animal Control or any law enforcement agency employee of the governing authority until such time as the owner of the dangerous or potentially dangerous animal provides proof of compliance with the duties of the owner of dangerous or potentially dangerous animals as set forth in articles V and VI of this chapter. 
B.  All animals impounded under this section shall be housed and cared for at the Hall County Animal Shelter unless another facility which meets the requirements for housing a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal is expressly agreed upon between the animal control officer and the animal's owner. 
C.  A dangerous or potentially dangerous animal whose owner has not complied with the provisions of articles V and VI of this chapter within 20 days of the date the animal was impounded or whose owner has failed to pay the fees required for release of the animal pursuant to section 4.10.420 of this chapter within three days of the impoundment of said animal as well as every seven day period thereafter, shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
D.  Any animal classified as dangerous or potentially dangerous under this chapter that is not reclaimed by the owner as provided in this section shall not be released for adoption, but shall be humanely euthanized instead. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.420. - Notice to owner of impounded animal; impound fees; redemption by owner. 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of Hall County Animal Control to immediately notify the owner of each domesticated animal or agricultural animal impounded if the owner of the domesticated animal or agricultural animal is known or can be reasonably ascertained. The owner of any domesticated animal or agricultural animal impounded may reclaim such domesticated animal or agricultural animal by the payment of: 
1.  Any impoundment fee as established in the animal services fee schedule adopted by the governing authority; 
2.  Any charges assessed by the Hall County Animal Services pursuant to the animal services fee schedule adopted by the governing authority for boarding, quarantine boarding, and veterinary services for the animal; 
3.  If required due to the animal not wearing a current rabies inoculation tag, the cost of the rabies vaccination as per the animal services fee schedule adopted by the governing authority; 
and upon proof of payment of any fine already imposed for a violation of this chapter. 
B.  Owners of animals who have been identified and notified but who refuse to reclaim their animals will be responsible for all fees charged pursuant to this chapter by Hall County Animal Services within ten days of the animal's impoundment. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.430. - Release to shelter of impounded animals. 
Hall County Animal Control shall release to the Hall County Animal Shelter for adoption or euthanasia any domesticated animal or agricultural animal unredeemed or unclaimed by the owner after 72 hours except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.440. - Biting animals. 
All animals, other than a dog or cat, which are known to have bitten a person or any animal which cannot be held for a rabies observation period, shall be euthanized and a lab specimen of brain tissue sent to the state department of epidemiology for testing and control of rabies in accordance with the rules of the board of health. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.450. - Suffering animals. 
Any impounded animal which: 
1.  Represents a real immediate danger to persons or other animals, or 
2.  Is suffering due to a life threatening disease or injury, 
and a licensed veterinarian recommends euthanasia as the most humane course of action, and the animal services control director or his designee agrees that the best interest of the animal would be served by euthanizing said animal, then the animal shall be humanely euthanized without regard to the period of confinement as provided in section 4.10.430 of this chapter. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.460. - Livestock impoundment. 
All livestock impounded by Hall County Animal Control shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-3-4 et seq. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.470. - Disposition of feral animals and unowned animals. 
Feral and unowned animals which have been captured by or come to be in the custody of Hall County Animal Control need not be retained for any required time under this article. Wildlife and wild animals received by animal services will be disposed of in accordance with federal and state guidelines. All other feral and unowned animals shall be euthanized or released for adoption in the discretion of the Hall County Animal Services Director or his designee unless otherwise provided herein. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE V. - CLASSIFICATION AND REGISTRATION OF DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS 

4.10.500. - Animal control officer; duties generally. 
The animal control officer shall make such investigations and inquiries as may be necessary to identify dangerous animals and dangerous animal owners within the jurisdiction of the governing authority. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.510. - Classification of dangerous or potentially dangerous animals; notice to owner required; contents of notice. 
A.  When a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal is classified as such, or when a potentially dangerous animal is reclassified as a dangerous animal, the animal control officer shall notify the animal's owner of such classification. 
B.  Notices to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  The notice shall be in writing and either mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address or hand-delivered to the owner. Such notice shall be complete either upon its mailing, or, if hand-delivered, upon personal receipt; 
2.  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that formed the basis for the animal's classification or reclassification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal; 
3.  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the animal is a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal; 
4.  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the governing authority or its designee, and shall specify the name of the agency which shall conduct the hearing; 
5.  The notice shall state that either a filing fee in the amount of $250.00 or a sufficient pauper's affidavit showing that the owner is unable without undue financial hardship to pay the filing fee shall be filed with the hearing request to the governing authority or its designee for said hearing; 
6.  The notice shall state that, if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that an animal is a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal will become effective for all purposes under this chapter on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
7.  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the governing authority or its designee and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the governing designee. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.520. - Liability of owner of dangerous or potentially dangerous animal. 
The notice procedures provided for in this article are not an essential condition for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal is held to know that such animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous if the animal has, at any time, displayed any one or more of the behaviors described in the definition of dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal as provided in this chapter. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.530. - Presiding body at hearings on dangerous or potentially dangerous animals. 
The governing authority may conduct hearings provided for in this article, may designate an animal control board to conduct such hearings, or may designate the board of health to conduct such hearings. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.540. - Procedure for hearings on dangerous or potentially dangerous animals. 
When the governing authority or its designee receives a request for a hearing as provided in section 4.10.510 of this chapter along with payment of the fee or a sufficient pauper's affidavit showing that the owner is unable without undue financial hardship to pay the filing fee required for said hearing, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The governing authority or its designee shall notify the animal owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the animal owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the animal shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, and in addition thereto the governing authority or its designee shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the governing authority or its designee may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the animal. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.550. - Notice of determination regarding dangerous or potentially dangerous animal. 
Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the governing authority or its designee shall notify the animal owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the animal is a dangerous animal or a potentially dangerous animal, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. If such determination is that the animal is not a dangerous animal or a potentially dangerous animal, then the governing authority or its designee for said hearing may, in its discretion, return any filing fee paid to the animal owner. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.560. - Certificate of registration required for dangerous or potentially dangerous animals. 
It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the jurisdiction of the governing authority a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No more than one certificate of registration shall be granted per person or owner for a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal. No more than one certificate shall be issued per tax parcel of property. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.570. - Certificate of registration for dangerous or potentially dangerous animal; proof of proper enclosure and posting of premises. 
Subject to the additional requirements of section 4.10.580 of this chapter, the animal control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal if the owner complies with the following requirements including presenting to the animal control officer or the animal control officer otherwise finding sufficient evidence of: 
A.  The posting of the premises where the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal is located with a clearly visible sign of the type specified by animal control warning that there is a dangerous animal on the property and containing a symbol designed to inform children of the presence of a dangerous animal. Said signs shall be exempt from any requirements for signs under the provisions of chapter 17, but, in no event, shall the signs be placed on the right-of-way of any road. 
B.  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal as per the following requirements: 
1.  All proper enclosures located outdoors shall: 
a.  Have a securely attached top; 
b.  Have the fence bottom embedded no less than 24 inches in the ground or attached to a concrete or asphalt floor; 
c.  Be constructed of no less than six gauge wire for the sides of the fence; 
d.  Have tubing that the fence is attached to no less than 18 gauges thick; 
e.  Be no smaller than 12 feet in length and 12 feet in width, although the height and any further width and length of the enclosure are left to the owner's discretion; 
f.  Provide protection from the elements for the animal; 
g.  Have only one gate that shall be of the inward opening type that is kept locked by key or combination lock except when the owner is inside the proper enclosure for the purpose of cleaning the kennel, providing food and water or otherwise tending to the animal; and 
h.  Be inside a perimeter or area fence of the property on which the proper enclosure is located. 
2.  Any structure other than a residence approved as a proper enclosure shall meet all other building codes as well as the following: 
a.  Have a securely attached top; 
b.  Provide protection from the elements for the animal; and 
c.  Not have any holes or other means of escape in walls, floors, windows, doors, ceiling, vents and all walls, floors, windows, doors, vents and ceiling are securely attached to the frame of the building. 
3.  A proper enclosure shall not include the owner's residence with the exception of a proper enclosure for a potentially dangerous animal that is 25 pounds or under in which event the proper enclosure may be comprised of the following: 
a.  Have a securely attached top; 
b.  Be a kennel of no less than five feet in length by five feet in width and five feet in height located inside the residence; 
c.  Have a locked gate that shall remain locked by key or combination lock except when the owner is inside the proper enclosure for the purpose of cleaning the kennel, providing food and water or otherwise tending to the animal; 
d.  Have six gauge wire fencing; 
e.  Have tubing that shall not be less than 18 gauges thick; and 
f.  Be allowed only if the owner and the owner of the property on which the proper enclosure is located consent to allow animal control to inspect the inside of the residence where the proper enclosure is maintained or any other area where the animal is found randomly and without notice for compliance with maintaining the animal in the proper enclosure. 
C.  It shall be the duty of every owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal to have the animal permanently identified by insertion of a microchip by Hall County Animal Services and pay the required fee for the insertion of the microchip in accordance with the animal services fee schedule adopted by the governing authority. 
D.  Consent from the owner of the animal and the owner of the property that animal control shall have the right to inspect, randomly and without notice, a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal, on the property of the person to whom the certificate of registration is issued to include its proper enclosure, if the animal is therein, or the entire property until the animal is found if the animal is not in the proper enclosure for the purpose of assuring compliance with this chapter. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.580. - Certificate of registration for dangerous animal; proof of insurance or bond. 
In addition to the requirements of section 4.10.570 of this chapter, the owner of a dangerous animal shall present to the animal control officer evidence of: 
A.  A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $100,000.00 per occurrence issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the dangerous animal against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous animal and a letter or other written verification to that effect from the insurance company through which the policy is maintained to the effect that the company is aware of the dangerous animal and is otherwise providing insurance as required in this section for the owner of the animal; or 
B.  A surety bond in the amount of $100,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous animal and a letter or other written verification to that effect from the company issuing the surety bond to the effect that the company is aware of the dangerous animal and is otherwise providing insurance as required in this section for the owner of the animal. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.590. - Dangerous or potentially dangerous animals; exemptions. 
A.  An animal that inflicts an injury upon a person when the animal is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal within the meaning of this chapter. An animal shall not be a dangerous animal or a potentially dangerous animal within the meaning of this chapter if the injury inflicted by the animal was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
B.  No owner of a dangerous animal shall be held criminally liable under this chapter for injuries inflicted by said owner's animal to any human being while on the owner's property if said owner is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter at the time of the injuries being inflicted. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE VI. - MAINTAINING DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS 

4.10.600. - Notice of escape, death, or change of ownership of dangerous or potentially dangerous animal. 
A.  The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall notify the animal control officer immediately if the animal has attacked a human or other animal or within 24 hours if the animal is on the loose, is unconfined, has died, or has been sold or donated. 
B.  If the animal has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the animal control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the animal as well as the address for the location of the animal. 
C.  In the event the animal is deceased, the owner shall not dispose of the body until written authorization is received from animal control. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.610. - Dangerous or potentially dangerous animals; annual registration fee. 
An annual registration fee as set by the governing authority in the animal services fee schedule shall be charged by the animal control officer to defray the cost to register dangerous animals and potentially dangerous animals as required in this chapter. Said fee shall be due and payable at the time an application is made for a certificate of registration to be issued as well as on January 1 of each year thereafter with any required late fee as set in the animal services fee schedule as adopted by the governing authority to be assessed if the annual registration fee is not paid by February 1 of the year in which it is due. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.620. - Dangerous animals; muzzling. 
It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous animal to permit the animal to be outside a proper enclosure unless the animal is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person. The leash shall not be in excess of six feet in length and shall be of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.630. - Potentially dangerous animals; restraint. 
It is unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous animal to permit the animal to be outside a proper enclosure unless the animal is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The leash shall not be in excess of six feet in length and shall be of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.640. - Dangerous or potentially dangerous animals; confiscation; return to owner or destruction. 
A.  A dangerous animal shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the animal control officer if: 
1.  The owner of the animal does not secure and maintain the liability insurance or bond required by this chapter; 
2.  The animal is not validly registered as required by this chapter; 
3.  The animal is not maintained in the proper enclosure approved by animal control; 
4.  The premises where the animal is located are not posted as required by this chapter; or 
5.  The animal is outside the proper enclosure approved by animal control in violation of this chapter. 
B.  A potentially dangerous animal shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous animal if: 
1.  The animal is not validly registered as required by this chapter; 
2.  The animal is not maintained in the proper enclosure approved by animal control; 
3.  The premises where the animal is located are not posted as required by this chapter; or 
4.  The animal is outside the proper enclosure approved by animal control in violation of this chapter. 
C.  Any animal that has been confiscated under the provisions of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this chapter and upon the payment of all required impoundment, boarding, veterinary and other fees set pursuant to the animal services fee schedule as adopted by the governing authority. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this chapter within ten business days of the date the animal was confiscated, said animal shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.650. - Destruction of dangerous or potentially dangerous animals. 
If impracticable to impound a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal due to its viciousness, or if the delay or attempt to impound the same be attended with danger, it shall be the duty of any law enforcement agency with authority in the jurisdiction of the governing authority or the animal control officer to destroy the animal. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.10.660. - Citation and court appearance for violations relating to dangerous or potentially dangerous animals. 
Upon information known to or upon a complaint being lodged with an animal control officer, or any law enforcement agency employee of the governing authority that an animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous and not being kept by its owner under restraint in compliance with this chapter, the animal control officer, or any law enforcement agency employee of the governing authority shall issue a citation for the violation to the owner of the animal to appear before the judge of the magistrate's court of the county on a day and time certain for a hearing to determine if the animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous as defined herein. 
(Res. of 9-24-09, § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE VII. - HALL COUNTY ANIMAL SHELTER 

4.10.700. - Adoption. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided herein, the Hall County Animal Shelter may offer for adoption any animal unclaimed after 72 hours following impoundment or, if the animal is voluntarily surrendered to Hall County Services by the owner, the animal may be offered for adoption immediately. 
B.  An animal may be donated for adoption only by a resident of Hall County, Georgia unless the required animal relinquishment fee as established pursuant to the animal services fee schedule adopted by the governing authority is paid. The donated animal may be made available for adoption upon the determination by the Hall County Animal Shelter that the animal is of reasonably good health and temperament. 
C.  Potential persons who want to adopt an animal must: 
1.  Make application for adoption with the Hall County Animal Shelter; 
2.  Meet requirements associated with the humane housing and care of the animal as determined by the Hall County Animal Services Director; 
3.  Unless waived in writing by the animal services director or his designee, pay the required fees as established pursuant to animal services fee schedule adopted by the governing authority including the applicable adoption fee; and 
4.  Be approved for adoption by the Hall County Animal Shelter in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  No dog or cat which is not neutered or spayed shall be released from the Hall County Animal Shelter without a written agreement from the person adopting the animal that such dog or cat will be sterilized within 30 days from the date of adoption or, if the dog or cat is under six months old, by the time dog or cat is seven months old, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  Any adopted dog or cat not sterilized within the time specified may be reclaimed by animal control. 
F.  No person residing in the same household, nor any corporation, institute or other entity may adopt more than three animals within any 12-month period unless approved by the animal services director or his designee. 
G.  Nothing shall prohibit the Hall County Animal Shelter from using the discretion to donate animals, if the donation is in the best interest or welfare of the animal or it is in the best interest of public safety, provided a written record of the date, animal and person receiving the donation is kept by the Hall County Animal Shelter of all animals donated. 
H.  Hall County Animal Shelter shall have the exclusive right to dispose of all animals that have been relinquished to Hall County Animal Shelter, impounded or confiscated and not redeemed within the period specified by this chapter in any manner deemed appropriate and in the best interest of the animal and in accordance with this chapter. 
(Res. of 2-11-10(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— Res. of 2-11-10(2), § 1(Exh. A), repealed former § 4.10.700, and enacted a new § 4.10.700 as set out herein. Former § 4.10.700 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS[1] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Commercial activity in parks, § 2.50.190; gross premium tax on insurance, ch. 3.30; excise tax on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, ch. 3.40; sales and use tax, ch. 3.50; tattoo establishments, ch. 8.10; incineration of solid waste and biomedical waste, ch. 8.70; noise control, ch. 8.80; phosphate control, ch. 8.90; manufacture, storage or transportation of fireworks, § 8.100.060; clean indoor air ordinance, ch. 8.120; utility franchises and easements, ch. 12.50; disposal of wastewater by land application, ch. 13.30; buildings and construction, ch. 15; zoning regulations, tit. 17; outdoor storage requirements, ch. 17.260; signs, ch. 17.270; minimum standards for apartments, ch. 17.300; mobile home and travel trailer parks, ch. 17.310; approval of caretaker or employee residences, § 17.350.120; approval of residential businesses, § 17.350.130; approval of rural businesses, § 17.350.140. 

CHAPTER 5.10. - BUSINESS OCCUPATION TAX AND REGULATIONS[2] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Revenue and finance, tit. 3; application for license for tattoo establishment, § 8.10.080. 

ARTICLE I. - BUSINESS OCCUPATION TAX 

5.10.010. - Payment of tax required; applicability; display of license. 
As of September 14, 1995, and for each calendar year thereafter beginning January 1, 1996, each person engaged in or commencing any business, trade, profession or occupation in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia, or in the case of an out of state business with no location in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation; [and] any applicable business license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the tax payer has a permanent business location in Hall County. If the tax payer has no permanent business location in Hall County, Georgia, such business tax registration shall be shown to the license inspector, Sheriff of Hall County, Georgia, to any of his deputies, or to the Hall County Marshal, upon his or their request. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.010; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.010); Res. of 11-11-99, § 1) 
5.10.020. - Definitions. 
A.  "Hall County, Georgia" as used herein shall be construed to mean the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia; wherever the term "county" is used herein, it shall be construed to mean the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia. 
B.  As used herein the following terms shall apply: 
1.  Administrative fee means a component of an occupational tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
2.  Board of commissioners means the governing body of Hall County, Georgia, and shall also include the terms "board" and "board of commissioners of Hall County." 
3.  Business means any person who, in Hall County, engages in, causes to be engaged in or represents himself or herself to be engaged in any occupation or activity with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, either directly or indirectly. This shall include any person advertising by any means, including but not limited to signs, cards, circulars, newspapers, etc., that he or she is engaged in a business of any kind. 
4.  Business license means the certificate issued upon payment of the administrative fee, payment of the regulatory fee, if any, and the payment of the occupation tax. Only one business license certificate shall be issued, which shall demonstrate that the fees and tax have been paid. 
5.  Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
6.  Employee. 
a.  Any individual, owner, family member or relative who works 40 hours per week and whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer who withholds FICA, federal income tax or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2, but not a form IRS 1099, shall be counted as an employee. Computation of employees who work less than 40 hours to produce full time equivalents is set out in 5.10.050(B). For purposes of this chapter, each business will have a minimum of one employee. 
b.  An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2. 
7.  Engaged in business or carrying on business means doing or performing any act of selling any goods or services, or soliciting business, or offering any goods or services for sale primarily in an attempt to make a profit, including selling or performing services of the character of a wholesaler or retailer, or being involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, or renting real or personal property; all of the foregoing performed either as an owner, operator or agent of any business, trade, profession, or occupation within Hall County. 
8.  Flea markets as used herein shall mean a retail sales operation wherein one or more spaces are made available from which goods or wares are sold. 
9.  Licensee means the person issued the license, his authorized employee in charge of the business of the licensee, or the person operating the business of the licensee. 
10.  Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
11.  Nonprofit organization means a corporation, club or group exempt from income taxation under the Internal Revenue Code and regulations thereunder as now existing or as hereafter amended, or regulations promulgated by the Secretary of State of Georgia, now existing or as hereafter amended. 
12.  Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
13.  Person, wherever used in this article, shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships or any other form of business organization. 
14.  Practitioner of a profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
15.  Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
16.  Registration, business registration, and business tax registration are all synonymous with "business license" and shall mean the certificate issued upon payment of the administrative fee, the regulatory fee, if any, and the occupation tax, if applicable. Only one business license certificate shall be issued, which shall demonstrate that the fees and tax have been paid. 
17.  Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee or a registration fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
18.  Yard sale means sales of used household belongings by an individual at his principal residence or by a group of individuals combining such items for a group yard sale at one of their principal residences. Such sales may be held no more than four times in a calendar year, with each individual sale lasting no more than three consecutive days, and shall be exempt from the fee requirements of this chapter. All merchandise must be the property of the person(s) holding the sale and not be purchased for the purpose of resale. The term also includes garage sales, basement sales, or other similar usage. All other sales of merchandise are considered retail sales, and subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.020; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.020); Res. of 11-11-99, §§ 2—4) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 
5.10.030. - Purpose and scope of occupation tax. 
A.  The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the occupation tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any profession which is classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18). 
B.  The occupation tax applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. 
C.  All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinances. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.120; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.030)) 
5.10.040. - Administrative fee and regulatory fee structure. 
A.  A non-prorated, non-refundable administrative fee of $50.00 shall be required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
B.  A regulatory fee will only be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those businesses that require an application on an annual basis, and on those businesses which will require an application for the initial business license for the purpose of regulating the business in reference to character checks, or other verification that is necessary to legally permit operation of that business for the current licensing year. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
1.  Classifying businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations according to whether such businesses and practitioners have a location within the unincorporated area of Hall County and imposing and collecting differential regulatory fees on the basis of such a classification is prohibited. 
2.  The regulatory fee is not a general revenue producing component of the license fee structure, and must reflect approximately the actual reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed. 
C.  Regulatory fees authorized by this chapter shall be paid before commencing business or the practice of a profession as a condition precedent for transacting business or practicing a profession. 
D.  Regulatory fees may be paid after commencing business or the practice of a profession when: 
1.  The work done or services provided are necessary for the health or safety of one or more individuals. 
2.  The work done or services provided have no adverse effect on any other person; and 
3.  Regulatory fees are tendered to the local government within two business days after commencing business or practice of a profession. 
E.  Regulatory fees and administrative fees may not be prorated on businesses that close, dissolve, are sold or relocate outside unincorporated Hall County, or otherwise cease to operate in unincorporated Hall County, prior to the expiration of the license on December 31 of each calendar year. 
F.  Any and all regulatory and/or administrative fees paid shall be non-refundable after the fact. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.030; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.040); Res. of 11-11-99, §§ 5, 6; Res. of 9-25-03(1), § 1; Res. of 12-14-06, § 1) 
5.10.050. - Occupation tax levied; amount 
A.  An occupation tax is levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within unincorporated areas of Hall County, Georgia, and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: The tax shall be levied on the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
B.  The occupation tax shall be determined according to the number of employees of the business or practitioner as computed on a full-time basis or full-time position equivalent basis, provided that, for the purpose of this computation, an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents. The occupation tax shall be levied as follows: 

 
* The above schedule includes a $50.00 non-prorated, non-refundable administrative fee as required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal or reopening of those accounts. Section 5.10.040. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.040; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.050); Res. of 9-25-03(1), § 2; Res. of 1-8-04(1), § 2; Res. of 6-25-15(2), § 1) 
5.10.060. - Occupation tax restrictions; transfer of business license. 
A.  Hall County shall not require an additional occupational tax on those businesses that have paid the occupation tax in other localities or states on the business's or practitioner's sales or services in Georgia, provided that those businesses or practitioners were taxed in full compliance with O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-7 and 48-13-14, and show proof of payment of the occupation tax. 
B.  Hall County shall not require an occupation tax from those real estate brokers, agents or companies whose offices are located outside the unincorporated areas of Hall County, Georgia, and sell property inside the unincorporated areas of Hall County, Georgia. 
C.  The business license shall not be transferable to another person, firm or corporation in the same location. The business license may be transferred from one location to another provided the ownership of the business remains the same. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.040; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.060)) 
5.10.070. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Res. of Jan. 8, 2004(2), repealed § 5.10.070, which pertained to business license tax on depository financial institutions. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
5.10.080. - Payment of occupation tax by businesses with no location in state. 
If not exempt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7(f), the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, requires a registration and the assessment of an occupation tax on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia providing the largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is done or performed in the unincorporated area of Hall County, and the business or practitioner: 
A.  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia, for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.070; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.080); Res. of 11-11-99, § 7) 
5.10.090. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration/business license certificate of each business operated in the county shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the business license department and that line of business being noted by the business license department upon the business license certificate which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.080; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.090)) 
5.10.100. - Each location considered separate business. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one store or location, each store or location shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax; however, no more than one occupation tax shall be required for each location. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.090; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.100)) 
5.10.110. - Occupation tax on professionals. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect each calendar year as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
A.  The occupation tax based on number of employees [as provided] in section 5.10.050 of this chapter. 
B.  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per practitioner fee shall include all persons in the business who qualify as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.100; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.110)) 
5.10.120. - Exemption for practitioners exclusively practicing for government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentalities of the United States, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.110; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.120)) 
5.10.130. - Allocation of employees of business with multiple locations. 
A.  For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the county where the employees can be allocated to each location, the number of employees used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those employees attributed to each county location. In the case of an employee who works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county, the municipal corporation or county in which the employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year shall be authorized to count the individual as an employee who is employed within the local government's geographic jurisdiction for purposes of occupation tax. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the county the following: 
1.  Payroll and personnel records necessary to allocate the number of employees of the business or practitioner; and 
2.  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's number of employees by other local governments. 
B.  Where the business has locations outside of the county and taxation is levied for a criteria other than number of employees in the other local government's jurisdiction, the county shall not assess more than the allotted share of number of employees for the local operation. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.140; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.140)) 
5.10.140. - Miscellaneous exemptions. 
No occupation tax, regulatory fee or administrative fee shall be levied on the following: 
A.  Any state or local authority or nonprofit organization; 
B.  Veterans with a ten percent or greater disability, upon presentation of a certificate of exemption from the state director of veterans services; 
C.  Blind persons, upon presentation of a certificate of exemption from the judge of probate court of Hall County; 
D.  Such other businesses as are exempt by federal or state statute; 
E.  Agricultural production of crops and livestock, except poultry hatcheries, forestry and fishing, and hunting and trapping. 
F.  Sale of produce, fruits and vegetables grown by the seller when the point of sale is on the property where grown; 
G.  Reserved; 
H.  Reserved; 
I.  The builder of a single home or outbuilding for his own use. This exemption does not extend to subcontractors or persons acting in a construction management capacity; 
J.  Service performed by a unit of government, but not a private contractor for a unit of government. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.150; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.150); Res. of 11-11-99, §§ 8—10) 
5.10.150. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable. 
Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43 by the state license examining boards shall provide evidence of proper state licensure before the county business license may be issued. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.160; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.160)) 
5.10.160. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
A.  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificate of qualification, certificates of competency, certificate of occupancy, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business license, show evidence of such qualification. 
B.  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of that business shall do so before the business license is issued. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.170; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.170)) 
5.10.170. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain registration. 
All persons subject to the occupation taxes provided in this chapter shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business prescribed in this chapter, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a business license. Every person commencing business in Hall County after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting or offering to transact in the county any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation subject to this chapter without first having so obtained said registration shall be subject to penalties provided herein, and, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 5.10.190 of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.180; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.180)) 
5.10.180. - Delinquent fees or tax; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
A.  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. If any fees or occupation tax due under this chapter remain due and unpaid for 30 days from January 1, the person liable for the fees or tax shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the fees or tax due. Interest on delinquent fees and tax shall be assessed at one percent for each month or fraction thereof of delinquency. Said penalty and interest shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal, herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, the administrative fee and the regulatory fee, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. On renewal registrations, applicable penalties and interest fees shall be collected based on the annual due date of January 1. 
B.  The business license herein provided for shall be issued by the business license director, and, if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a business license shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any of the kind of business, trade, profession or occupation subject to this chapter, without having first obtained said business license, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 5.10.190 below. 
C.  In addition to the above remedies, the business license director may proceed to direct the Hall County Marshal or the Hall County Sheriff to collect [such fee or tax] in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.190; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.190); Res. of 12-14-06, § 2; Res. of 10-23-14(2), § 1) 
5.10.190. - Violation of chapter; penalty. 
A.  In addition to other remedies available to the county for the collection of special taxes, occupation taxes and regulatory fees due the county from persons subject to the tax or fee who fail or refuse to pay the tax or fee, the officer charged with the collection of the tax or fee shall issue executions against the delinquent taxpayers for any or all of the following: 
1.  The amount of the taxes or fees due when the taxes or fees become due. 
2.  Any penalty imposed by subsection (A) of section 5.10.180 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. 
3.  Any interest imposed by [section] 5.10.180(A) of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia; 
B.  The court of competent jurisdiction (Hall County Magistrate Court) for the enforcement of ordinances of the local government which has levied the tax or imposed the fee may impose a civil fine for failure to pay the occupation tax or regulatory fee. Such a civil fine shall not exceed $500.00 and may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. 
C.  Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.200; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.200); Res. of 11-11-99, § 11; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
5.10.200. - Business inspectors. 
The business license director and his duly designated assistants or their successors shall be classified as deputy business inspectors with full subpoena and arresting powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the Business Occupation Tax and Regulations Resolution for 1995 (this chapter) and succeeding years thereafter. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.210; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.210)) 
5.10.210. - Businesses not covered by chapter. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this chapter, but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by act of local law: 
A.  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
B.  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3. 
C.  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.220; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.220)) 
5.10.220. - Occupation tax inapplicable where levy prohibited or exempted by law. 
This occupation tax is not levied upon the number of employees of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of Georgia or of the United States. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.230; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.230)) 
5.10.230. - Date when occupation tax due and payable. 
A.  The amount of occupation tax shall be due and payable to the said county, at the business license office of the county on January 1 each year, and delinquent if not paid within 30 days from the due date. 
B.  Prior to the opening of a new business, an application for a business license must be made. If the application, fees or taxes have not been paid prior to the opening of the new business, the person liable for the fees or tax shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the fees or tax due. Interest on delinquent fees and tax shall be assessed at one percent for each month or fraction thereof of delinquency. Said penalty and interest shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal, herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, the administrative fee and the regulatory fee, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.240; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.240); Res. of 11-11-99, § 12; Res. of 10-23-14(2), § 2) 
5.10.240. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the unincorporated area of Hall County in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees from the commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid as provided in section 5.10.150. When any person commences business on or after April 1, in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 75 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year and shall be due and payable before commencement of the business. When any person commences business on or after July 1, in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year and shall be due and payable before commencement of the business. When any person commences business on or after October 1, in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 25 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year and shall be due and payable before commencement of the business. The administrative fee and the regulatory fee shall not be reduced. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.250; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.250); Res. of 11-11-99, § 13; Res. of 10-23-14(2), § 3) 
5.10.250. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Res. of 11-11-99, § 14, repealed § 5.10.250, which pertained to confidentiality of returns. See the Code Comparative Table. 
5.10.260. - Inspection of books and records. 
In any case, the business license director of the county, through his officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business upon which the applications are made. The business license director or his designee shall have the right to inspect the books or records of the business for which the application was made in the county, and upon demand of the business license director or his designee such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the county within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the business license currently existing to do business in the county. Adequate records shall be kept in Hall County, Georgia, for examination by the business license director or his designee at his discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, a penalty of ten percent of the deficiency and an additional one percent of the deficiency for each month or fraction thereof that the deficiency was due and unpaid shall be assessed. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.280; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.280)) 
5.10.270. - Revocation of business license for failure to pay tax, file returns, or permit inspection of books. 
Except for a person whose qualifications to practice his or her profession are determined by the general laws of the State of Georgia, [upon] the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent as above provided, any business license granted by the county under this chapter permitting the owner of said business to do business in the county for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business license shall be granted by the county for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to a person who has failed to submit adequate records as requested. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.290; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.290)) 
5.10.280. - Effect of noncompliance; continuing in business after business license revocation. 
Any person, or their manager, agent or employee, who does business in the county after the business license for said business has been revoked as herein provided; any person, or their manager, agent or employee, who is hereby required to make returns showing the number of employees and who fails to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, or refuses to amend such returns so as to set forth the correct information, or who shall make false returns; and any person, or their manager, agent or employee, who refuses to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officer(s), agent(s), employee(s) or representative(s) of the county request such inspection, during normal business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 5.10.190 of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.300; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.300)) 
5.10.290. - Execution for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the tax commissioner of Hall County, upon any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the person liable for said tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property of the person liable for said tax, all as provided by the resolutions of Hall County, Georgia, and the laws of Georgia. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and dated from the time when such tax becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the sheriff of Hall County upon the property of the person liable for said tax, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the resolutions of Hall County and the laws of Georgia, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the resolutions of Hall County and the laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the tax commissioner of Hall County, Georgia, against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest, penalties and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due the person as though the person had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.310; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.310)) 
5.10.300. - Amendments. 
Subject to the provisions of section 5.10.340, this chapter shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the board of commissioners to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the county of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.320; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.320)) 
5.10.310. - Payment of tax or assessment levied under prior ordinance or resolution. 
This chapter does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance or resolution heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance or resolution have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances and/or resolutions heretofore and hereafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances or resolutions, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or resolution, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.330; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.330)) 
5.10.320. - Enforcement of chapter. 
It is hereby made the duty of the business license director, the Hall County Marshal, and the Hall County Sheriff's Department to see that the provisions of this chapter relating to business occupation taxes and regulations are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the magistrate court of Hall County or the state court of Hall County. It is hereby made the further duty of the business license director, the Hall County Marshal and/or the sheriff, and their designees and assistants, to inspect all business licenses issued by the county, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary, to determine whether the business license held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.340; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.340)) 
5.10.330. - Provisions of chapter to remain in effect until amended by board of commissioners. 
This chapter shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the board of commissioners. All provisions hereof relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.350; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.350)) 
5.10.340. - Public hearing required before adoption of tax. 
The board of commissioners shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any resolution which will affect the occupation tax as set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.360; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.360)) 
5.10.350. - Authority to establish exemption or reduction in tax. 
A.  The board of commissioners may by subsequent resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax or a credit against occupation tax owed to [by] one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting, encouraging, or maintaining selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious. 
B.  Exemptions or reductions in occupation tax pursuant to paragraph A of this section may include but shall not be limited to the following: 
1.  Absolute dollar amount limitations on the total amount of tax, either by criterion or combination of criteria used for classification or for businesses and practitioners, provided that a jurisdiction which provides an absolute dollar amount limitation on the total amount of tax shall levy and collect such maximum tax only once on each business entity or practitioner even if a business or practitioner has more than one office or location within the jurisdiction; 
2.  Tax credits for the retention or creation of jobs, or for jobs of a specific description, including but not limited to entry level jobs or jobs with compensation of a specified range; 
3.  Tax credits for other taxes paid to the local government, including but not limited to ad valorem taxes; 
4.  A tax exemption or a lower rate of taxation for sales to customers outside the jurisdiction of Hall County; 
5.  A credit or rebate to businesses or practitioners who paid occupation taxes in the previous year; 
6.  A limitation on the dollar or percentage amount of increase in tax from a base year to a subsequent year, provided that the limitation is made applicable to new businesses or practitioners by imputing the number of employees of the subsequent year to the base year in calculating tax for the base year, tax for the subsequent year and the increase in tax; and 
7.  A credit or reduction as an adjustment for seasonal fluctuations in the number of employees, other fluctuations in the number of employees, increases or decreases in the number of employees, or temporary employees. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.370; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.370)) 
5.10.360. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this chapter between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.380; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.380)) 
5.10.370. - Public hearing on use of increased revenue. 
In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year in Hall County, one or more public hearings shall be held by the board of commissioners of Hall County as part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.390)) 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 

5.10.380. - General authority to impose regulatory fees. 
Business regulatory fees shall be levied, assessed, collected and paid on and by those individuals, firms or corporations doing business or practicing a trade in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia, in such sums and in such categories as set forth in section 5.10.570 of this chapter. The fees and taxes imposed herein and the categories of business and trade upon which such fees and taxes are imposed may be modified or changed by subsequent resolution of the board of commissioners of the county. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.400; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.400)) 
5.10.385. - Regulatory fee exemptions. 
Examples of businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations which local governments are not authorized to subject to regulatory fees include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
1.  Lawyers; 
2.  Physicians licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia; 
3.  Osteopaths licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia; 
4.  Chiropractors; 
5.  Podiatrists; 
6.  Dentists; 
7.  Optometrists; 
8.  Psychologists; 
9.  Veterinarians; 
10.  Landscape architects; 
11.  Land surveyors; 
12.  Practitioners of physiotherapy; 
13.  Public accountants; 
14.  Embalmers; 
15.  Funeral directors; 
16.  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers; 
17.  Architects; 
18.  Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors; 
19.  Dealers of motor vehicles, as defined in paragraph 1 of the Official Code of Georgia, Section 10-1-622; 
20.  Owners or operators of bona fide coin operated amusement machines, as defined in the Official Code of Georgia, Section 48-17-1, and owners or operators of businesses where bona fide coin operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, provided that such amusement machines have affixed current stickers showing payment of annual permit fees, in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia, Section 48-17-9; 
21.  Merchants or dealers as defined in the Official Code of Georgia, Section 48-5-354 as to their deliveries to businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations in areas zoned for commercial use; and 
22.  Any other business, profession, or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by state law, unless the state law regulating such business, profession, or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. 
(Res. of 11-11-99, § 15) 
5.10.390. - Business license transfer. 
A.  The business license shall not be transferable to another person, firm or corporation in the same location. 
B.  The business license may be transferred from one business location to another provided the ownership of the business remains the same. 
C.  Notification of any relocation of a business, or changes to the business type, must be given to the business license department within 30 days of any relocation or change of business type. 
D.  Application for an updated license with the new address and business information may be made at the time of notification with the business license department. Failure to do so will void the business license and may result in citations being issued for improper zoning or building code violations and/or operating without a valid business license. 
E.  The business license issued is valid only if the information printed on the actual business license is correct. Any changes to the business type or address will void the license. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.410; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.410); Res. of 10-23-14(2), § 4) 
5.10.400. - Business license application; investigation; action by business license director; restrictions. 
All applications for a business license shall be on forms prepared by the business license director. 
A.  The application shall include: 
1.  The name of the business; 
2.  The location of the business; 
3.  The mailing address of the business; 
4.  The name and address of the owner of the business, and, if a corporation, the name of the person responsible for corporate affairs in unincorporated Hall County; 
5.  The name of the manager at the business location; 
6.  The nature of the business or businesses; 
7.  The number of employees or such other information as may be required to assess the occupation tax; 
8.  Such other information as may be required to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Upon completion of the application and the payment of the tax and fees, the business license director shall make such investigations and require such reports as necessary to carry out this chapter. Upon receipt of the necessary reports and investigations, the business license director shall either issue the business license or refer the application to the board of commissioners. If the application is referred to the board of commissioners, the applicant shall be notified in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
C.  The limited hours of operation, restrictions and other special circumstances pertaining to the operation of a business licensed by the county shall be entered directly onto the business license before the same is issued and delivered over to the business license applicant. 
D.  Business owner must be a citizen of the United States or a legal alien. In the case of a legal alien, the owner must furnish current alien registration card or picture identification and documentation from the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service authorizing the legal alien to work in the United States. 
E.  All business owners must be 18 years of age when applying for a business license. 
F.  All sole proprietor business owners must show a photo ID when applying for a business license. If the ownership of the business is a partnership, then photo ID must be provided on all partners associated with the business. If the ownership of the business is a corporation or LLC, then ID must be provided on the president, CEO, or managing member of the business, as is indicated by the Georgia Secretary of State's office. Businesses who indicate ownership by a corporation, or LLC must additionally provide evidence that the corporation is registered with the Georgia Secretary of State's office, and that the corporation is current and in compliance with the Georgia Secretary of State's office. All foreign corporations must also register with the Georgia Secretary of State's office. 
G.  All delinquent and current state and county ad valorem taxes assessed against the business, whether such business is a proprietorship, general partnership, limited partnership, limited liability/limited partnership, limited liability company or corporation, shall be paid prior to the issuance of a business license. 
H.  Before a business license can be issued, a final certificate of occupancy must be obtained from the planning and zoning department and the building inspection department. 
I.  (Reserved for future use.) 
J.  For an application to be issued at a commercial location, the owner of the business must produce a current lease or deed to the property in the owner's name. 
K.  A business license is only valid if the information printed on the actual license is correct; including, but not limited to, business name, owner name, business address and business type. Any changes not reported to the business license office will immediately void the business license. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.420; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.420); Res. of 11-11-99, § 16; Res. of 12-14-06, § 3; Res. of 10-23-14(2), § 5) 
5.10.410. - Issuance of business license by board of commissioners. 
Whenever an application is referred to the board of commissioners under section 5.04.420 of this chapter, the board of commissioners shall make such investigation and hold such hearings as it shall determine. The board of commissioners may either issue the business license, issue the business license with conditions, or deny the business license, as necessary, in the opinion of the board of commissioners, to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare and security of the county. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.430; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.430)) 
5.10.420. - Special requirements for licensing of certain businesses. 
A.  The power to issue a business license to a tourist camp, cabin camp, tourist house, road house, public dance hall or similar establishment as defined in O.C.G.A. Sections 43-21-50 and 31-28-1 shall be reserved specifically to the board of commissioners. licenses issued to astrologers, clairvoyants, fortune tellers, palmists, phrenologists and related occupations shall also be reserved by the board of commissioner in all zoning districts except I-I and I-II. 
B.  The power to issue a business license for the operation of a flea market, outdoor exhibition, outdoor performance, outdoor musical festival or other places of outdoor public assembly shall be reserved specifically for the board of commissioners. 
C.  The board of commissioners shall make such investigations and hold such hearings as necessary to assess the impact of the businesses set forth in this section upon the health, safety and general welfare and security of the county. The application for a business license for any of the businesses set forth in this section shall set forth conclusive evidence: 
1.  That the applicant shall provide sufficient security people, at the expense of the applicant, to control the public and enforce all laws within the area occupied by the business and/or event; 
2.  That the applicant shall provide adequate emergency medical facilities, at the expense of the applicant, to provide sufficient emergency medical care for members of the public who patronize his business and/or event; 
3.  That the applicant shall provide adequate maintenance personnel to clean the area occupied by the business as well as those areas which are adjacent to the area occupied by the business and which are littered as a result of the business, event and/or its patrons; 
4.  That a study has been prepared establishing the adequacy of the business facility for the use as applied for and further establishing the adequacy of the public roads to handle the access to the business facility for the number of anticipated patrons; 
5.  That the applicant shall provide adequate toilet facilities such that a minimum of one toilet fixture per 100 patrons is provided; 
6.  That the applicant shall provide adequate drinking water for the members of the public who patronize his business and/or event. 
D.  The board of commissioners may either issue the business license, issue the business license with conditions, or deny the business license as necessary, in the opinion of the board of commissioners, to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare and security of the county. 
E.  The failure of the applicant for a business license for a business set forth in this section to make the required application in sufficient time for the board of commissioners to consider the application at two successive regular meetings of said board of commissioners prior to the beginning of the operation of the business shall result in the automatic denial of the business license; provided, however, that a renewal of a business license for a business set forth in this section may be considered and acted upon in one regular meeting if no objections to the issuance of the renewal business license are raised. However, if any objections are raised, the renewal must be considered at two successive regular meetings of the board of commissioners. 
F.  Businesses permitted under this section shall not operate on Sundays between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 (noon), ending activity at 7:00 p.m. on Sundays and at midnight on other nights. (This does not apply to non-noisemaking activity.) 
G.  The specifically enumerated requirements set forth in subsections C(1) through C(6) of this section shall not apply to any business and/or event when the anticipated attendance is less than 10,000 people. 
H. 1. Subject to the provisions of this section, the board of commissioners may issue a special events business license to an applicant who intends to conduct one or more outdoor exhibitions, outdoor performances, outdoor musical festivals or other events involving an outdoor public assembly. The procedure for the issuance of the business license shall be the same as the procedure for the issuance of other business licenses under this section. The applicant for a special events business license shall include in his application a list of the events he anticipates conducting during the term of the business license. 
2.  Prior to conducting an event, a special events business licensee must notify the business license director in writing of the event. The business license director will determine whether the planned event is of a character or type similar to those listed in the licensee's application. In making this determination, the business license director shall consider the number of persons expected to attend, the noise or other disruptions associated with the event, the impact on the area surrounding the licensed premises, the adequacy of facilities (medical, toilets, drinking water, etc.) at the licensed premises, and any and all other matters relevant to the determination. Failure to have listed the specific planned event on the application does not preclude the business license director from determining that the planned event is of a same or similar character to those listed on the application. If the business license director determines that the event is of a same or similar character to those listed on the application, he will authorize the event. If the business license director determines that the event is not of a same or similar character to those listed on the application, he will deny the licensee the authority to conduct the event. If the business license director is unable to make a determination, he will refer the matter to the board of commissioners, who will review the matter and make a decision at the first regular meeting following referral of the matter to them. If the business license director makes a determination adverse to the licensee, the licensee may request that the matter be referred to the board of commissioners and the board of commissioners will review the matter and make a decision at the first regular meeting following referral of the matter to them. 
3.  The special events business license shall only authorize events by the licensee at the licensed premises. The business license shall not authorize events by persons renting or leasing the licensed premises from the licensee. 
I.  When the renewal of a business license of a regulated business is requested, the business license director is given the authority to review the annual renewal request of the regulated business. If after reviewing the request for renewal, no adverse complaints, issues or extenuating circumstances are found, the business license director may automatically renew the license rather than presenting it to the board of commissioners for approval. If there are adverse complaints, issues or extenuating circumstances, the business license director will submit the renewal request to the board of commissioners for its consideration. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.440; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.440); Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 1; Res. of 2-8-07(1), § 1; Res. of 3-26-09(1), § 1; Res. of 10-23-14(2), § 6) 
Cross reference— Background investigation required for operators of certain businesses, § 5.10.550; health and safety, tit. 8; public peace, morals and welfare, tit. 9. 
5.10.430. - Grounds for denial of business license. 
The board of commissioners may deny a business license to any business engaged in an unlawful activity or operated in such a manner as to violate lawful ordinances or resolutions adopted by the board of commissioners of the county. Unlawful activity shall include, but not be limited to, activities in violation of the zoning regulations and the electrical, health, building and fire codes of the county. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.450; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.450)) 
5.10.440. - Going-out-of-business sales and similar sales. 
A.  All persons shall secure from the county a special business license pursuant to the provisions of this section before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale advertised or held out by any means to be one of the following kinds: 
1.  Going-out-of-business sales; 
2.  Removal of business sales; or 
3.  Fire and other altered stock sale. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
1.  Fire and other altered goods sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water, or other means. 
2.  Going-out-of-business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including but not limited to the following sales: adjustors, adjustment, alteration, assignee's, bankrupt, benefit of administrator's, benefit of creditor's, benefit of trustee's, building coming down, closing, creditor's committee, creditor's end, executor's final days, forced out, forced out-of-business, insolvent's last days, lease expire, liquidation, loss of lease, mortgage sale, receiver's, trustee's quitting business and other like sales. 
3.  Goods means any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated under this section. 
4.  Removal of business sale means a sale held out in such manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location in the county or will then continue business from other existing locations in the county. 
C.  A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this section shall make a written application to the county, setting forth and containing the following information: 
1.  The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale; 
2.  The true name and address of the person from whom he purchased the goods to be sold, the price therefor, and, if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition; 
3.  A description of the place where such sale is to be held; 
4.  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the effective date of termination of such occupancy; 
5.  The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted; 
6.  A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted; 
7.  The means to be employed in advertising such sale, together with the proposed content of any advertisement; 
8.  A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at such sale as disclosed by the applicant's records. Such inventory shall be attached to and become part of the required application. 
(a)  All goods included in such inventory shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment. 
(b)  Such inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting a sale regulated hereunder. Any unusual purchase or additions to the stock of goods of the business hereby affected within ten days before the filing of an application hereunder shall be deemed to be of such character. 
D.  Any applicant for a business license under this section shall submit to the county a business regulatory fee of $100.00 with his application. 
E.  Any person who has not been the owner of the business advertised or described in the application for a business license under this section for a period of at least 12 months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be granted a business license except upon the approval of the county commissioners; provided that, upon the death of a person doing business in this county, his heirs, devises or legatees shall have the right to apply at any time for a business license under this section. 
F.  Where a person applying for a business license under this section operates more than one place of business, the business license issued shall apply only to the one store or branch specified in the application. No other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it or in any way participating in the licensed sale. Nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale. 
G.  A business license issued under this section shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than three calendar months following the issuance thereof; provided that a longer period shall be designated by the county commission upon good cause shown, but not to exceed 30 additional days. 
H.  A business license issued under this section shall authorize only the one type of sale described in the application at the location named therein. 
I.  Any business license provided for or by this section shall not be assignable or transferable. 
J.  Upon being issued a business license under this section for a going-out-of-business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the county all other business licenses he may hold at the time applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a business license under this section. 
K.  Any person who has held a sale, as regulated under this section, at the location stated in the application, within one year last past from the date of such application shall not be granted a license, except upon the approval of the county commission. 
L.  A business license issued under this paragraph [section] shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. 
M.  A licensee under this section shall: 
1.  Adhere to inventory. Make no additions whatsoever, during the period of the licensed sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application for license; 
2.  Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising; 
3.  Adhere to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto; 
4.  Keep duplicate inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and shall present such duplicate to inspecting officials upon request; and 
5.  Segregate non-inventoried goods. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale and shall make such distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and out of the place of sale apprising the public of the status of all such goods. 
N.  It is unlawful for any person to advertise by newspapers, radio, posters or otherwise and represent that he is operating, offering or maintaining fire sales, wreck sales, bankrupt sales, closing-out or going-out-of-business sales and similar businesses, whereby the public is led to believe that it is being offered merchandise at reduced rates on account of fire, wrecks, bankruptcies, closing out or discontinuance of business, when in fact such sales are not bona fide, but are fakes and frauds, and the advertisement and representations are untrue and false. 
O.  It is unlawful for any person to advertise by sign, posters, handbills or otherwise that he or any business entity is operating, offering or maintaining fire sales, wreck sales, bankrupt sales, closing-out or going-out-of-business sales or similar sales for more than a four-month period. In the event such advertising is continued for a period of time in excess of four-months, such shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this section; provided, however, any individual or business entity having just cause or reason requiring the extension of such sales for more than the four-month period may, prior to expiration of the four-month period, petition the county commission for a continuance of time within which to complete such sales, and the county commission, in its discretion, upon a showing of good cause, may but shall not be required to grant an extension of time. The commission's decision on whether or not to grant such additional time for the advertising and the conducting of the sales shall be final. 
P.  It is also unlawful for any person, conducting any sale, except judicial sales, whether the same is by auction or otherwise, of any goods, wares or merchandise which are claimed to be or have been in or damaged by fire, or which are claimed to be or have been sold or purchased on account of any fire, or which are or have been or which are claimed to be the property of any bankrupt person who has failed in business or has made a general assignment, or is or has been in voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy, or which are being sold or offered for sale in any other way than through the usual channels of trade, to sell or offer for sale in such sale any goods, wares or merchandise not so affected or damaged or to add to or to permit to be added to or to bring into or permit to be brought into any store, warehouse or any building in the county, for the purpose of adding to such goods, wares or merchandise not so circumstanced or affected and which are on hand in any such store, warehouse or other building for the purpose of being sold at such sale. 
Q.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
1.  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
2.  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials; 
3.  Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction; 
4.  Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication who publishes in good faith any advertisement, without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions of this section have not been complied with. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.460; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.460)) 
5.10.450. - Failure to pay regulatory fee; collection of delinquent fees. 
Any person, firm or corporation required to pay a regulatory fee and who fails to do so during the required period of collection shall be deemed to be delinquent. When any fee becomes delinquent under this chapter, collection and penalties shall be as provided for in section 5.10.180 and section 5.10.190 of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.470; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.470)) 
5.10.460. - Grounds for revocation of business license. 
The board of commissioners shall have the right, after notice and hearing, to revoke any business license issued hereunder on the following grounds: 
A.  Violation of this chapter. 
B.  1.  Violation of other laws and resolutions of the county pertaining to the carrying on of such business as would affect the health, safety, and welfare of the public or the county. 
2.  Violation of a law of the United States or the State of Georgia, which affects the public health, welfare and safety. 
C.  Fraudulent business practices. 
D.  Failure of a licensee for a business which is so required by section 5.10.420 to provide the following enumerated items: 
1.  Sufficient security people, at the expense of the licensee, to control the public and enforce all laws within the area occupied by the business and/or event. 
2.  Adequate emergency medical facilities, at the expense of the licensee, to provide sufficient emergency medical care for members of the public who patronize his business and/or event. 
3.  Adequate maintenance personnel to clean the area occupied by the business as well as those areas which are adjacent to the area occupied by the business and which are littered as a result of the business, event, and/or its patrons. 
4.  Adequate toilet facilities such that a minimum of one toilet facility per 100 patrons is provided. 
5.  Adequate drinking water for members of the public who patronize his business and/or event. 
E.  The business constitutes a nuisance. For the purposes hereof, a nuisance is defined as follows: A nuisance is anything that works hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary reasonable person. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.480; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.480)) 
5.10.470. - Preliminary investigation on revocation of business license. 
Where it is reported to the business license director that a holder of a county business license is engaged in any activity which could form the basis for a revocation of said business license under section 5.10.460, a preliminary investigation shall be conducted by the business license director in order to determine whether or not there is a basis for the reports. If the business license director's preliminary investigation reveals that there may be a basis for revocation or suspension of the business license, the business license holder will be notified to appear before the board of commissioners for a hearing under the provisions of section 5.10.490. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.490; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.490)) 
5.10.480. - Seizure of business license. 
A.  If the sheriff of the county shall find that a business of a certain category listed below is in violation of a law of the State of Georgia or in violation of a law or resolution of the county and that the continued operation of the business would create a clear and present danger to the health, safety and general welfare and security of the county, the sheriff shall be empowered to seize and temporarily suspend the business license of the business. The sheriff shall deliver the business license to the clerk of the board of commissioners upon the next working day of the clerk. The chairman of the board of commissioners shall then schedule a special hearing of the board of commissioners to consider further action upon the order within five days of the date upon which the clerk of the board of commissioners received the business license from the sheriff. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall be limited to the following businesses: 
1.  Tourist camps, cabin camps, tourist houses, roadhouses, public dance halls or similar establishments as defined in Ga. Code Ann. ch. 52-3 [O.C.G.A. § 43-21-1 et seq.]; 
2.  Flea markets, outdoor exhibitions, outdoor performances, outdoor musical festivals or other places of outdoor public assembly; 
3.  Auctions of property other than real estate, billiard rooms, game rooms, canvassers and solicitors, second hand sales, pawn brokers, precious metal dealers, private detectives and detective agencies, carnivals, circuses, traveling shows, taxi services, limousine services, and bounty hunters. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.500; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.500); Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 1) 
5.10.490. - Hearing on revocation of business license. 
A.  When a matter is transmitted by the business license director or the sheriff to the clerk of the board of commissioners for possible suspension or revocation, the chairman of the board of commissioners shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall make such investigations as it deems necessary and shall conduct the hearing as the chairman shall see fit. 
B.  The licensee shall be notified in person or by mail at his business address of the date and time of the hearing. The licensee may appear in person or be represented by counsel. 
C.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the board of commissioners, based upon evidence submitted at the hearing, shall enter an order making a finding of fact and then: 
1.  Find that the evidence does not authorize revocation or suspension; or 
2.  Issue a warning to the licensee; or 
3.  Suspend the business license and probate the suspension; or 
4.  Revoke the business license and probate the revocation; or 
5.  Suspend the business license; or 
6.  Revoke the business license; or 
7.  Take any other appropriate action regarding the license. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.510; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.510)) 
5.10.500. - Appeal of decision of administrative official. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation may appeal any action, order, decision, or determination of the business license director or any other administrative official to the board of commissioners. The appeal is limited to an alleged error of the official from which the appeal is taken. 
B.  The appeal shall be filed in writing with the clerk of the board of commissioners within 15 days following the date on which the alleged error was made. Upon receiving the appeal, the clerk shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners and notify all parties to the appeal by mail at their business address of the time and date of the appeal hearing. 
C.  All parties to the appeal may appear in person or be represented by counsel. 
D.  The board of commissioners shall conduct the hearing as the chairman shall see fit. At the conclusion of the hearing, the board of commissioners shall enter an order making a finding of fact and shall have all the powers of the official from which the appeal was taken. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.520; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.520)) 
5.10.510. - Board of commissioners' decisions final. 
Any decision, order, requirement or determination of the board of commissioners of the county shall be a final administrative determination. Any application for relief from an official action of the board of commissioners shall be as set forth in section 5.10.600 of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.530; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.530)) 
5.10.520. - Requirements for businesses exempted from fees. 
Even though a person, firm or corporation may be exempt under section 5.10.140.A from paying an administrative fee, regulatory fee, and occupation tax, or exempt from paying the administrative fee and occupation tax under section 5.10.140.B, C and D, such person, firm or corporation shall apply to the business license director for a free business license to engage in or carry on any business, occupation or use provided for herein, and shall submit proper credentials showing that the applicant is entitled to exempt status. The applicant shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter and all other rules, regulations and resolutions of the county, and upon failure to do so shall be subject to the penalties of this chapter or any other appropriate resolution of the county. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.540; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.540)) 
5.10.530. - Right of entry. 
The business license director, the sheriff, or their authorized representatives shall have the power to enter any premises during the normal business hours of the business for the purpose of enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.550; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.550)) 
5.10.540. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Res. of 9-9-10(1), § 1, deleted § 5.10.540, which pertained to business licenses for canvassers and solicitors and derived from Code 1991, § 5.04.560; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.560) and Res. of 1-23-03, § 1. 
5.10.550. - Background investigation required for operators of certain businesses. 
A.  Persons, firms or corporations engaged in the following businesses, trades or professions shall be investigated prior to the issuance of a business license: 
1.  Operators of tourist camps, camp cabins, tourist houses, roadhouses, public dance halls or similar establishments as defined under O.C.G.A. Sections 43-12-50 and 31-28-1. 
2.  Operators of flea markets, outdoor exhibitors, outdoor performances, outdoor musical festivals, and outdoor public assemblies as defined in section 5.10.420. 
3.  Auctioneers of property other than real estate, owners and/or operators of billiard rooms or game rooms, canvassers and solicitors, (except those exempted from obtaining identification badges under the provisions of section 5.10.540(A), astrologers, clairvoyants, fortune tellers, palmists, phrenologists and such related occupations, second hand sales, pawn brokerages, precious metal dealers, carnivals, circuses, traveling shows, taxi services, limousine services, tattoo artists, tattoo operators and bounty hunters. 
4.  Transient persons as defined in O.C.G.A. Section 92-107 (now repealed). 
B.  No license shall be issued to any business type listed in paragraph A. to any person or business where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal stockholder or licensee, whether such interest is direct or indirect, or beneficial or absolute, has been convicted or has taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten years for conviction involving moral turpitude, or five years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal or county ordinance which would have any effect on the applicant's ability to properly conduct such a business, except traffic offenses. The term "conviction" as used in this section shall include an adjudication of guilt or plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. 
C.  The board of commissioners on appeal, may waive any conviction as a disqualification if it finds that it would have no material effect upon the applicant's ability to properly conduct its business if such license were granted. Upon payment by the applicant of a fee in the amount of $100.00 the Business license director shall schedule a hearing before the Hall County Board of Commissioners for its consideration as to whether a license be granted. 
D.  Any person desiring to operate a tattoo establishment or desiring to operate as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall make application for a business license to the Business License Office of Hall County, Georgia. The minimum age of each applicant shall be 18 years of age. Applicants shall furnish two photographs showing a front and side picture of the full face of the applicant, size two and one-half inches by two inches. Applicants shall present a medical certificate from a medical doctor certifying that the person is sound physically and mentally, has good eyesight and is not affected with a disease which can be communicated through openings in the human skin. The applicant shall also submit the exposure control plan which has been approved by the Hall County Health Department prior to the issuance of the business license, and shall further comply with all requirements of the Hall County Tattoo Resolution designated as Chapter 8.10 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.570; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.570); Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 1; Res. of 1-23-03, § 2; Res. of 2-8-07(2), § 1) 
Cross reference— Special requirements for licensing of certain businesses, § 5.10.420; tattoo establishments, ch. 8.10; public peace, morals and welfare, tit. 9. 
5.10.560. - Prohibited businesses. 
No person shall practice any of the following trades, occupations or professions in the county: 
A.  Bookmaking or bookmaking services, gambling or gambling establishments, games of chance and other such occupations as prohibited by law. 
B.  Reserved. 
C.  The sale of drug consumption paraphernalia or drug enhancement paraphernalia (head shops) by persons other than those legally licensed as a pharmacist. 
D.  No business activity listed in section 5.10.420 shall be conducted within the unincorporated areas of Hall County prior to being approved in accordance with section 5.10.420. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.580; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.580); Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 1; Res. of 2-8-07(3), § 1) 
Cross reference— Public peace, morals and welfare, tit. 9.0 
5.10.570. - Amount of regulatory fees. 
The regulatory fees set forth herein shall apply when obtaining a business license if applicable, and shall be in addition to the administrative fee and the occupation tax imposed in article I. The sheriff approval and background checks are subject to change at any time and are in accordance with the rates set by the Hall County Sheriff's Office: 
A.  Fees associated with the sheriff's department approval or background investigations will be set by the Hall County Sheriff's Department and are subject to change at any time. 
B.  Identification badges: $10.00 each. 
C.  Address change or business name change requiring reissuance of business license: $5.00. 
D.  Permits requiring board of commissioners' approval: 
1.  New applications: $100.00. 
2.  Renewal applications: $50.00. 
3.  Going-out-of-business sale: $100.00. 
E.  Registration and regulatory fees shall be non-refundable after the fact. Upon written request the occupation tax may be refunded, if the application is not approved or is canceled. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.590; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.590); Res. of 10-23-14(2), § 7) 
5.10.580. - Additional restrictions on certain businesses. 
A.  Door to door canvassers or solicitors shall be limited to daylight hours only and must display badges issued by Hall County while canvassing or soliciting. 
B.  All food sales or merchandise sales from vehicles require written permission from the property owner. 
C.  Flea markets: No public sales before noon on Sundays; before noon operations limited to loading and unloading. 
D.  Establishments permitting public dancing must close by 12:30 a.m. weeknights, except Thursday and Friday nights, when they may remain open until 2:00 a.m. There will be no Sunday operation. 
E.  Race tracks: Racing is prohibited between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 (noon) on Sundays, ending racing activity at 7:00 p.m. on Sunday and at midnight on other nights. There will be a 1:00 a.m. extension for an unforeseen delay only due to extenuating circumstances. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.600; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.600); Res. of 3-26-09(1), § 2) 
5.10.590. - Amendments. 
This chapter may be amended from time to time, and all persons, businesses, occupations, trades and uses subject to this chapter shall be subject to such amendment. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.610; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.610)) 
5.10.600. - Appeal of decisions of board of commissioners. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation who may have a substantial interest in any decision of the board of commissioners may appeal from any final decision of the board of commissioners to the superior court of Hall County by filing with the clerk of the court a notice of appeal in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly wherein such decision is contrary to law. Such notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the decision of the board of commissioners is rendered. A copy of the notice of appeal shall be served on the clerk of the board of commissioners. Upon the filing of a notice of appeal, the clerk of the superior court shall give immediate notice thereof to the clerk of the board of commissioners, and within 30 days from the time of such notice the clerk of the board of commissioners shall cause to be filed with the clerk of the superior court a duly certified copy of the minutes of the proceedings had before the board of commissioners and the decision of the board of commissioners. 
B.  In the event of an appeal to the superior court, the appellants shall bear the cost of preparing the necessary documents as required by the court. 
(Code 1991, § 5.04.620; Res. of 9-14-95, § 1(5.04.620)) 
CHAPTER 5.20. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Public peace, morals and welfare, tit. 9. 

5.20.010. - Findings; public purpose. 
A.  The governing body of the Hall County, Georgia is aware of the following evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the Board of Commissioners of Hall County, Georgia (hereinafter the "governing body"): 
1.  Findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Rome, Georgia; Adams County, Colorado; Ellicottville, New York; Newport News, Virginia; St. Croix County, Wisconsin; Centralia, Washington; Whittier, California; Denver, Colorado; Dallas, Texas and environs; Fort Worth and Dallas, Texas; Jewett, New York; El Paso, Texas; Palm Beach, Florida; American Center for Law and Justice; Oconee County, Georgia; City of Lilburn, Georgia; City of Roswell, Georgia; City of Sandy Springs, Georgia; City of Carrollton, Georgia; Manatee County, Florida; St. Paul, Minnesota; Troup County, Georgia; Gwinnett County, Georgia; Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas, and numerous other studies, articles, and court decisions, all of which have been presented to the Board of Commissioners of Hall County in bound form and/or on diskette and incorporated into the record of the proceedings before the governing body of Hall County, Georgia; and 
2.  The following special reports relating to the secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments on real property values: September 2004 Survey of Appraisers, Fort Worth and Dallas, Texas; May 2008 Survey of Appraisers, Palm Beach County, Florida; and June 2008 Survey of Texas Appraisers, Texas City Attorneys Association incorporated into the record of the proceedings before the governing body of Hall County, Georgia; and 
3.  The opinion of the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals in Flanigan's Enterprises, Inc. of Georgia v. Fulton County, Ga., 596 F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2010), which discusses extensive evidence of negative secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments in Fulton County, Georgia incorporated into the record of the proceedings before the governing body of Hall County, Georgia; and 
4.  Three articles authored or co-authored by Dr. Richard McCleary, Professor at the University of California, Irvine, entitled "Rural Hotspots: The Case of Adult Business" (2008); "Do Peep Shows 'Cause' Crime? A Response to Linz, Paul, and Yao" (2006); and "Do 'Off-Site' Adult Businesses Have Secondary Effects? Legal Doctrine, Social Theory, and Empirical Evidence" (2009), incorporated into the record of the proceedings before the Governing Body of Hall County, Georgia. 
B.  Based upon all of this evidence, the Board of Commissioners of Hall County, Georgia finds: 
1.  Sexually oriented businesses, also known as adult entertainment establishments, lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled or inadequately controlled by the operators of the establishments. The commercial exploitation of human sexuality, in all forms in which such exploitation may be manifested has a deleterious effect on the community where it takes place as heretofore mentioned. Sexually oriented businesses cause an increase in criminal behavior in nearby areas, including but not limited to disorderly conduct, prostitution, solicitation, drug trafficking, drug use, assaults and batteries, and corruption of public officials. 
2.  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses. Offering or providing private or semi-private space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
3.  Adult entertainment establishments escalate and exacerbate undesirable community conditions, including but not limited to blight, diminished property values, increased need for law enforcement and emergency medical response resources, and increased burden on the judicial system as a result of the criminal behavior which the governing body finds such business establishments bring to a community. The secondary negative effects that are caused by such businesses are not limited to such facilities that offer live or recorded performances with human nudity or the depiction of sexual acts but other forms of sexually oriented businesses that also have a deleterious effect on nearby neighborhoods, commercial districts and on urban life in general. These other types of such businesses include but are not limited to adult bookstores, peep shows, massage parlors, bathhouses, adult gift and novelty shops and lingerie or nude modeling studios. 
4.  Persons frequent certain adult theatres, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. 
5.  Communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses. 
6.  AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components. 
7.  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
8.  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
9.  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in some areas of some sexually oriented businesses. 
10.  The findings noted in subsections B.1 through B.9 raise substantial governmental concerns. 
11.  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
12.  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult entertainment establishments as defined herein. 
13.  Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
14.  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and other secondary negative effects as described herein. 
15.  It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding employees who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
16.  The fact that an applicant for an adult entertainment license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter. 
17.  The barring of such individuals from the management of adult entertainment establishments for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
18.  The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the Hall County, Georgia, will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter. 
C.  Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities as described above, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by Hall County, Georgia; and based on the documentary and oral evidence presented at the public hearings before the Board of Commissioners of Hall County, Georgia (hereinafter "the governing body") held prior to the adoption of the resolution codified in this section; and based on the evidence and statements of persons who have appeared before members of the governing body on other occasions, and on other documentary evidence submitted to the governing body, the governing body for Hall County, Georgia takes note of the well-known and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within our country. 
D.  It is the finding of the governing body that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances in establishments offering live nude entertainment or "adult entertainment" begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment have the same deleterious effects on the community. 
E.  Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with commercial nudity and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are criminal activity, depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhoods, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove referenced. The governing body finds it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in Hall County, Georgia, as well unless these regulations are adopted. 
F.  Furthermore, it is the finding of the governing body that live nude or semi-nude entertainment and other forms of adult entertainment including, but not limited to, adult book stores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, adult theaters, lingerie and/or nude modeling shops, and massage parlors have an adverse effect upon the quality of life in the county and surrounding communities. 
G.  The governing body further finds that each separate adverse secondary effect of adult entertainment businesses and sexually oriented businesses constitutes a substantial government interest, that each substantial government interest includes, but is not limited to, preventing future adverse secondary effects of both pre-existing sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment businesses in Hall County, Georgia, and those that may open in the future, and the viability of each separate substantial government interest of the county addressed herein does not depend upon any comparative analysis between adult entertainment businesses and non-adult entertainment businesses. 
H.  The governing body therefore finds that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the Hall County, Georgia, the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and children's day care facilities to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the governing body of Hall County, Georgia finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment, and finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including, but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions. The governing body further finds that such will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To all of these ends, this chapter is hereby adopted. 
I.  Also based upon all of the information, studies, reports, statements, findings in court decisions, and testimony referenced above, as well as the well-known and self-evident conditions and secondary effects caused by the commercial exploitation of commercial total nudity combined with the sale, dispensing and consumption of alcoholic beverages, the governing body also finds and concludes that the sale, dispensing, or consumption of alcoholic beverages of any kind in an adult entertainment establishment as defined herein tends to independently create, aggravate, exacerbate, and add to all of those negative secondary effects set forth in this section. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to address and forestall those negative secondary effects in Hall County, Georgia within the permissible limits and parameters of the Georgia and United States Constitutions. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.010; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2; Res. of 10-23-14(1), § 1) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of a resolution adopted Oct. 23, 2014, amended § 5.20.010 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Inasmuch as two subsections were designated C, in order to preserve sequential lettering of subsections, the second such subsection C—H have been relettered D—I at the editor's discretion. Section 5.20.010 was formerly catchlined "Purpose." 
5.20.020. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  Adult bookstore: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, printed material, magazines, or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter which depicts, describes, or in any way relates to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section of the store, comprising five percent of its total floor space, which is devoted to the sale or display of such material, or an establishment with five percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter which depicts, describes, or relates to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
B.  Adult business: Any establishment which is either expressly specified in this chapter, or which is other than those expressly specified in this chapter, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities, or which offers its patrons a service or entertainment of any type which is characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
C.  Adult dancing establishment: Any business or establishment where employees or dancers display or expose specified anatomical areas to others, or any establishment which features live performances by entertainers or employees where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
D.  Adult entertainment establishment: Any adult theater, adult bookstore, or adult dancing establishment operated for commercial or pecuniary gain, regardless of profit or loss, and whether licensed or unlicensed. An establishment with an adult entertainment license is presumed to be an adult entertainment establishment. 
E.  Adult material: Any one or more of the following, regardless of whether it is new or used: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations, or recordings or other audio matter, which have as their primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
F.  Adult motel: Any motel, hotel, boardinghouse, roominghouse, or other place of temporary lodging which advertises the presentation of or presents films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The term "adult motel" is included within the term "adult theater." 
G.  Adult theater: Any establishment which consists of an enclosed building, or a portion or a part of an enclosed building, or an open-air area used by persons for the viewing of films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Adult motels and establishments which have adult booths are both considered to be adult theaters. 
H.  Adult video store: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of this [its] stock in trade, videotapes, or movies, or other reproductions, whether for sale or for rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or any establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent or more of its total floor space, which is devoted to the sale or display of such material, or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter which depicts, describes, or relates in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
I.  Alcoholic beverage: Any beverage containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight. 
J.  Bathhouse: An establishment to which the public is permitted or invited and in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or on specified anatomical areas. 
K.  Board of commissioners: The board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia. 
L.  Church: Any place where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
M.  Conviction: Any adjudication or determination of guilt resulting from a plea, trial, or forfeiture of bond when charged with a crime, regardless of whether adjudication was withheld or whether the imposition of a sentence was suspended. This definition shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly called the State of Georgia First Offender Act. 
N.  Department: The Hall County Business License Department, or any other section of the Hall County government set aside for the issuance of business licenses and permits. 
O.  Display: Any exposing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion revealing to any person in any location, whether public or private, an item in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision by view from a street, highway, or public sidewalk, or from the property of others, or from any portion of the person's store or property when items and material other than this material are offered for sale or rent to the public. 
P.  Disseminate: To transfer possession of, whether with or without consideration. 
Q.  Distance and measurement: The measurement in lineal feet from the center of any door of customer entry of the proposed premises of any adult entertainment establishment or adult business (or, if not on ground level, then the beginning point for measuring the distance shall be the point at ground level determined by measuring from the center of any door of customer entry which is perpendicular to ground level) to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence, or hospital, as required by this chapter. 
R.  Distribute: Any transfer of possession, whether with or without consideration. 
S.  Educational institution: Any premises or site upon which there is an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which conducts regular classes and/or course of study. Included in the definition of the term "educational institution" are nursery schools, kindergartens, elementary schools, junior high schools, senior high schools, or any special institution of learning. The term does not include any premises or site upon which there is a vocational institution, professional institution, or institution of higher education, including community colleges, junior colleges, four-year colleges, or universities. 
T.  Employee: A person who works or performs in an adult entertainment establishment, irrespective of whether such person is paid a salary or wage. 
U.  Escort bureau: Any business, person, or agency who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish the names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes, or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments, or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
V.  Establishment: A site or premises, or portion thereof, upon which certain activities or operations are conducted for commercial or pecuniary gain, regardless of actual profit or loss. A site or premises shall be presumed to be an establishment where it is in possession of an occupational business license. 
W.  Furnish: To issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, or otherwise provide. 
X.  Good moral character: A person is of good moral character according to this chapter if that person has not been convicted of any felony or any non-felony involving moral turpitude in the past five years. For the purposes of this definition, conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with either a felony, or a non-felony involving moral turpitude. 
Y.  Inspector: An employee or officer of the health department, business licensing department, building inspection department, zoning department, sheriff, fire department or fire and rescue department who inspects premises licensed under this chapter and takes or requires the actions authorized by this chapter in case of violations being found on licensed premises, or who inspects premises seeking to be licensed under this chapter or who takes or requires corrections of unsatisfactory conditions found on the premises. 
Z.  Minor: Any person who has not attained the age of 18 years of age. 
AA.  Nudity: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
BB.  Obscene: Any material or performance which, after applying contemporary community standards, is found to predominantly appeal to prurient interest in sex; to be, as a whole, a depiction or description of sexual conduct which is patently offensive to the average person in the community; and when taken as a whole is found to lack serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
CC.  Park: Any lands or facility owned, operated, controlled, or managed by any county, city, or federal government, or any governmental entity in and upon which recreational activities occur, or upon which places are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public, or which is kept or maintained for ornament and/or recreation. 
DD.  Performance: Any play, motion picture, film, videotape, dance, or exhibition performed before an audience. 
EE.  Religious institution: Any premises or site which is used primarily or exclusively for religious worship and related religious activities. 
FF.  Residence: A house, apartment, mobile home, boarding or rooming house, duplex, condominium or other multi-family housing for human dwelling or any property zoned therefor. 
GG.  School: Any state, county, city, church, or other school, public or private, as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state, and vocational schools, colleges, post-high school learning centers, kindergartens, and day care centers for persons of all ages. 
HH.  Sadomasochistic abuse: Any flagellation or torture by or upon a person as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification. 
II.  Sexual conduct: Any actual or simulated acts of human masturbation; deviant sexual intercourse, sexual intercourse; or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic areas, buttocks, or the breast of a female in any act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification; or any sadomasochistic abuse; or acts including animals or any latent objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
JJ.  Specified sexual activities: Shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of sexual relationship including sadomasochistic abuse, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, lesbianism, zooerastia; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breast; or 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal irrigation. 
KK.  (1)  Lingerie modeling means entertainment or activity which consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments. 
(2)  Lingerie modeling studio means any place or commercial establishment wherein the patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee or required to make a purchase in order to view entertainment or activity which consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments. 
LL.  Specified anatomical areas: Shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
MM.  Adult novelty shop: Any business offering for sale instruments, novelties, devices, magazines, periodicals, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, discs, slides or other visual representations, recordings or other audio matters which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating, describing, simulating or related in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
NN.  Moral turpitude: The act of baseness, vileness, or the depravity in private and social duties which man owes to his fellow man, or to society in general, contrary to accepted and customary rule of right and duty between man and man. An act or behavior that gravely violates moral sentiment or accepted moral standards of community, and is a morally culpable quality held to be present in some criminal offenses as distinguished from others. The quality of a crime involving grave infringement of the moral sentiment of the community as distinguished from statutory mala prohibita. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.020; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2; Res. of 1-23-97, § 2; Res. of 10-23-14(1), § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 
5.20.030. - Violations; penalty; additional remedies. 
A.  Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
B.  The county is hereby authorized to punish violations of this chapter under the provisions of the Official Code of Hall County, Chapter 1.50. 
C.  Any adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. In addition to or in lieu of any other penalties or remedies, the county may commence an action or actions to enjoin, abate, or remove any violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be considered due cause for the suspension or revocation of any licenses issued by the county to the offending party. Such revocation or suspension shall occur by way of a hearing before the board of commissioners as provided by this chapter. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.030; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
5.20.040. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, corporation, or other business entity to engage in, operate, conduct, or carry on in or upon any premises an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store without first having complied with the provisions of this chapter, or without a currently valid Hall County license for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment. No license issued hereunder shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States, or under any other ordinance, rule, or regulation of Hall County. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.040; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.050. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, licensee, or other adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store to admit or permit the admission of minors into the premises of their adult business or adult establishment, or to allow a minor to remain within the licensed or unlicensed premises of such a business or establishment. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.050; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.060. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, exchange, trade, give, or offer to sell, barter, exchange, trade, or give to any minor any entertainment, service, material, device, or thing offered, for sale or otherwise, at an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.060; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.070. - Prohibited activities. 
A.  No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall conduct any illegal activity in or upon the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store. 
B.  No adult entertainment licensee shall permit or suffer an employee or other person to reveal specified anatomical areas where there is an individual payment offer or solicitation of money occurring between patron and employee. 
C.  No adult entertainment licensee shall permit any employee or patron to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this chapter. 
D.  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to insert an object into her vagina or her or his anal orifice, except for private personal hygiene. 
E.  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to engage in actual or simulated genital masturbation or, in the case of females, fondling of the breasts. 
F.  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit a male employee or any person on the premises to exhibit an unclothed erect penis. 
G.  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to engage in or simulate bestiality. 
H.  No employee or person, while on the premises of any adult entertainment licensee, shall expose or be permitted to expose to public view his or her specified anatomical areas in a lewd or obscene fashion or be permitted to do so by the licensee or its employees. 
I.  No employee or person, while on the premises of an adult entertainment licensee, shall dance or perform while revealing specified anatomical areas in such manner as to simulate sexual activity with any patron, spectator, employee, or other person, or be permitted to do so by the licensee or its employees. 
J.  No person, while on the premises of an adult entertainment licensee, shall, while revealing specified anatomical areas, sit upon or straddle the leg, legs, lap, or body of any patron, spectator, employee, or other person therein, or engage in or simulate sexual activity while touching or being touched by said patron, spectator, or other person. 
K.  Reserved for future use. 
L.  No licensee shall suffer or permit any signage or advertisement which encourages, solicits, induces, or promotes conduct or activities proscribed by this chapter. 
M.  No alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be sold, possessed, or consumed on the premises except in full compliance with the Hall County Malt Beverages and Wine Ordinance [chapter 5.30] and any applicable state or federal laws. 
N.  No drugs or illegal or controlled substances of any kind shall be allowed, permitted, used, possessed, or sold upon the premises, and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted therein, and each licensee shall be required to provide for adequate security procedures and personnel to insure an orderly operation of such establishment. 
O.  No adult entertainment establishment, as defined by this chapter, shall be open for business between the hours of 12:45 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. each day, nor shall such establishment operate after the hour of 12:45 a.m. on Sunday or on Christmas Day. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.070; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2; Res. of 10-23-14(1), § 3) 
5.20.080. - Minimum distance from certain uses. 
No adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video store shall be located within the following distance and measurement as defined and stated herein: 
A.  Within 1,000 feet of any residence; 
B.  Within 1,000 feet of a church, school, educational institution, religious institution, governmentally owned or operated building or structure, library, civic center, public park, park, hospital, community club, or prison; 
C.  Within 1,000 feet of any establishment or business regulated or defined hereunder; 
D.  Within 1,000 feet of an establishment selling alcoholic beverages other than the licensed establishment. 
Each application for license hereunder for which there are no existing Hall County licenses for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment or business then in effect shall include a blue line copy of a surveyor's plat, 8½ inches by 11 inches in size, with a scale of one inch per 200 feet, showing the proposed location and the location of all customer entries in relation and distance, measured as provided in this chapter, to all real property and buildings on such real property which fall within the above distance requirements, together with the zoning classifications and present uses of all real property and the proposed location. 
Each application for a location which has not previously been occupied for other than residential purposes or on which there is or is to be new construction shall also include a copy of a site plan approved by the Hall County Department of Planning and Zoning. 
After issuance of any license, no change in the location of the building on the premises or customer entry locations shall be made which would affect compliance with any distance requirements of this chapter. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.080; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
Cross reference— Zoning regulations, tit. 17. 
5.20.090. - Existing establishments. 
All existing adult entertainment establishments, adult businesses, bathhouses, escort bureaus, and adult video stores shall obtain a license and comply with all the terms of this chapter within 30 days of its adoption. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.090; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.100. - Employees. 
A.  Employees of adult entertainment establishments, adult businesses, bathhouses, escort bureaus, and adult video stores shall be not less than 18 years of age, and shall be of good moral character as defined in this chapter. 
B.  No person shall be employed in any capacity whatsoever, including, but not limited to, performers, entertainers, and musicians, who has been convicted anywhere in the United States, or in federal court, within five years immediately prior to the application for employment, of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics, sex offenses, or any other felony, or for whom any outstanding warrant exists on which service has not been perfected. "Be employed" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment on the premises and elsewhere than on the licensed premises, for compensation or otherwise. A criminal background check shall be required for each employee proposed to be hired by the adult entertainment establishment, the cost of which shall be paid by the licensee of the adult entertainment establishment in addition to the annual license fee required by section 5.20.120 of this chapter. 
C.  It shall be the duty of all licensees of an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, bathhouse, escort bureau, or adult video stores to file with the Hall County Sheriff's Department the names of all employees with their home addresses and home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees must be filed with the Hall County Sheriff's Department within seven calendar days from the date of any such changes. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.100; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2; Res. of 10-23-14(1), § 4) 
5.20.110. - License generally; application for license. 
A.  All licenses awarded under this chapter shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license, and shall be subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and related laws, applicable provisions of this Code, and other ordinances and resolutions of the county which may relate to such businesses. 
B.  All licenses awarded under this chapter shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be suspended and revoked under the provision of the ordinances of Hall County, Georgia." 
C.  A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
D.  No license shall be issued to any person who is less than 18 years of age or, in the instance where alcohol is served or proposed to be served upon the premises, 21 years of age. 
E.  Application for a license shall be written and on forms supplied by Hall County at the county's business license office. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the place where the proposed business is to be located; the nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners, if a corporation, the names of the officers and shareholders, or if another business entity, then the names of all [persons] holding any ownership or managerial interest therein, and must be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. 
F.  All applicants shall furnish all data, information, and records which the county may request of them, and failure to furnish such data within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the applicant's application. By the filing of an application, applicants agree to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the county or the county attorney, and who may be considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts as to such license. The failure to produce such persons within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of such application. 
G.  For the purposes of this chapter, the term "applicant" shall include a person or persons, and shall also include all partners, officers, directors, principals, and shareholders of any partnership or corporation. 
H.  Each application must be complete in its entirety before being accepted by the county for filing and processing. 
I.  All applicants for licenses shall furnish plans and renderings of the proposed premises. Such premises shall meet all applicable building codes. The exterior shall be of finished building material such as brick, steel, stone, or wood, but shall not be constructed of concrete block. The applicant shall comply with all zoning, building, health, and similar county codes. All applicants shall obtain and file with their application a certification of zoning compliance, certifying that the property where the applicant plans to operate the business is zoned for the appropriate category as provided herein. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.110; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2; Res. of 10-23-14(1), § 5) 
5.20.120. - License fee; penalty for late payment. 
A.  The annual license fee shall be $3,500.00 as set by the board of commissioners and as from time to time may be amended by resolution. Said fee is a nonrefundable fee and shall be paid upon submission of the application for license hereunder. Licenses shall be issued for a period of 12 months only and not for any partial year. No license shall be issued or renewed until and unless all fees and penalties due to the county are first paid. 
B.  In addition to and not in the alternative to any other penalty which may be provided herein, any licensee, person, or entity who fails to pay any fee, tax, or other payment due to the county of any kind when due shall pay, in addition to such fee, tax, or other charge, a separate penalty equal to ten percent of the required fee, tax, or other charge, for each period of 30 days, or portion thereof, following the due date, until paid in full, including penalties. Said penalty shall be paid at the same time the delinquent fee, tax or any other payment due the county is paid to avoid revocation of the license. Failure to pay any license within 30 days of their due date shall result in revocation of the license of the business or establishment. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.120; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2; Res. of 10-23-14(1), § 6) 
5.20.130. - Qualifications of applicant for license. 
No license hereunder shall be granted where the application or the evidence on a hearing shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
A.  That the applicant is not of good moral character. 
B.  That the applicant has previously had revoked or suspended any license issued under the police powers of any county or governmental entity. 
C.  That the applicant, as a previous holder of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages, any business license issued by Hall County for any special purpose, or any adult entertainment license, has violated any law, resolution, or ordinance relating to such business within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
D.  That any applicant, or any corporation or partnership of which the applicant is or was an officer, director, shareholder, general partner, or managing agent is delinquent in payment of any property tax or other tax or license fee payable to Hall County or the State of Georgia. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.130; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2; Res. of 10-23-14(1), § 7) 
5.20.140. - Investigation of license applications. 
All applications required by this chapter shall be investigated by the Hall County Sheriff's Department, which shall report its findings and recommendations to the county business license office, or any committee or board created by the board of commissioners for the purpose of making recommendations as to any application. No further action shall be taken by Hall County or by any applicant with respect to any application until completion by the sheriff's department of its investigation. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.140; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.150. - Citizenship and residence requirements for licensees. 
A.  Where the applicant is a corporation, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the corporation and either (1) the majority shareholder thereof, or (2) a person employed full time in a managing capacity by the corporation. Each of the said persons must be a U.S. citizen or legal alien for at least one year prior to application. 
B.  Where the applicant is a partnership, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either (1) the managing general partner thereof, or (2) a person employed full time by the partnership in a managing capacity. Each of the said persons must be a U.S. citizen or legal alien for at least one year prior to application. 
C.  Where the applicant is a sole proprietor, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor if he is working full time in a managing capacity on the premises, and, if not, then to the sole proprietor and a person employed full time by the sole proprietor in a managing capacity. Each of the said persons must be U.S. citizen or legal alien for at least one year prior to application. 
D.  For purposes of this section, the words "managing capacity" shall mean the president or chief executive officer of a corporation, or the managing or general partner of a partnership, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations at the location to be licensed and who is a full time employee of the corporation, partnership, proprietary, or other ownership entity. 
E.  The licensee shall notify the county in writing, and shall keep said notification current, of the name, address, and telephone number of the licensee and the agent of the licensee or any other person under whose name the license is issued, for the purpose of receiving communications and notices required under this chapter. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.150; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.160. - Action on license application; appeals. 
A.  All applications shall be acted upon by the Hall County Business License Department (the "department") within 45 days of the date of the filing of the application with all required documentation. 
B.  If the department fails to act on the application within 45 days of the date of the filing of the application, the application shall be deemed approved. 
C.  The department shall act on any application after first giving notice to the applicant to personally appear at a date, time, and place established by the department. This notice shall be given at least five days prior to the appearance date. 
D.  The applicant shall be required to personally appear before the department on the date and time as set forth in the notice. 
E.  Any decision of the department shall be final unless an appeal is filed with the Hall County Administrator by any aggrieved party on or before ten days from the date of the decision by the department. 
F.  A hearing before the commissioners shall be scheduled within 20 days of the date of the filing of the appeal and notice thereof shall be provided to the appellant and other interested parties. 
G.  The hearing on the appeal shall be held and a decision made on the appeal within 45 days of the date of the filing of the appeal unless the appellant agrees in writing for a hearing date to be held more than 45 days from the date of the filing of the appeal. 
H.  If the county administrator fails to act on the appeal within 45 days of the date of the filing of the appeal, there will be an automatic granting of the application. 
I.  Upon the hearing of such appeal, the county administrator shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the appellant, from interested parties and from county staff and enforcement officers. 
J.  The county administrator may sustain, overrule, or modify the action complained of. 
K.  The decision of the county administrator shall be final. 
L.  The decision of the county administrator may be appealed to the Superior Court of Hall County pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 et seq. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.160; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2; Res. of 7-24-03(1), § 1; Res. of 10-23-14(1), § 8) 
5.20.170. - Restrictions on transferability of license and addition of additional partners or shareholders. 
A.  No license issued hereunder shall be sold, given, transferred, or assigned by any licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person, persons, or entities. Any such sale, gift, transfer, or assignment, or attempted sale, gift, transfer, or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided, however, if the licensee is a partnership or corporation, and one or more of the partners or shareholders, as the case may be, should die, one or more of the surviving partners or shareholders who were partners or shareholders at the time of issuance of the license, and who wish to carry on the business by their service in a managing capacity, may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or shareholder without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and, in such case, the new licensee shall immediately notify the business license department of the county. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred, or assigned after the issuance of such a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license hereunder is thereafter issued and sold, transferred, or assigned. 
B.  No licensee shall change the name or location of the establishment without obtaining a new license. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.170; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.180. - Issuance of license to persons with prior convictions. 
No original license shall be issued to any person where any individual having an absolute interest or a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the establishment either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, or his spouse, shall have been convicted within ten years immediately prior to the filing of said application of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.180; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2; Res. of 10-23-14(1), § 9) 
5.20.190. - Additional licensing standards. 
With respect to the issuance, renewal, or retention of licenses issued hereunder, or any right to retain or have approved an application for a license or renewal, the following standards shall apply in addition to standards stated elsewhere herein: 
A.  Where there is evidence that alcoholic beverages have been sold to intoxicated persons or to a minor by licensee. 
B.  Where there is evidence that the conduct of the business by the licensee or potential licensee would violate the law or this Code, or where there is evidence that illegal activities have occurred on or in connection with the premises or establishment. 
C.  Where there is evidence that there are no licenses granted in the area or where there is evidence that the proposed area is already adequately supplied with such licenses. 
D.  Where there is evidence that a license for the location would be detrimental to the property values in the area. 
E.  Where there is evidence that the license in that location would be detrimental to traffic conditions or that there is a lack of sufficient parking spaces for automobiles. In addition to compliance with any other parking space requirements of Hall County and the State of Georgia, a licensee shall have sufficient parking on the premises so as to provide parking for his customers and so as to prevent parking on the streets or adjoining property. 
F.  Where there is evidence that alcoholic beverages have been sold to intoxicated persons or to a minor. 
G.  Where there is evidence that the conduct of the business by the licensee or potential licensee would violate the law or this Code, create a disturbance, create a congregation of intoxicated or unruly persons or minors, or allow minors to be on the premises or to purchase, possess, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises, or where there is evidence that illegal activities have occurred on or in connection with the premises or establishment, or where the police have been caused to answer complaints or make extra surveillance of the premises or area. 
H.  In addition to the above and in determining whether or not any license applied for shall be granted, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
1.  If the applicant is a previous holder of any special license under the Hall County Business License Ordinance [chapter 5.10], or is a holder of an alcoholic beverage license, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual law enforcement observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation, or ordinance relating to such business. 
2.  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of neighborhood, and the effect such establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
3.  The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought. 
4.  If applicant's spouse shall not be able to meet the qualifications of an applicant, particularly if it appears that the applicant's spouse or another person is using the applicant as a guise or "front" to obtain a license. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.190; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2; Res. of 10-23-14(1), § 10) 
5.20.200. - Interest in license by county officials or employees. 
It shall be unlawful for any elected or appointed official, employee of the county, or employee of any elected official of the county who receives all or part of his salary from Hall County, or his or her spouse or minor child, to have any whole, partial, or beneficial interest in any license issued hereunder. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.200; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
Cross reference— Code of ethics, ch. 2.110. 
5.20.210. - Issuance of license. 
Except as provided for in section 5.20.230 herein, when a license has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the department the required fee, the license shall be issued. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.210; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.220. - Causes of mandatory denial of license. 
No license shall be issued to an applicant if within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of an application one or more of the following shall have occurred: 
A.  The same applicant for a license or renewal has been rejected for any location, if such rejection was based upon the applicant's failure to meet the terms of the ordinance applicable to the applicant. 
B.  The one-year waiting period will not apply where the applicant shall apply for a new location which has not been rejected within the preceding 12 months, except if the applicant has had an application for another location rejected within the preceding 12 months because of a lack of qualifications on the part of the applicant. 
C.  That applicant has withdrawn, without permission of the board or the department, an application at any time within seven days immediately preceding the time and date set for the hearing before the board or department, unless at least one year shall have expired from such withdrawal. 
D.  When any application for a license to transact any business within the control of the police powers is denied for cause or any license is revoked for cause by the board of commissioners. 
The one-year waiting period will not apply where the applicant shall apply for a new location which has not been rejected within the preceding 12 months, except if the applicant has had an application for another location rejected within the preceding 12 months because of a lack of qualifications on the part of the applicant. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.220; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2; Res. of 10-23-14(1), § 11) 
5.20.230. - Completion of proposed licensed premises. 
If the building where the adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau is to operate is, at the time of the application for such license, not in existence or not yet completed or renovated, a license may be approved for such location provided the plans for the proposed building or renovation show clearly a compliance with all provisions of this chapter. No business shall be conducted therein until the premises have been completed in accordance with the plans, and the building is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this chapter, the Official Code of Hall County, and all laws and regulations of the state or federal government, and the license has been issued. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.230; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.240. - Forfeiture of license for nonuse. 
Any holder of a license hereunder who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized by the license, but who shall for a period of 30 days thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized by the license, shall, upon completion of said 30-day period, automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of said failure to operate, be canceled without the necessity of any further action on the part of the county. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.240; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.250. - Annual renewal of license required. 
All licenses hereunder shall be issued for a period of one calendar year, the same being January 1 through December 31 of each year. All licensees hereunder shall be required to renew their licenses annually on forms provided by the county, with the annual renewal fee for any such license being $3,500.00. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.250; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2; Res. of 10-23-14(1), § 12) 
5.20.260. - Revocation and suspension of license; hearing. 
A.  Grounds: Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of an adult entertainment establishment license, and these constitute the sole permissible reasons for suspension or revocation of an adult entertainment establishment license: 
1.  The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which is material and is later found to be false. 
2.  A violation of the following regulations or prohibitions of this chapter by the licensee (individually or through the operation of the licensed premises): Sections 5.20.030, 5.20.040, 5.20.50, 5.20.60. 5.20.070, 5.20.370, or alternatively a total of at least three or more violations committed by the employees of the licensee while on the premises of the licensee within any six-month period. 
3.  With respect to the applicant, operator(s) and owner(s), conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes which would make such person or adult entertainment establishment ineligible to hold a license for crimes involving assault, battery, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, masturbation for hire, sexual battery, rape, child molestation, enticing a child for indecent purposes, or any offense included in the definition of a "criminal offense against a victim who is a minor" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 within a period of ten years next preceding the date of the application. If there has been any such conviction or plea, then the application shall be denied. For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the applicant was allowed to avail himself of the Georgia First Offender Act unless the applicant is later adjudicated guilty of having violated the terms of his first offender treatment. 
B.  Upon notice to the county that an alleged violation has occurred which may require the suspension or revocation of an adult entertainment license, a hearing shall be scheduled before the county administrator to consider the proposed suspension or revocation of said license. The licensee whose license is the subject of the aforesaid hearing shall be given adequate written notice by the county of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the licensee shall be entitled to legal representation, and shall have the right to present witnesses and to cross-examine any witnesses presented by the county. No hearing provided for herein shall be conducted sooner than ten days from the date of issuance of the citation. The county administrator shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted hereunder. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
C.  Notwithstanding all other provisions of this chapter, the board of commissioners shall have the sole discretion as to whether to suspend or revoke the license of a licensee thereby halting the operation of that licensee's adult entertainment establishment, adult bookstore, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau for the violation of the provisions of any ordinance of Hall County, or for the violation of any law, rule, or regulation of the State of Georgia. Further, the board of commissioners may, at their discretion, set terms and conditions upon suspension of a license which must be followed by the licensee in order to have the license removed from suspension, or may place the licensee on probation for a period of time during which time the licensee may continue to operate his business. During the period of such probation as established after hearing by the board of commissioners, in the event of any subsequent violation of the laws and regulations of Hall County or the State of Georgia, the board of commissioners may thereafter either suspend the license, continue the period of probation, or revoke the violator's adult entertainment license. 
D.  The county administrator may choose to revoke such a license at the first hearing following any alleged violation. Neither probation nor suspension is a procedural precondition to revocation of a license issued under this chapter. The action of the action of the county administrator shall be final. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.260; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2; Res. of 10-23-14(1), § 13) 
5.20.265. - Appeal procedures from revoked or suspended licenses. 
A.  Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits; procedures. Whenever the county administrator finds reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a license or a permit issued hereunder, he shall schedule a hearing to consider such suspension or revocation and shall, at least 15 days prior to the hearing, notify the licensee of the time and date of the hearing and the proposed action and the grounds therefor. The licensee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine any witness at the hearing, with or without legal counsel. The county administrator shall make his decision within 10 days of the hearing and shall notify the licensee in writing within five business days of the decision. 
B.  The county administrator shall have the power to decide all questions brought before him and shall have the power to suspend or revoke a license or employee permit issued under this Chapter if he finds grounds as stated in section 5-20-260.A. He shall issue a written decision within ten days after closing of the hearing. 
C.  Any applicant for an adult license, license holder, aggrieved by any decision of the county administrator or any decision by Hall County, Georgia, or any of its officials, employees, or gents pursuant to this chapter, may seek an immediate review of such decision by filing an appropriate pleading in the Superior Court of Hall County, Georgia, initiating a certiorari proceeding within 30 days pursuant to the Official Code of Georgia. 
(Res. of 10-23-14(1), § 14) 
5.20.270. - Removal of signs upon revocation or suspension of license. 
When any license issued under this chapter is revoked, all signs indicating that such business is conducted on the premises shall be removed from the premises, both outside and inside the building, during the period of revocation or suspension. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.270; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.280. - Falsified license applications. 
Any material omission or untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original or renewal application for a license under this chapter shall be unlawful, shall be cause for a denial thereof, and shall be punishable as a violation of a county ordinance. If any such license has previously been granted under the above circumstances, such shall constitute cause for the revocation of same. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.280; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.290. - Special provisions for adult dancing establishments. 
The following provisions shall apply to adult dancing establishments in addition to all other provisions of this chapter: 
A.  The licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed as dancers or entertainers. 
B.  All dancing and entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the next highest level of the remainder of the floor. 
C.  No dancing or entertaining shall occur closer than ten feet from any person. 
D.  No dancer or entertainer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
E.  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or entertainer. 
F.  No dancer or entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.290; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.300. - Zones where establishments permitted. 
No adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau, etc. shall be located on any premises unless the location has been zoned highway business district (HB), light industrial district (I-I) or heavy industrial district (I-II) under the zoning laws of Hall County. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.300; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2; Res. of 10-23-14(1), § 15) 
Cross reference— Zoning regulations, tit. 17. 
5.20.310. - Design and maintenance of premises. 
A.  No adult entertainment establishment shall be conducted, operated, or licensed if the adult entertainment activity on the interior is visible from the exterior of the premises. 
B.  No booth, screen, partition, or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such establishment so as to prevent a clear view through the premises, except to separate offices, kitchens, rest rooms, or other areas not frequented by patrons. 
C.  All premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition. Each premises shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment, and supplies on the premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or more frequently if necessary to prevent accumulation. 
D.  No premises for an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau shall have any interior connections or door with any other place of business or with any place where gambling or other illegal activity is conducted, or where persons congregate for the illegal consumption, sale, possession, barter, manufacture, exchange, purchase, dispensation, delivery, or dealing in of alcoholic beverages or illegal substances such as narcotics or marijuana. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.310; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.320. - Display of license and license number. 
Each licensee shall have printed on the front window of the licensed premises the inscription, "Hall County License No. _____, ___________ Licensee" in uniform letters not less than three inches in height. 
The license itself shall be conspicuously displayed at all times within the premises. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.320; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.330. - Lighting. 
All premises shall be fully lighted, both inside and outside, except during hours when the establishment is not open for business. Interior lighting shall be at least 3.5 foot candles per square foot. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.330; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.340. - Advertising prohibited activity. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator of an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau, regardless of whether it is licensed under this chapter, to advertise the presentation of any activity prohibited by this chapter, any applicable state statute, or any applicable local ordinance. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.340; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.350. - Regulation of obscenity. 
Hall County considers the regulation of obscenity to be a matter of state law. It is not the intention of Hall County to legislate or regulate with regard to matters of obscenity. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.350; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2; Res. of 10-23-14(1), § 16) 
5.20.360. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon its adoption. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 5.06.360; Res. of 4-11-96, § 2) 
5.20.370. - Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
A.  No person, association, partnership or corporation licensed under chapter 5.20 of title 5 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, after April 11, 1996, shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer or wine or controlled substance upon the premises of any licensee. Any licensee whose license was granted prior to the adoption of this amendment shall not be subject to this amendment until December 31, 1996, at which time all licensees within the unincorporated area of Hall County shall be subject to this provision, including those licensees licensed before the effective date hereof. 
B.  This section (5.20.370) shall not apply nor prohibit traditional or mainstream theater, which means a theater, movie theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution, bar, restaurant, dinner theater, karaoke bars or restaurants, or similar establishment which regularly features live or other performances or showings which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. For purposes of this subsection, such performances and showings are regularly featured when they comprise at least 80 percent of all annual performances or showings and derive less than 20 percent of its gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Res. of 4-11-96, §§ 1, 2; Res. of 10-23-14(1), § 17) 
CHAPTER 5.30. - MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Advertising alcoholic beverages in parks prohibited, § 2.50.150; public peace, morals and welfare, tit. 9; open containers of alcoholic beverages in vehicles, ch. 9.10. 

5.30.010. - License issuance. 
Wholesale, retail and consumption on the premises licenses for the sale of malt beverages and wine outside municipalities in the county will be issued by the board of commissioners of the county pursuant to the rules and regulations set forth in the following paragraphs of this chapter. The holding of any of said licenses is declared to be a privilege and not a right. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99) 
5.30.020. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term: 
A.  Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine, or fortified wine. 
B.  Banquet hall/events venue means a facility used for the purpose of hosting banquets, receptions, weddings, private parties, or other similar social events in which an average of three or more events are held each month on an annual basis. In addition, the facility must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Possess a current business license issued by Hall County; 
(2)  Contain an "events area" of a minimum of 1,500 square feet, not inclusive of kitchen, restrooms, dressing rooms, etc.; 
(3)  Possess a current catering license issued by Hall County; 
(4)  Contain on the premises a commercially equipped kitchen; 
(5)  The management of the facility shall be required to submit a monthly report on forms provided by the Hall County Business License Office detailing the amount of food and alcoholic beverage consumed/sold at each event. 
B1.  Brown bagging means possession of an open glass bottle, can, or other container containing an alcoholic beverage or consumption of an alcoholic beverage on premises: 
(a)  For which a county business license has been issued; and 
(b)  [Which] occurs at a location different from where said alcoholic beverage was purchased. 
C.  Director means the business license director for Hall County. 
D.  Election day means that period of time beginning with the opening of the polls and ending with the closing of the polls. As used in this section, the term "election" is defined as any statewide primary election and the statewide general election and any runoff held for such primary or general election. The term also includes "local elections." 
E.  Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
F.  Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any licensed consumption on the premises business that has been licensed pursuant to the regulations of this chapter for sales off the premises of alcoholic beverages for catered functions. 
G.  Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by any fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product or any combination of such products in water containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager, beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
H.  Nonprofit private club means a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state or a fraternal or veterans' organization associated with and a part of a recognized national fraternal or veterans' organization which is organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofit purposes and which immediately prior to the application for a license hereunder: 
1.  Has at least 100 members regularly paying dues; and 
2.  Has tax exempt status under the provisions of section 501(a) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code; and 
3.  Owns or leases a building or space for the reasonable use of its members; and 
4.  Has no members or officers, agent or employees of the club receiving compensation directly or indirectly in the form of commissions or other compensation based on the amount of profits from the sale of malt beverages and wines beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at an annual meeting or by its governing body out of the general revenue of the club; and 
5.  Has no part of the net earnings inuring to the benefit of any shareholder or member; and 
6.  Has been in continuous operation for at least one-year prior to the application for a license hereunder. 
I.  Premises means the space or area owned, leased or controlled by the licensee and used by him for the purpose of operating under the license. It shall be limited to one location for each license and there shall be a separate license for each premises outlet, except in the case of a licensee where: 
1.  A golf course is located adjacent to and contiguous with a restaurant, premises shall include the playing area of the golf course. 
2.  Where a SportsCar, SCCA (Sports Car Association of America), ACO (Automobile Club De L'Quest) CART (Championship Auto Racing Teams), or NASCAR (National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing) sanctioned motor sport road race track facility is located adjacent to and contiguous with a restaurant. 
3.  In these exceptions the premises shall include the permanent concession points, grandstands and other event viewing areas; provided however, that alcoholic beverages may only be served at permanent concession points on the premises operated by the main licensed location and approved in advance by the county business license director or such other official as may be designated by the board of commissioners. 
J.  Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and interior or exterior seating capacity of at least 30 people, with at least one meal per day being served for not less than three days a week for at least six months each calendar year, and the serving of such meals being the principal business conducted, with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. 
K.  Retail package means sales of malt beverages or wine packaged to go and not for consumption on the premises sales. 
L.  Veterans' organization means a veterans group duly certified by their national organization and with a membership of not less than 25 persons. 
M.  Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this chapter. 
M1.  Farm winery means a winery which makes at least 40 percent of its annual production from agricultural produce grown in the state where the winery is located, and: 
a.  Is located on premises, a substantial portion of which is used for agricultural purposes, including the cultivation of grapes, berries, or fruits to be utilizes in the manufacture or production of wine by the winery; or 
b.  Is owned and operated by persons who are engaged in the production of a substantial portion of the agricultural produce used in its annual production. 
M2.  Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine by providing samples of such wine to the public and for the sale of such wine at retail for consumption on the premises and for sale in closed packages for consumption off the premises. Samples of wine can be given free of charge or for a fee. 
N.  Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
O.  Growler means a reusable, resalable, and professionally sanitized glass jug used to transport draft beer for off-premises consumption that is not to exceed 64 ounces and is filled with beer from a keg by a licensee, or an employee of a licensee with a malt beverage license for consumption off-premises issued by Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99; Res. of 1-26-06, §§ 1, 2; Res. of 6-8-06, § 1; Res. of 4-23-09(1), § 1; Res. of 4-26-12(2), § 1; Res. of 11-29-12(1), § 1; Res. of 4-24-14(1), §§ 3, 4; Res. of 11-29-12(1)(2), §§ 1, 2; Res. of 12-11-14(1), § 1) 
5.30.030. - License required. 
No person shall engage in the business of wholesaling, retailing or otherwise providing malt beverages and wines of any kind in the unincorporated area of the county without first obtaining a license therefor under this chapter. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99) 
5.30.040. - License classifications. 
Only the following classes of licenses shall be authorized: 
A.  Malt beverage: 
1.  Wholesale; 
2.  Retail package; 
3.  Consumption on the premises; 
4.  Consumption off the premises catering; 
5.  Event permit; 
6.  Event permit—(Nonprofit charitable and civic organizations): 
a.  Bona fide nonprofit charitable organizations, nonprofit civic organizations, colleges and universities desiring to sell alcoholic beverages may apply and submit completed forms furnished by the Commissioner of the State Department of Revenue and a permit from the Commissioner authorizing the organization to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages for a period not to exceed three days as provided in Rule 560-2-2-43 of the Rules and Regulations of the State Department of Revenue, as amended. 
b.  Bona fide nonprofit charitable organizations, nonprofit civic organizations, colleges and universities if approved for a temporary event, may sell beer for consumption on premises only. 
c.  Provided a permit has been issued to a nonprofit charitable organization, nonprofit civic organization, college or university, said organization, college or university shall be considered the same as any other licensee and subject to all laws, rules and regulations and other applicable sections of this chapter relating thereto, except that a bona fide nonprofit charitable organization, nonprofit civil organization, college or university may dispense malt beverages on the premises of a temporary event without the necessity of contracting with an alcoholic beverage caterer for such event if approved by the Director of the Hall County Parks and Leisure Services; and 
7.  Growlers. 
B.  Wine: 
1.  Wholesale; 
2.  Retail package; 
3.  Consumption on the premises; 
4.  Consumption off the premises catering; 
5.  Event permit; and 
6.  Event permit—(Nonprofit charitable and civic organizations): 
a.  Bona fide nonprofit charitable organizations, nonprofit civic organizations, colleges and universities desiring to sell alcoholic beverages may apply and submit completed forms furnished by the Commissioner of the State Department of Revenue and a permit from the Commissioner authorizing the organization to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages for a period not to exceed three days as provided in Rule 560-2-2-43 of the Rules and Regulations of the State Department of Revenue, as amended. 
b.  Bona fide nonprofit charitable organizations, nonprofit civic organizations, colleges and universities if approved for a temporary event, may sell wine at retail for consumption on the premises and by the unopened package subject to O.C.G.A. §§ 3-9-3, 3-9-4 and 3-9-5. 
c.  Provided a permit has been issued to a nonprofit charitable organization, nonprofit civic organization, college or university, said organization, college or university shall be considered the same as any other licensee and subject to all laws, rules and regulations and other applicable sections of this chapter relating thereto except that a bona fide nonprofit charitable organization, nonprofit civil organization, college or university may dispense wine on the premises of a temporary event without the necessity of contracting with an alcoholic beverage caterer for such event if approved by the Director of the Hall County Parks and Leisure Services. 
C.  Combination, malt beverage and wine: 
1.  Malt beverage and wine wholesale; 
2.  Malt beverage and wine retail package; 
3.  Malt beverage and wine for consumption on the premises; 
4.  Consumption off the premises catering; 
5.  Event permit; and 
6.  Event permit—(Nonprofit charitable and civic organizations): 
a.  Bona fide nonprofit charitable organizations, nonprofit civic organizations, colleges and universities desiring to sell alcoholic beverages may apply and submit completed forms furnished by the Commissioner of the State Department of Revenue and a permit from the Commissioner authorizing the organization to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages for a period not to exceed three days as provided in Rule 560-2-2-43 of the Rules and Regulations of the State Department of Revenue, as amended. 
b.  Bona fide nonprofit charitable organizations, nonprofit civic organizations, colleges and universities if approved for a temporary event, may sell beer for consumption on premises only. Wine may be sold at retail for consumption on the premises and by the unopened package subject to O.C.G.A. §§ 3-9-3, 3-9-4 and 3-9-5. 
c.  Provided a permit has been issued to a nonprofit charitable organization, nonprofit civic organization, college or university, said organization, college or university shall be considered the same as any other licensee and subject to all laws, rules and regulations and other applicable sections of this chapter relating thereto except that a bona fide nonprofit charitable organization, nonprofit civil organization, college or university may dispense wine on the premises of a temporary event without the necessity of contracting with an alcoholic beverage caterer for such event if approved by the Director of the Hall County Parks and Leisure Services. 
D.  Manufacturing: 
1.  Farm winery. 
(Res. of 4-23-09(1), § 2; Res. of 10-25-12(1), § 1; Res. of 4-24-14(1), § 5; Res. of 12-11-14(1), § 2; Res. of 5-28-2015(1), §§ 1—3) 
Editor's note— Ord. of 4-23-09(1), § 2, deleted the former § 5.30.040, and enacted a new § 5.30.040 as set out herein. The former § 5.30.040 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
5.30.050. - License fees. 
A.  The applicant for any alcoholic beverage license shall pay a fee of $25.00 for an application package. Application packages include application instructions, a check-off list indicating all documents required, the multi-page application form, all other required forms, and a complete copy of the alcoholic beverage code. 
B.  The applicant for a retail package license for the sale of malt beverages and/or wine shall pay to the business license director at the time of application the sum of $500.00 for the sale of malt beverages and $500.00 for the sale of wine as an annual license fee for operation for one calendar year at one location or one business where the product will be sold. 
C.  The applicant for a consumption on the premises malt beverage and/or wine license shall pay to the business license director at the time of application the sum of $700.00 for the sale of malt beverages and $700.00 for the sale of wine as an annual license fee for operation for one calendar year at one location or one business where the product will be sold. 
D.  Any wholesale dealer in malt beverages or wines licensed by the state or the agent of such wholesale dealer will be granted a license upon payment of $100.00 annually for malt beverages, and/or $100.00 annually for wine; the distribution to be made outside the municipalities in the county. All appropriate and pertinent parts of this chapter shall be applicable to any applicant for or holder of a wholesale license to sell and/or distribute malt beverages and/or wine under this chapter. 
E.  The applicant for a manufacturing license shall pay to the business license director at the time of application the sum of $3,000.00 as an annual license fee for operation for one calendar year at one location where the product will be manufactured. 
F.  The applicant for a consumption off the premises malt beverage and/or wine catering license whose consumption on the premises license is current shall pay to the business license director at the time of the application the sum of $250.00 as an annual license fee. 
G.  Where a catered function is to be held in the unincorporated area of Hall County by a caterer holding a valid consumption on the premises and a catering license issued by Hall County, the caterer shall be required to apply to Hall County for an event permit, such application to include the name of the caterer, the date, address and time of the event, and the caterer's malt beverage and/or wine catering license number and shall pay to the business license director the sum of $25.00 at the time of filing the application. Where the applicant for an event permit has a valid consumption on the premises license from a governmental entity other than Hall County, the event permit fee shall be $50.00 to be paid to the business license director at the time the application is filed. 
H.  Upon the filing of an application and payment of a fee of $25.00 by a bona fide nonprofit organization, college or university, the business license director may issue a permit authorizing the organization, college or university to sell alcoholic beverages pursuant to section 5.30.040, subject to any law regulating the time for selling such beverages. If the temporary event is a wine tasting then the event shall also be subject to the provisions of section 5.30.175: 
1.  No more than six permits may be issued to an organization in any one calendar year pursuant to this section. 
2.  Permits issued pursuant to this section shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit. 
3.  Applicants under this section do not have to obtain alcohol bonds. 
I.  Alcohol licensed locations/license holders who have their alcoholic beverages license suspended for a period of time shall pay to the business license director a reinstatement fee of $350.00 before the suspended license may be reissued. 
J.  Each application for license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee. Should the applicant be denied a license or should the applicant(s) withdraw the application prior to its being submitted to the commission, the license fee shall be refunded; however $150.00 for investigation and application processing shall be retained. 
K.  The above license fees shall not be prorated for applicants whose businesses operate for less than one year. No refund shall be made to license holders who have their licenses revoked or suspended by the county commission. 
L.  License fees for permanent concession points for the sale of alcoholic beverages as set forth under the definition of "premises" in subsections 5.30.020G.1. and 2. shall be as follows: 
1.  An annual inspection fee of $100.00 for 1—4 concession locations; 
2.  An annual inspection fee of $200.00 for 5—10 concession locations; and 
3.  An annual inspection fee of $300.00 for more than ten concession locations shall be charged to offset the cost of concession site inspections. 
4.  Licensing fees for concession points shall not be pro-rated and shall be due and payable at the same time the alcoholic beverage license is renewed each year. 
5.  Alcohol concession permits will be issued for each concession point as a supplementary license to the main licensed location. 
6.  Any new concession locations added during the licensing year shall be charged an initial inspection fee of $50.00, and then the new concession location shall be added to the annual renewal fee the following year. 
(Res. of 5-14-2009(1), § 1(Exh. A); Res. of 10-25-12(1), § 2) 
Editor's note— Res. of May 14, 2009, § 1(Exh. A), deleted § 5.30.050, and enacted a new § 5.30.050 as set out herein. The former § 5.30.050 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
5.30.055. - Payment of license fee for new applications. 
A.  In the case of a malt beverage and/or wine business subject to a license under this chapter for a calendar year in which no malt beverage and/or wine license was issued for any period of time in the unincorporated area of Hall County in the preceding year, said licensee will be subject to a pro rata license fee of the license fee as follows: 
1.  When a license is applied for on or after April 1, in any year, the license fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be 75 percent of the license fee imposed for the entire year, and shall be due and payable before the commencement of the business. 
2.  When a license is applied for on or after July 1, in any year, the license fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the license fee imposed for the entire year, and shall be due and payable before the commencement of the business. 
3.  When a license is applied for on or after October 1, in any year, the license fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be 25 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year, and shall be due and payable before the commencement of the business. 
4.  No other fees including background investigations shall be reduced or prorated. 
(Res. of 12-11-14(1), § 3) 
5.30.060. - License application. 
A.  All applications for licenses to sell malt beverages and wine shall be made in person by the applicant to the business license director in writing on forms made available by the business license director. The application shall contain, but is not restricted to, the following information: 
1.  Name; 
2.  Age; 
3.  Address; 
4.  Length of residency of the applicant; 
5.  Name of business; 
6.  Location of business; 
7.  Current, valid Hall County business license for proposed alcohol licensed location; 
8.  Description of the premises or place of business where the license is to be effective; 
9.  Statement as to whether the applicant or any person with any interest in the applicant has made application previously for any malt beverage or wine license and the disposition of such application; 
10.  Whether the applicant or any person with any interest in the application has ever been convicted of a crime other than traffic violations; 
11.  Whether a previous license issued to the applicant or any person with any interest in the application has been revoked by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government, and the reason for said revocation; 
12.  Whether any other person is interested directly or indirectly in the profits or losses of the proposed business; 
13.  Each applicant for a malt beverage or wine license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the business premises or a copy of the current lease for the premises upon which the license is to be effective; and 
14.  Only after meeting all requirements for licensing by the applicant shall the application be submitted to the commission for approval. Current license holders applying for additional locations shall be exempt from this provision. 
B.  Every application for a license shall be accompanied by a scale drawing showing the nearest church, funeral chapel, school or college or shall have attached thereto an affidavit of a registered surveyor that the proposed location of the licensed premises complies with the distance requirements of this chapter and any state or federal law. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99; Res. of 4-23-09(1), § 4) 
5.30.065. - Application for sales off premises for catered functions. 
A.  Licensed malt beverages and wine consumption on the premises licensees eligible for off-premises catering licenses shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Any alcoholic beverage licensee that possesses a valid license from Hall County which authorizes the licensee to sell malt beverages and wine by the drink for consumption on the premises may be issued an off-premises catering license which authorizes such licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to sell malt beverages and wine by the drink off the premises and in connection with an authorized catered function within the unincorporated area of Hall County. 
2.  Any alcoholic beverage licensee that possesses a valid license from Hall County which authorizes the licensee to sell malt beverages and wine by the drink for consumption on the premises shall make application for an off-premises catering license as provided in paragraph F. of section 5.30.050 and shall pay to the business license director an annual license fee for operation for one calendar year. 
B.  Event permits will be issued for all catered functions located within Hall County. In order to distribute or sell malt beverages, or wine for consumption off the premises at an authorized catered function, a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall be required to: 
1.  Possess a valid current malt beverage and/or wine consumption off the premises catering license from Hall County which authorizes the licensee to sell malt beverages or wine by the drink. 
2.  Provide satisfactory reports to the director on forms provided by the department stating the quantity of any and all alcoholic beverages transported from the licensee's primary premises to the location of the authorized catered function and such other information as required by the director; and maintain original local event permits and documents required by the department in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered function at all times. 
(Res. of 4-23-09(1), § 5; Res. of 4-26-12(2), § 2; Res. of 11-29-12(1), § 2) 
5.30.070. - License approval procedures. 
A.  After filing an application with the director, the applicant for a license shall publish a notice of the application in a local newspaper in the county at least four times within two weeks prior to the regular county commissioner meeting at which the application is to be presented and considered. The notice shall contain the name of the person applying for the license and the name of the person for whom the application is submitted, if different, and the location of the proposed premises. An affidavit of the publisher or his authorized agent certifying that the advertisement has been published shall accompany each application. 
B.  After filing an application with the director, the applicant for a license shall place a sign in the establishment where alcoholic beverages are to be sold. This sign shall remain on the premises from the date of the initial filing of the application with the director, and shall remain until the application has been approved or denied. The sign shall be visible form the street or thoroughfare on which the establishment where alcoholic beverages are to be sold. The sign shall contains the words "NOTICE: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSE APPLIED FOR." The words shall appear in bold type and be clearly visible from the street or thoroughfare on which the establishment where alcoholic beverages are to be sold is located, and be located at the main entrance to the establishment. Letters on this sign shall be not less than four inches in height. The day, month, and year the license was applied for and dates and place of the hearings shall also appear on said sign. 
C.  The application may be reviewed and considered by the county commission at the next regularly scheduled county commission meeting following the necessary publication of the application. The county commission shall not act upon or vote upon the application until the second regularly scheduled county commission meeting following the publishing of the application. 
D.  Applications for new alcoholic beverage licenses may be approved for locations currently under construction, or for locations where new construction will begin within 30 days of commission approval, providing said construction must be completed, certificates of occupancy be issued, and the business license and alcoholic beverage license issued, in accordance with regulations contained in this Code, within 12 months of the date of approval by the Hall County Commission. Extensions may be requested and granted by the licensing director for extenuating circumstances only. Any and all applicable fees or renewals fees due or normally associated with the license during this 12-month period will be due and payable as set forth in this Code. Locations not meeting the requirements or time restrictions of this paragraph will be required to apply for a new license after the expiration of 12 months from the date of initial approval by the commission. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99; Res. of 1-26-06, § 3; Res. of 4-23-09(1), § 6) 
5.30.080. - License renewal and transfer. 
A.  A licensee who desires to renew his license for a subsequent calendar year must file a renewal application with the director on or before November 15 of the preceding year. Payment of license fees for renewal shall be made at the time of application and, upon approval of the renewal application by the director, the license will be issued. Applications for renewal shall be treated as applications for new licenses but need not be advertised and/or resurveyed unless requested by the director. Any renewals submitted after the due date of November 15, shall be considered delinquent and assessed a penalty in the amount of ten (10) per cent of the fees due. Interest on delinquent fees shall be assessed at one (1) percent for each month or fraction thereof of delinquency. 
B.  No license may be transferred from one person to another or from one managing agent to another without the approval of the director pursuant to written application. 
C.  Upon change of a license holder or owner (unless the owner is a corporation and stock is traded publicly or listed on a major stock exchange) the license shall be transferred and will remain in effect for no longer than 90 days or until the transfer is granted or refused under this chapter, whichever shall occur first. Payment of the transfer fee of $150.00, if made within five days of the transfer, or $300.00 if more than five days after the transfer, shall be due at the time of application. After 90 days, the license shall immediately be temporarily suspended until such time as a new license holder or registered agent appointed. Reinstatement fees as indicated in section 5.30.050(H) would apply. A time extension for the transfer may be granted by the director due to extenuating circumstances. 
D.  Upon the death of any license holder, his personal representative or heirs may continue to operate under the original license for the balance of the year without payment of any fee, provided those persons are otherwise qualified as license holders. Otherwise, the license may be transferred to a qualified transferee within 30 days after the condition of the estate of the deceased licensee will permit. In such case, the transferee shall pay a transfer fee of $150.00. 
E.  Any licensee desiring to discontinue business at one location and commence business at another location must make a completely new application for the new location. 
F.  No refund of renewal fees shall be made once the renewal application is submitted, approved and license is issued. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99; Res. of 3-22-01(1), § 1; Res. of 9-25-03(2), § 2; Res. of 1-26-06, § 4; Res. of 4-26-12(2), § 3; Res. of 11-29-12(1), § 3) 
5.30.090. - Qualifications of license holders. 
A.  All applicants for a license shall be at least 21 years of age. 
B.  All sole proprietor owners who are permanent residents of the State of Georgia shall make application for a license in their own name. Where the owner is a corporation, partnership, or other association, the application shall be made in the name of an officer, partner, or associate who owns a substantial interest in the business. In the event that there is no qualifying officer, partner, or associate who is a permanent resident of the State of Georgia, the application shall be made in the name of an agent of the business who is a permanent resident of the State of Georgia. In such cases the application shall show that the license is for the use of the owner who shall be named in the application. 
C.  For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise indicated, applicant means the corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other organization and the managing agent. 
1.  Every managing agent applicant for a county malt beverage and wine license shall be at least 21 years of age, a U.S. citizen or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residency, and a resident of the state, and shall make application on forms furnished by the business license office and in connection therewith shall, under oath, answer all questions, supply all information, and furnish all certificates, affidavits, and other supporting data as required thereby. 
2.  Where the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and an officer or agent who meets the requirements as set forth in section 5.30.090. The officer or agent named as the applicant shall be an individual who does in fact have regular managerial authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed fulltime by the corporation. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." 
3.  Where the application is made on behalf of a partnership, the license shall be issued jointly to the partnership and either the managing general partner thereof, or an individual who meets the requirements set forth in section 5.30.090 does in fact have managerial authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed full time by the partnership. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." 
4.  Where the application is made on behalf of a sole proprietorship, the license shall be issued jointly to the sole proprietorship and an individual who meets the requirements set forth in section 5.30.090 who does in fact have management authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed full time by the proprietor. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." The "managing agent" may be the sole proprietor, if he/she otherwise qualifies under this section. 
5.  Where the application is made on behalf of any other type organization, the license shall be issued jointly to the organization and an individual who meets the requirements set forth in section 5.30.090 who does in fact have management authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed full time by the organization. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." In the case of a nonprofit private club, the managing agent may be an officer of the organization in lieu of a full-time employee if the individual is otherwise qualified under section 5.30.090. 
6.  A license application may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
7.  The written application for the license shall be a permanent record which the licensee must maintain current as required by this chapter. Failure to maintain a current application shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
8.  In the event the "managing agent" changes, or ceases to meet requirements as set forth in subsections 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 above, the licensee shall notify the business license director within five days of the change. A fee of $150.00 will be charged for the processing of an application for the change of the "managing agent," or if after five days a fee of $300.00, and such applicant must be approved by the director. 
9.  The business license director shall refuse to approve any "managing agent" who has been convicted, within the five years preceding his application, of any felony of any kind or any misdemeanor relating to an alcoholic beverage violation or any state law, or county or municipal ordinance violation relating to alcoholic beverages. 
D.  Registered agent. 
1.  All applications for licenses under this chapter shall nominate and name in the application one or more residents of Hall County, Georgia, as the registered agent and representative of the applicant to receive all communications, notices, services or process or other papers or documents, on behalf of the applicant in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any county license. If the managing agent is a permanent resident of Hall County, Georgia, then he/she may serve as the registered agent. The applicant shall furnish a notarized affidavit from such registered agent, and the mailing to any registered agent at that address of any notice required to be given under this chapter or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the applicant/licensee. 
2.  A registered agent must be a U. S. Citizen or a legal alien of at least 21 years of age. 
3.  Such registered agent shall be a permanent resident of Hall County, Georgia, and must be approved by the business license director. The business license director shall refuse to approve any registered agent who is not a bona fide resident of Hall County, Georgia, or who has been convicted, within the five years preceding his nomination, of any felony of any kind or any misdemeanor relating to an alcoholic beverage violation or any state law, or county or municipal ordinance violation relating to alcoholic beverages. 
4.  If any registered agent shall cease to be a resident of the county or in any manner ceases to meet the requirements of subsection (3) of this section, the licensee shall notify the business license director in writing of such event and shall nominate a new registered agent within five days after such event occurs. Such new registered agent shall meet the requirements in subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this section and must be approved by the business license director. The county shall charge a fee of $50.00 for a change of the licensee's registered agent; provided, however, that if the licensee fails to notify the county and nominate a new registered agent within said five-day period, then the county shall charge a fee of $100.00 for a change of the licensee's registered agent and/or revoke the licensee's license. 
5.  No license may be transferred from one registered agent to another without the approval of the director pursuant to written application. 
6.  Upon change of a registered agent the license shall be transferred and will remain in effect for no longer than 90 days or until the transfer is granted or refused under this chapter, whichever shall occur first. After 90 days, the license shall immediately be temporarily suspended until such time as a new license holder or registered agent appointed. Reinstatement fees as indicated in section 5.30.050(H) would apply. A time extension for the transfer may be granted by the director due to extenuating circumstances. 
E.  Where an application for a license is submitted for a nonprofit private club or veterans' organization, the application shall be made in the name of the highest elected officer and/or the manager of the club or organization. 
F.  When contrary to the public interest and welfare, no license shall be issued by the county commission to an applicant under the following circumstances: 
1.  The applicant's business experience, financial standing, trade associations, personal associations, arrest record or reputation in any community in which he has resided indicates he is not likely to operate the business for which he is seeking a license in conformance with federal, state or local laws, rules, regulations, or resolutions; 
2.  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony involving moral turpitude; 
3.  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony not involving moral turpitude within ten years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the license; 
4.  The applicant was convicted of or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a misdemeanor, including, but not limited to, laws involving alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, wine, drugs, pornography, gambling, or tax law violations, if such conviction or plea tends to indicate that the applicant will not operate the business for which he is seeking a license in conformance with federal, state or local laws, rules, regulations, or resolutions; for at least five years from the date of conviction. 
5.  The applicant is an official or employee of the county; 
6.  The applicant is a person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation where any manager, partner, officer, or director thereof has been convicted of or pled guilty to any felony or lesser offense involving moral turpitude. 
7.  An application which is for an applicant with any of the above convictions shall be automatically denied by the director. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99; Res. of 3-22-01(1), §§ 2—4; Res. of 1-26-06, §§ 5, 6; Res. of 4-23-09(1), § 7; Res. of 4-26-12(2), § 4; Res. of 11-29-12(1), § 4) 
5.30.095. - Lake Lanier Olympic Venue at Clarks Bridge Park licensing. 
A.  The sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises at the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue shall be allowed. 
B.  The consumption on the premises license provided for herein is exempted from the food sale requirements provided for in section 5.30.110 paragraph B of this chapter. 
C.  The county shall offer for bid an alcoholic beverage license, except as provided in subsection E below: 
1.  For consumption on the premises at the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue; 
2.  Each bid shall be according to the terms and provisions set forth in the invitation to bid by the county commission; 
3.  The right to sell alcoholic beverages under this bid system shall go to the highest and best bidder which is deemed in the overall best interest of the county, and shall entitle each license holder to the exclusive sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue; 
4.  All sales of alcoholic beverages under each license shall be competitive and be of sufficient quality as is required by the franchise agreement that will be entered into between the county and the grantee of the franchise. 
5.  The bidder must provide sufficient proof that he would be entitled to a business license and an alcoholic beverage license for consumption on the premises under this article. 
D.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, possessed or consumed on the premises of the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue unless the alcoholic beverages are delivered by or sold by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license provided for in paragraphs C and E of this section. 
E.  The director of the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue, or his designee, may hold an alcoholic beverage license for the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue, or the director of the Hall County Parks and Leisure Services, or his designee, may hold an alcoholic beverage license for the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue so that the orderly operation of the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue will not be interrupted in the event the person or entity holding the alcoholic beverage license for the facility is unable to serve alcoholic beverages for any reason. There shall be no county license fee paid by the director of the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue, or his designee, or the director of the Hall County Parks and Leisure Services, or his designee. 
F.  The hours of sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises of the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue shall be the same as provided in section 5.30.120 of this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises. 
(Res. of 4-23-09(1), § 8) 
5.30.100. - Building and location requirements. 
A.  No license shall be issued for a location not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the county commission because of traffic congestion, or general character of the neighborhood, or because of the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties and neighborhood. 
B.  No license shall issue for a location within an area where, in the judgment and discretion of the county commission, the number of malt beverage or wine licenses already granted makes it contrary to the public interest or welfare. 
C.  No license shall issue for a location where a valid and current certificate of occupancy has not been issued, or where the operation of such a licensed business would violate the zoning rules and regulations of the county. 
D.  No license shall issue for a location where a previous license has been revoked or suspended, and where, in the judgment of the county commission, the problems which have arisen from the operation of a licensed business at such a location indicate that it is not in the interests of public health, safety, welfare, or morals that the sale of malt beverages or wines be permitted at such a location. 
E.  No license shall issue for a location where it would violate state or local law, regulations or resolutions. 
F.  No license shall issue for a location where the nearest point of the main structure of the business is located within 100 yards of the location of the main structure of the business from a church building or 200 yards from any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus as measured in a straight line between the two structures. The word "school" shall include kindergartens, primary and secondary schools, colleges and other educational institutions whether public or private. Provided, however, this provision shall not apply where it would prohibit the renewal, or transfer, of an existing alcoholic beverage license for the sale of malt beverages and wine at a location where a license holder had been granted a license under the terms of any prior county resolution relating to the sale of malt beverages and wine. In the event a church subsequently locates within 100 yards of licensed premises, or a school subsequently locates within 200 yards of a licensed premises, this provision shall not be applicable under such cir 
cumstances and such an event would not cause a license holder to be in violation of this provision or prohibit the renewal or transfer of a license. In such cases, the license may be renewed by the same license holder for the same place of business, or transferred to a new license holder, as long as all of the other provisions of this chapter are complied with. No license shall issue for any location in which the licensed premises contain a drive-in window for the sale of malt beverages and wine. 
G.  The licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by authorized personnel of the county. 
H.  Consumption on the premises licenses shall be issued only to restaurants, nonprofit private clubs, veterans' organizations, and banquet hall/events venues as defined herein. Retail package licenses shall not be issued to restaurants, nonprofit private clubs, veterans' organizations and banquet halls/event venues. 
I.  Licensed premises must be open for business at least six months of each calendar year. Licensed premises may close for seasonal or remodeling reasons only. Closures due to being out of business, or change in ownership will require an application for a new license. Once the business is "closed" the license ceases to be valid and is revoked. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99; Res. of 1-26-06, § 7; Res. of 4-23-09(1), § 9; Res. of 4-26-12(2), §§ 5, 6; Res. of 11-29-12(1), §§ 5, 6; Res. of 11-29-12(2), § 3) 
5.30.110. - Required reports and notices. 
A.  The licensee must report to the director within five days any change in any interests in the licensee's business, including but not limited to: 
1.  Any change in the division of the profits of the licensed business; 
2.  Any change in the division of net or gross sales for any purpose whatsoever; 
3.  Any change in the payment of rents or leases; 
4.  Any change in the ownership of any lease or building or land used in such business; 
5.  Any change in the ownership of stock of any corporation that has an interest in the licensed business except for the sale of stock over the counter or through a recognized stock exchange; 
6.  Any change in the local managing agent or registered agent of a corporate business licensed under this chapter. 
B.  Reserved for future use. 
C.  Copies of summaries of sales and state form ATT-122 shall be furnished to the business license director not later than the tenth day of each month by wholesale dealers selling malt beverages and wines to licensees. The report shall apply to deliveries made during the previous month. Copies of these reports shall be submitted with the excise tax described in section 5.30.200. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99; Res. of 3-22-01(1), § 5; Res. of 4-26-12(2), § 7; Res. of 11-29-12(1), § 7) 
5.30.120. - Hours of operation. 
A.  The hours of sale for consumption on the premises of malt beverages and wine shall be 11:00 a.m. to 12:45 a.m. Monday through Fridays, and 11:00 a.m. to 11:30 p.m. on Sundays. Hours on Saturday and Christmas Eve shall be 8:00 a.m. to 11:45 p.m. 
B.  In the event that a licensed business is open for less than the hours stated in the preceding paragraph, then sales of malt beverages and wines shall be restricted to those regular store hours; however, in no event shall sales be made during hours other than described in the preceding paragraph. 
C.  All licensed businesses for the consumption of malt beverages and wines shall remove the beverages from the area of the premises used by customers within 15 minutes after closing time for the sale of the beverages. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99; Res. of 4-26-12(2), § 8; Res. of 11-29-12(1), § 8; Res. of 1-24-19(2), § 1) 
5.30.130. - Advertising. 
Advertising of the sale of malt beverages and wine shall be in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia and the regulations adopted by the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99) 
5.30.140. - Minors. 
A.  All persons seeking to purchase alcoholic beverages within the unincorporated area of the county (regardless of their apparent age) shall be required to provide "proper identification" showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. "Proper identification" as defined for purposes of this subsection means any document issued by a state or U.S. governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth, and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification and, driver's license and/or certified birth certificate. Violations of this section shall be subject to a fine of no less than $100.00 on the first offense, and for a second offense, a fine of no less than $250.00. This fine shall be levied against the actual license holder, at the licensed location, not specifically to the person failing to request the ID. 
B.  Any license holder, agent or employee of any license holder, who sells alcoholic beverages to a person under the age of 21 years, without requiring proper identification as that term is defined in paragraph A. above, shall, upon first conviction thereof, be sentenced to a mandatory sentence of a minimum of one weekend (48 hours) in confinement and a fine of not less than $500.00. Subsequent convictions shall be punished as provided by section 5.30.230 of this Code. 
C.  Any license holder, or agent or employee of a license holder, who fails to require proper identification and who sells alcoholic beverages to a person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, may, at the sole discretion of the board of commissioners, be subject to the revocation or suspension of his/her license on the first offense. 
1.  For a second offense, at the same licensed location, the board of commissioners may suspend the license for no less than 30 days, or at its discretion suspend the license for a longer period of time or revoke the license based on the severity of the offense, unless the second offense occurs within three years from the first offense, wherein the board of commissioners shall suspend the license for no less than 90 days, or at its discretion suspend the license for a longer period of time or revoke the license, based on the severity of the offense. This suspension may, at the sole discretion of the board of commissions, be less than 90 days if the license holder can provide proactive documentation showing training and education of its employees, and offers other programs to prevent the sale of alcoholic beverages to a person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages. This educational program must be in place at the time of the violation in order to show the business as being proactive and qualify for the lesser suspension. 
2.  For a third offense, occurring within three years of the first offense, at the same licensed location, the board of commissioners shall revoke the license, and an application for a new license shall not be authorized until the expiration of 12 months following the date of revocation, providing the license holder has an educational/training program for employees of the business, and has other programs in effect to prevent the sale of alcoholic beverages to a person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages. If the license holder does not have this educational program in place, then an alcoholic beverage license may not be applied for, for any business in which he may have any interest. 
3.  Businesses that have a proactive alcoholic beverage education program in effect, after three years of operation using the proactive program with no violations of underaged sales, may be considered as having no violations. Businesses that do not have an alcoholic beverage education program in effect, after ten years with no violations, may be considered as having no violations. 
4.  The board of commissioners, in its sole discretion, may suspend the license for a longer period of time, or revoke the license depending upon the severity of the offense evidenced by the facts in each case, including but not limited to, consideration of prior violations of law by the license holder. Where the board of commissioners has suspended the license of a specific location, such suspension shall not be relieved prior to its expiration notwithstanding the sale of the licensed premises or the business located thereon unless authorized by the board of commissioners pursuant to a public hearing held thereon. 
D.  License holders may not allow a person under 18 years of age to sell malt beverages or wine. 
E.  No person shall knowingly and intentionally act as agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, or otherwise procure for or furnish to a person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as defined by state law, any alcoholic beverage, except for medical purposes upon the written prescription of a duly licensed physician under the laws of the state. 
F.  It is unlawful for any person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to falsely misrepresent his or her age in any manner whatsoever in violation of this chapter or applicable laws. 
G.  It is unlawful for any person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to purchase, drink, or possess any alcoholic or malt beverages or wine as defined herein in the county outside of any municipalities. 
H.  It shall not be considered a violation of this chapter for a person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to purchase, drink, or possess any alcoholic or distilled spirits if such person is at the time bona fidely acting for and on behalf of law enforcement agencies conducting investigations of license holders and/or their employees. 
(Res. of 5-14-2009(1), § 1(Exh. B)) 
Editor's note— Res. of May 14, 2009, § 1(Exh. B), deleted § 5.30.140, and enacted a new § 5.30.140 as set out herein. The former § 5.30.140 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
5.30.150. - Gross sales requirement. 
Consumption licenses shall be revoked if gross sales of food products (excluding sales of alcoholic beverages) fall below 50 percent of the combined business volume of food products and alcoholic beverages sold on an annual basis. On or before the 20th day of each month, each licensee shall furnish to the business license director an affidavit showing the gross sales of food products (excluding sales of malt beverages and wines), the gross sales of malt beverages and wines, and the gross sales of other merchandise for the preceding month. The business license director will furnish the form for this affidavit. The licensee must attach to the affidavit a copy of the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Report for the same period. These reports shall remain confidential. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99; Res. of 4-26-12(2), § 9; Res. of 11-29-12(1), § 9) 
5.30.160. - Sale on Christmas Day and election day. 
A.  Except as specifically authorized by law, no person knowingly and intentionally shall sell or offer to sell alcoholic beverages on Christmas Day. 
B.  Alcoholic beverages are authorized to be sold on any election day as defined herein. 
(Res. of 4-26-12(2), § 10; Res. of 11-29-12(1), § 10) 
Editor's note— Res. of 4-26-12(2), § 10, repealed former § 5.30.160, and enacted a new § 5.30.160 as set out herein. Former § 5.30.160 pertained to sale on Sunday, Christmas Day and election day and derived from Res. of 11-13-97, § 1 and Res. of 9-9-99. 
5.30.170. - Sale, dispensing and miscellaneous regulations. 
A.  License holders may not sell on the licensed premises less than 24 ounces of malt beverages, whether in one container or a multi-unit container, unless they have consumption licenses, or sell less than one-half pint of wine, unless they have consumption licenses. 
B.  License holders may not sell malt beverages or wines on the licensed premises to any person who is in an intoxicated condition. 
C.  License holders shall not permit any disorderly conduct or breach of the peace on the licensed premises. 
D.  License holders may not sell, offer for sale, possess or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of alcoholic or malt beverages and wines which a license holder is not authorized to sell under his license. The license holder shall not allow "brown bagging" on the licensed premises. 
E.  Malt beverages or wines may not be sold or offered for sale through vending machines on the licensed premises. 
F.  Deliveries of malt beverages and wines to the licensed premises may be made only by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a license from the board of commissioners to deliver such beverages in the county. 
G.  No retail license holder shall accept delivery of malt beverages and wines from any wholesale dealer unless the wholesale dealer has fully complied with the state laws regulating and taxing the sale of such beverages at wholesale. 
H.  No retail or consumption license holder shall deliver malt beverages and wines at any location other than the licensed premises. 
I.  All licensees shall store all malt beverages and wines in their possession only on the premises for which the license was issued. 
J.  Every license holder shall have available on the licensed premises a copy of this chapter and shall be responsible for compliance with the resolution [this chapter] by all persons on the premises. 
K.  Any and all costs associated with or for signs, notices, and/or advertisements as required by this chapter shall be borne by the applicant. Applicant shall be responsible for any and all fees charged for legal advice or consultations associated with this application. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99; Res. of 4-23-09(1), § 10) 
5.30.175. - Wine tastings. 
A.  A request to conduct a wine tasting may be approved by the business license director when such request is made in writing on an application furnished by the business license director and under the following conditions: 
(1)  A wine tasting must comply with all local and state laws and regulations pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state and the county; 
(2)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits in the unbroken package or container at retail; 
(3)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell wine in the unbroken package or container at retail unless 60 percent or greater of the total retail space of the licensed premises is dedicated to the sale of wine in the unbroken package or container; 
(4)  All wines secured for a wine tasting must be obtained through a wholesale dealer possessing a valid current license to distribute wine issued by the county; 
(5)  A bona fide nonprofit charitable or civic organization that seeks to conduct a wine tasting shall comply with all requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 3-9-3, 3-9-4, and 3-9-5 and must make application 25 days prior to the proposed event on forms supplied by the business license office; the business license director may waive a portion of such waiting period upon good cause being shown. 
(6)  A for-profit organization that seeks to conduct a wine tasting and is not licensed shall comply with all requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-20 and must make application 25 days prior to the proposed event on forms supplied by the business license office; 
(7)  A nonrefundable fee of $25.00 will be charged for the processing of an application for a wine tasting. 
(Ord. of 5-28-09(1), § 1) 
5.30.176. - Brew pubs. 
A.  For all purposes of this section, a "brew pub" is defined as an eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. 
(1)  No individual shall be permitted to own or operate a brew pub without first obtaining a proper brew pub license from the county business license director. Each brew pub license holder shall comply with all other applicable state and local license requirements. A brew pub license authorizes the holder of such license to (i) manufacture on the licensed premises not more than 5,000 barrels of beer in a calendar year solely for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form; and (ii) operate a restaurant that shall be the sole retail outlet for such beer and may offer for sale any other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers which are authorized for retail sale under this chapter, provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer for consumption on the premises only and, provided further, in addition to draft beer manufactured on the premises, each brew pub licensee shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer. 
(2)  Possession of a brew pub license shall not prevent the holder of such license from obtaining any other license available under this chapter for the same premises. 
(3)  A brew pub license does not authorize the holder of such license to sell alcoholic beverages by the package for consumption off the premises. 
(4)  A brew pub licensee shall pay all state and local license fees and excise taxes applicable to individuals licensed under this chapter as manufacturers, retailers and, where applicable, wholesale dealers. 
(5)  Except as set forth in this section, a brew pub license holder shall be subject to all sections of this chapter. 
(6)  A brew pub license shall be classified as a manufacturing license as provided in Section 5.30.050 of this Code. Other alcoholic beverages sold on the premises but not manufactured thereon, shall require consumption on-the-premises licenses. 
(Ord. of 5-28-09(2), § 1) 
5.30.177. - Farm wineries. 
A.  Wines sold under this section. A farm winery may sell its wine and the wine of any other state farm winery licensee at retail in a tasting room or other facility on the premises of the winery for consumption on the premises and in closed packages for consumption off the premises and to sell its wine and the wine of any other state farm winery licensee at retail for consumption on the premises and in closed packages for consumption off the premises in tasting rooms at a location within the county that is one of the five additional locations in the state authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1(b), but only if the annual production of wine by the farm winery is made in Georgia in accordance with the source of berries, fruits or grapes as provided by the laws of the state and the rules and regulations of the state department of agriculture. 
B.  Licenses. The alcoholic beverage licenses which may be issued to farm wineries under this section are: 
(1)  Wholesaler of farm winery production. A farm winery shall be granted a wholesale license for sale and distribution as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1. Such license shall be issued upon application and payment of established fees and upon presentation of a receipt for payment of the state annual license tax as provided by the referenced code provisions in this section. 
(2)  Retail package sales of wine. Each retail package sales license shall require that all sales shall be by and through the farm winery tasting room at the site for which said license is issued. 
(3)  Retail sales of wine. Each license for retail sales of wine for consumption on the premises shall require that all consumption shall be at the farm winery site for which said license is issued. 
(4)  Multiple farms winery licenses. A farm winery may apply for and, if approved, may be issued multiple farm winery licenses as provided in subsections (1) through (3) of this section for any single site. At the primary farm winery facility where the wine is produced, such site may be licensed for wholesale, package retail sales and on-premises consumption. For any site other than the primary farm winery facility where the wine is produced, up to the maximum number of such sites as may be permitted by state statute, such site may be licensed for package retail sales and on-premises consumption. The license created in accordance with this article shall be limited to farm winery tasting rooms licensed by the state in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1 et seq., and the licensee shall be permitted to perform only acts allowed in accordance with such statutes. No license is hereby created authorizing any other use. 
(5)  Alternative provision. The first license at any site shall have a cost equal to the cost of a the county alcoholic beverage license at the time of the application. Any license for two or more categories of sale shall require payment of the additional license fees as provided in the county fee schedule. 
(6)  Ratio of sales. There shall be no specified or required ratio of alcohol sales to any other income for farm winery operations. Farm wineries shall operate on such days and hours as are provided by the Georgia Farm Winery Act, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
(7)  Renewals. All applications for renewal of a farm winery license or licenses shall be accompanied by a copy of the current state license. Failure to present a valid copy of a current and valid state license will result in a refusal to renew license. Timely application for renewal is determined by the date on which a complete and proper application has been submitted. 
(8)  State statutes. A farm winery may apply for a license for on-premises consumption of wine and malt beverages (not produced under the Georgia Farm Winery Act, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1 et seq.) under the terms as provided under section 5.30.040(C)(3). 
(9)  Compliance with section. All alcoholic beverage sales other than farm winery sales shall be in accordance with chapter 5.30 and chapter 5.60 of this Code. 
(10)  An applicant for a farm winery license may choose to submit an application under this section for a license to encompass all of the preceding selections under this subsection of section 5.30.177, which will include all provisions set forth in subsection B above. The application shall be submitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter as previously set forth. The fee for this license shall be $2,000.00, and shall include licenses for the following: 
(i)  Farm winery manufacturing. 
(ii)  Retail package sales of wine. 
(iii)  Retail sales of wine for consumption on the premises. 
(iv)  Wine tasting room. 
C.  Excise tax. Wines sold at retail by a manufacturer as provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1(b) shall have levied thereon, an excise tax as prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-50, and such tax shall be reported and remitted to the state tax commissioner as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-2-6. 
(Res. of 4-24-14(1), § 6(Exh. A); Res. of 12-11-14(1), § 4) 
5.30.178. - Sales by businesses licensed to sell packaged malt beverages and/or wine and growlers. 
Package malt beverage licensees, who are not also licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package, may fill growlers with draft beer at the licensed location subject to the following requirements: 
1.  At least 90 percent of the licensee's total gross sales are from packaged sale of malt beverages and/or wine or the licensee's premises have a minimum of 400 square feet of floor space dedicated to the display of malt beverages offered for sale. 
2.  A growler shall not exceed 64 ounces. 
3.  Growlers may only be filled from kegs procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. 
4.  Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. 
5.  Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. 
6.  Consumption on the premises is strictly prohibited. However, samples of tap beers may be made available without a malt beverage tasting license, but shall not exceed one ounce or shall any one individual be offered more than three samples within a calendar day. 
(Res. of 12-11-14(1), § 5) 
5.30.180. - Grounds for revocation or suspension of license. 
The following shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of a malt beverage and wine license. The existence of such grounds shall be determined by the board of commissioners in its sole discretion, to wit: 
A.  Violation by the licensee of any state or federal law or regulation, except misdemeanors, or of any resolution or ordinance of the county, other than traffic violations. 
B.  The failure of the licensee or his employees to report promptly to the sheriff's department any violation of law, regulation, county resolution or breach of the peace, disturbance, or altercation occurring on the premises. 
C.  Any conduct on the part of the licensee or his employees contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals. 
D.  Operating or conducting a business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals, or in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
E.  The violation of any state or federal law or regulation, municipal ordinance, or county resolution or ordinance pertaining to alcoholic and malt beverages and wines. This ground specifically includes any violation of any provision of this chapter. 
F.  The violation by the licensee of the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
G.  The violation by the licensee of any federal, state or local law prohibiting the sale of pornographic materials. 
H.  Failure of the licensee to furnish to the business license director any report required by this chapter or any report requested in writing by the director. 
I.  Allowing a person to work in the licensed business who had an alcoholic beverage license revoked by any jurisdiction for violation of its laws or rules within a period of five years immediately preceding the filing of an application for a license under this chapter. 
J.  Allowing a person employed by a licensed business to sell or assist in the sale of alcoholic beverages after being convicted of or having pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony involving moral turpitude. 
K.  Allowing a person employed by a licensed business to sell or assist in the sale of alcoholic beverages after being convicted of or having pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony not involving moral turpitude within ten years from date of conviction. 
L.  Allowing a person employed by a licensed business to sell or assist in the sale of alcoholic beverages after being convicted of or having pled guilty to any law of the United States or any state law pertaining to the sale of malt beverages, wines or alcoholic beverages within the past five years from date of conviction. 
M.  The conviction of the license holder or his employee(s) for driving under the influence within the past five years from date of conviction. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99; Res. of 12-10-09(1), § 1) 
5.30.190. - Hearing on revocation or suspension of license. 
A.  A license holder shall be entitled to a hearing by the board of commissioners concerning any alleged violation which could lead to revocation or suspension of the license. 
B.  Upon the report of any violation of this chapter by the license holder or agents to the board of commissioners, the business license director shall give notice to the registered agent in writing that the managing agent shall show cause before the commission why the license should not be revoked or suspended. 
C.  A written notice from the director shall specify the time and place for the hearing, which shall be not less than three days nor more than 14 days from the date of service of the notice. 
D.  The board of commissioners shall have the power to suspend any license issued under this chapter for a period of time not to exceed 14 days pending the hearing before the board of commissioners on the question of whether or not the license shall be further suspended or revoked for cause. 
E.  At the hearing the licensee shall have the opportunity to show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked. 
F.  The board of commissioners shall hear relevant evidence as to the alleged violation of the chapter. 
G.  The hearing need not be at a regular meeting of the commission but may be at such time and place as shall be fixed in the notice. 
H.  The decision of the board of commissioners shall be by majority vote of the members present at the hearing; provided, however, three members must concur to pass any order. 
I.  Within three days from the date of the hearing, the board of commissioners shall render a decision in writing and furnish a copy of the decision to the registered agent. A decision of the board shall be effective immediately, whether or not the licensee, managing agent, or registered agent can be personally served with a written copy of the decision. 
J.  Except as otherwise provided herein, a licensee who has had his license revoked may reapply for a license after 30 days have passed from the effective date of the revocation. Such a reapplication shall conform with all procedural requirements applicable to a new application. The board of commissioners shall consider all matters relevant to the application, including the previous revocation. 
K.  If the sheriff of Hall County shall find that a business holding a license under this chapter is in violation of a law of the State of Georgia, or in violation of a law or resolution of Hall County, and that the continued operation of the business would create a clear and present danger to the health, safety and general welfare and security of Hall County, the sheriff shall be empowered to seize and temporarily suspend the license of the business. The sheriff shall deliver the license to the business license director on the next working day. The chairman of the board shall then schedule a special hearing of the board to consider further action upon the order within five days of the date upon which the business license director received the license from the sheriff. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99) 
5.30.200. - Excise taxes. 
A.  There is levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages outside municipalities in the county an excise tax in the following amounts: 
1.  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in and from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; 
2.  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
B.  There is levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling wine outside municipalities of the county an excise tax in the following amounts: 
1.  An excise tax on the first sale or use of wine by the package which tax shall be $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
[2.  Reserved.] 
C.  The taxes imposed by this provision shall not be levied with respect to any sales of wine or beer which are exempt from taxation by federal or state law. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99) 
5.30.210. - Use of revenue. 
A.  Revenue produced from this chapter shall be used entirely for county uses outside municipalities. 
B.  No revenue produced by this chapter shall be used for purposes within any municipality in the county. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99) 
5.30.220. - Distribution of required forms. 
A.  Any forms required by this chapter shall be printed by the county and furnished to applicants and license holders. 
B.  License forms shall be printed by the county and signed by the person in charge of issuing licenses for the county. 
C.  A copy of this chapter shall be furnished to each license holder by the county. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99) 
5.30.225. - Brown bagging. 
A.  Brown bagging as defined in this chapter means possession of an open glass bottle, can, or other container containing an alcoholic beverage or consumption of an alcoholic beverage on premises: 
1.  For which a county business license has been issued; and 
2.  [Which] occurs at a location different from where said alcoholic beverage was purchased. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for a licensee or any other business to allow customers to bring with them their own alcoholic beverages which is known as "BYOB" or "brown bagging". 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any alcoholic beverages to be allowed to be brought into, served, stored, kept or consumed by any person on the premises of any business establishment for which a Hall County Business/Occupation Tax Certificate has been issued and which business establishment has no alcoholic beverage license issued by Hall County. 
D.  The prohibitions and restrictions in paragraph C. shall not apply to a private function in which attendance is by invitation only: 
1.  All alcoholic beverages served at a private function shall be provided by the host or hosts; 
2.  The cost of the alcoholic beverage(s) served at a private function are to be paid for by the host or hosts; 
3.  There are no business transactions conducted during the private function; and 
4.  There is no cost to attend the private function either by donations or any other means. 
(Res. of 6-27-13(3), § 1) 
5.30.230. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the magistrate or state court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
5.30.240. - Additional remedies. 
In the event any provision of this chapter has been violated or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, the county may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or abate such violation. 
(Res. of 11-13-97, § 1; Res. of 9-9-99) 
CHAPTER 5.40. - MASSAGE AND BODYWORK THERAPY BUSINESSES 

5.40.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate massage and bodywork therapy businesses in the interest of promoting and protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the unincorporated county. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.020. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this chapter regulating massage and bodywork therapy businesses shall have the meanings indicated below: 
A.  Business license means the certificate issued upon payment of the administrative fee, payment of the regulatory fee, if any, and the payment of the occupation tax. Only one business license certificate shall be issued, which shall demonstrate that the fees and tax have been paid. 
B.  County means the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia. 
C.  Employee means any person over 18 years of age, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage and bodywork therapy business and who receives compensation from the owner, operator or patrons of the business. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "employee" includes the terms "massage and bodywork therapist" and "independent contractors." 
D.  Good moral character means a person who has not been convicted of a sex-related crime, or convicted of an attempt to commit such offense, or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punished as a sex related crime, in the past ten years. 
E.  Home office means any residence which a person may use as a base of operation to include making appointments, receiving phone calls, mail, or engaging in management activity related to a business. This however, would not permit the practice of the business at the home office, any signs, or any visible evidence from the exterior that any type business activity is being conducted at the location. 
F.  Massage and bodywork means any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, range of motion stretches, soft tissue manipulation or stimulating of the external parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, hot packs or cold packs with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, water, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. This definition shall also include treatment by baths of all kinds, including all forms and methods of hydrotherapy. This definition excludes "physical therapy" as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-33-3(7). 
G.  Massage and bodywork therapist means any individual who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of "massage and bodywork or reflexology" as defined herein, whether as an owner, operator or employee of a massage and bodywork therapy business. 
H.  Massage and bodywork therapy business means any business or location operated by any person, firm, association or corporation, who engages in, carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on, any of the activities defined under massage and bodywork therapy or reflexology herein. Massage and bodywork therapy or reflexology businesses shall not include any occupations, businesses or professions exempted by section 5.40.180 of this chapter. 
I.  Massage parlor means any building, structure, or place used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation, prostitution, or masturbation for hire. 
J.  Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
K.  Operator means the manager or other natural person principally in charge of a massage and bodywork therapy business. 
L.  Owner or owners shall mean the proprietor if a sole proprietorship, all partners (general and limited) if a partnership, or all officers, directors and persons holding ten percent or more of the outstanding shares if a corporation. 
M.  Patron means any person over 18 years of age, or a minor with verified written consent of at least one parent or guardian, or who is accompanied by at least one parent or guardian, who receives a massage and bodywork or reflexology therapy under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will give money or any other consideration thereof. 
N.  Recognized school means a state-licensed school or institution of learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession, and work of massage and bodywork, including but not limited to: physiology, anatomy, hygiene, applied kinesiology, AIDS awareness, ethics, and statutes and rules of massage and bodywork therapy, and which school requires a resident course of study of not less than 500 hours before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school following the successful completion of such course of study or learning. Or a state licensed school or institution of learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession, and work of reflexology, and which school requires a resident course of study of not less than 200 hours before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school following the successful completion of such course of study or learning. 
O.  Reflexology means the application of specific pressure by the use of the therapist's hands, thumbs, and fingers to reflex points limited solely to the patron's hands, feet, and ears and which practice does not involve or require the patron to undress beyond the removal of the shoes and socks and does not require the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, hot packs or cold packs with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, water, liniments, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations but may include the application of antiseptics to the patron's feet. 
P.  Specific anatomical regions means and includes the genitals, anus, perineum, and female breast. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.030. - Facilities. 
No massage and bodywork therapy business establishment shall be issued a license, nor be advertised, operated, established or maintained in the county unless an inspection by the building inspections department and the health department reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
A.  Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths, and showers shall be made water impervious with approved materials and shall be installed in accordance with all codes and ordinances of the county. 
B.  All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, and steam or bath areas, shall have surfaces which may be disinfected. 
C.  The premises shall have equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing nondisposable instruments, and such instruments shall be disinfected after each use on each patron. 
D.  All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean linens and towels storage areas. 
E.  Toilet facilities shall be provided for use by employees and patrons. 
F.  Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule immediately adjacent thereto. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels or dryers. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.040. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the county, a massage and bodywork therapy business without a license to do so. It shall also be unlawful to be a massage and bodywork therapist, owner, operator or employee of a massage and body work therapy business without a valid employee license issued under terms of this chapter. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.050. - Qualifications for licenses. 
Owners, operators, and employees of a massage and bodywork therapy business shall be of good moral character as defined in this chapter. Any owner, operator, or employee who is convicted of a crime specified under good moral character as defined herein, while employed as an owner, operator, or employee of a massage and bodywork therapy business shall not thereafter work as an owner, operator, or employee of any massage and bodywork therapy business in the county for a period of ten years from the date of such conviction unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere, or a bond forfeiture. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.060. - Application process for a license to operate a massage and bodywork therapy business. 
Any person, association, partnership, or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any massage and bodywork therapy business shall make application to the county business license director. A nonrefundable new application fee of $100.00 shall be paid to the business license director with the application and all required supporting documentation. The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, or carrying on of any massage and bodywork therapy business. An employee license must be secured by each employee who shall work in the business in any capacity as outlined in section 5.40.110. Upon payment of a fee of $50.00 by the applicant, the business license director shall complete an investigation and upon the applicant meeting the requirements shall issue the employee license. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.070. - Application contents. 
Each application for a license to operate a massage therapy business shall contain the following information: 
A.  Applicant's full true name, social security number, date of birth, place of birth, aliases, sex, nationality, and citizenship. 
B.  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
C.  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
D.  Business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation. 
E.  The business license history of the applicant and where such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for a massage and bodywork therapy business or similar type business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
F.  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the date and place of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the same, the residence address and dates of birth of the partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant, corporation, or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
G.  If the applicant, any partners, or any corporate officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, have been convicted of any crime involving good moral character in the past ten years, and if so a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether any terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
H.  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. 
I.  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
J.  Whether the premises are owned or rented. 
K.  Each applicant for a license to operate a massage and bodywork therapy establishment or business shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
1.  If the applicant is an individual, by the individual; 
2.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
3.  If by a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
4.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
L.  In addition to the information required herein, the application shall disclose the name, address, social security number, and date of birth of any and all persons who have a financial interest in the entity applying for the license, and must consent for the county to obtain his or her criminal history record information. 
M.  The application must be accompanied by a certificate or diploma from a recognized school as defined in section 5.40.020(N) for each person working in the business of performing massage or reflexology. This paragraph does not apply to clerical or administrative personnel. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.080. - Application; investigation. 
The county shall have 45 calendar days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. The application will be referred to the commission for consideration of the issuance of a business license upon the completion of the investigation, and verifying the application meets the following requirements: 
A.  The required fee has been paid. 
B.  Application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
D.  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the application. 
E.  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted within ten years of the date of the application, in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving moral character as defined herein. Applicant has not had a license or permit to operate a massage and body work therapy establishment or business denied or revoked for cause involving lack of good moral character in this county or any other local government jurisdiction located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
F.  The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by applicant complies with all applicable zoning and distance laws code. 
G.  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.090. - Licenses nontransferable. 
No license to operate a massage and bodywork therapy business may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer, or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case, the license upon notification to the business license director, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.100. - Change of name or location. 
No licensee shall advertise, operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on a massage and bodywork therapy business under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. Any application for an extension or expansion of a building where a massage therapy business is located shall require inspection and shall comply with all provisions and regulations of this Code. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.110. - Application process for employee license. 
Before any person may work as an owner, operator, or employee of a massage and bodywork therapy business, such person shall pay a nonrefundable $50.00 fee designated in section 5.40.060 of this Code and file a notice of intended employment with the business license director on forms that require applicant's full name, current address, social security number, date of birth, birth place, sex, telephone number, address for the last five years, business occupation and employment history for the last five years, proof of age (photo I.D. from a governmental agency), complete information concerning the conviction of any crime within the past ten years, citizenship and consent for the county to obtain criminal history record information. If such applicant will engage in any activities of massage and bodywork or reflexology as defined in this chapter, such applicant shall provide a required diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school as defined by this chapter, or provide a current license from another state whose licensure requirements meet or exceed those set forth in this chapter, or provide proof of successful completion of the National Certification Examination for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork. Upon the filing of the notice and any other required documents with the business license director, the applicant may become a conditional employee and work on the licensed premises. The county shall have 45 calendar days to investigate the information furnished by the applicant. Each applicant shall furnish a consent form authorizing the county to receive criminal history information as may be contained in the files of the GCIC. If the applicant is found to be of good moral character and otherwise qualifies under this chapter, the business license director shall grant approval of employment. Upon approval, the applicant shall be issued an employee license. The license shall be with the owner, operator or employee while on a licensed premises or while engaged in or carrying on any activities of massage or reflexology. All notices to applicants or license holders issued pursuant to this chapter shall be mailed certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address set forth in the notice of intended employment. Applicants and license holders shall have the duty to furnish the business license director a new mailing address if the applicant's or license holder's address shall change during the investigation period or term of employment. Employee licenses issued pursuant to this code section shall remain valid until or unless otherwise suspended, revoked or in such case or circumstance where the employee would not otherwise qualify for the granting of a new license under this chapter. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.120. - Suspensions and revocations. 
If the sheriff of the county shall find that a massage therapy business or a massage therapist is in violation of a law of the state or in violation of a law or resolution of the county and that the continued operation of the business would create a clear and present danger to the health, safety and general welfare and security of the county, the sheriff shall be empowered to seize and temporarily suspend the business license of the business. The sheriff shall deliver the business license to the business license director upon the next working day of the business license director. The chairman of the board of commissioners shall then schedule a special hearing of the board of commissioners to consider further action upon the order within five days of the date upon which the business license director received the business license from the sheriff. The commission may suspend or revoke the license for any one of the following reasons: 
A.  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original or renewal application process. 
B.  A licensee has knowingly allowed the violation of this Code or the violation of laws of the state to occur on the premises. 
C.  A licensee fails to maintain good moral character as defined herein. 
D.  A licensee fails or refuses to provide consent for the county to obtain criminal history record information. 
E.  A licensee fails to pay any fee or any other amount of money due to the county under this chapter or any other code section. 
F.  Violations of any county codes or laws of the state that demonstrate the owner(s) further conducting the business would be a detriment to the community or surrounding area. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.130. - Appeals procedure. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation may appeal any action, order, decision, or determination of the business license director or any other administrative official to the board of commissioners. The appeal is limited to an alleged error of the official from which the appeal is taken. 
B.  The appeal shall be filed in writing with the clerk of the board of commissioners within 15 days following the date on which the alleged error was made. Upon receiving the appeal, the clerk shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners and notify all parties to the appeal by mail at their business address of the time and date of the appeal hearing. 
C.  All parties to the appeal may appear in person or be represented by counsel. 
D.  The board of commissioners shall conduct the hearing as the chairman shall see fit. At the conclusion of the hearing, the board of commissioners shall enter an order making a finding of fact and shall have all the powers of the official from which the appeal was taken. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.140. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
5.40.150. - Enforcement. 
The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted by the business license director, county enforcement department (marshal's office) or county sheriff's department. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.160. - Renewal of licenses. 
All licenses for massage and bodywork therapy businesses shall expire on December 31st of each year, including the year of issue, but may be reissued by the business license director for the following year, upon renewal application being made, payment of the appropriate fee designated in section 5.40.170 of this Code, and a determination by the business license director that the applicant remains qualified as set forth in this chapter. Renewal applications shall be submitted and renewal fees shall be paid by November 15th. Licenses not renewed by December 31st shall be void and such license holder must reapply as a new applicant in order to obtain a license. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.170. - Fee schedule. 
A.  New application ..... $100.00 
B.  Renewal application ..... 50.00 
C.  Sheriff approval and/or background investigations (each) ..... 15.00 
D.  Employee license ..... 50.00 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.180. - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to the following while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective occupations, business or professions: 
A.  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, occupational therapists, or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state. 
B.  Nurses who are registered under the laws of the state who practice nursing only. 
C.  Barbers, cosmetologists and nail technicians who are duly licensed under the laws of the state, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging and bodywork of the neck, face, scalp, feet, hands, and hair of the customer or client for cosmetic purposes. 
D.  A "recognized school" as defined in section 5.40.020(N) of this chapter. 
E.  Any person actively enrolled in and pursuing a course of study leading to a degree or certificate as a massage and bodywork therapist in an educational program in a "recognized school," not to exceed one year beyond the effective date of this chapter. 
F.  None of the provisions of this chapter shall be construed so as to limit or prevent any person duly licensed under the laws of this state to practice the profession for which he or she was licensed. 
G.  Persons licensed as a "home office" shall be exempt from requirements of section 5.40.030. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.190. - License required prior to advertising. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, a massage and bodywork therapy business without a valid massage and bodywork therapy license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.200. - Minimum age of massage and bodywork therapist. 
No massage and bodywork therapy business or owner or operator shall employ or contract with, as a massage and bodywork therapist, a person under the age of 18 years or any person not licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.210. - Hours of operation. 
A massage and bodywork therapy business shall be closed between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.220. - Patrons not to administer massage and bodywork. 
No massage and bodywork business or employee, owner or operator thereof shall offer to permit, or permit, any patron to administer any act of massage and bodywork or reflexology to any person. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.230. - Price rates to be posted. 
Price rates for all services performed at a massage and bodywork therapy business shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective patrons. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.240. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed to be brought into or served, stored, kept, or consumed on the premises of a massage and bodywork therapy business. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.250. - Massage of specific anatomical areas prohibited. 
No owner, operator or employee shall intentionally touch or massage, or offer to touch or massage any specific anatomical region of any patron. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.260. - Patron coverings required. 
Each massage and bodywork therapy business shall provide to each patron clean, sanitary and opaque coverings capable of covering the patron's specific anatomical regions. Reuse of such covering is prohibited unless the covering has been adequately cleaned. No massage and bodywork shall be administered unless the patron is covered by such covering of the specific anatomical regions. Opaque coverings shall not be required to be furnished to patrons receiving only reflexology therapy. Patrons receiving reflexology therapy shall not undress beyond the removal of shoes and socks. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.270. - Proper patron clothing required. 
With the exception of bathrooms and dressing rooms, no massage and bodywork therapy business, owner, operator or employee thereof shall permit any person within the massage and bodywork therapy business unless the specified anatomical regions are covered. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.280. - Proper owner, operator, employee clothing required. 
Each owner, operator, and employee of a massage and bodywork therapy business shall, while in the presence of another person, while on the premises of a massage and bodywork therapy business, wear clothing of an opaque material, and it shall be unlawful for such person to fail to fully conceal his or her specific anatomical regions or any portion thereof. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.290. - Compliance with laws and ordinances. 
No patron, owner, operator, or employee of a massage and bodywork therapy business shall violate any federal, state or local law or ordinance while engaged in or carrying on any of the activities of massage and bodywork or reflexology as defined in this chapter. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.300. - Authority to inspect premises. 
Massage and bodywork therapy businesses shall be open at reasonable times for inspection by county employees to ensure compliance with this Code. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.310. - Minors as patrons unlawful. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is under the age of 18 years to become a patron of a massage and bodywork therapy business unless such person possesses verified written permission from at least one parent or guardian, or is accompanied by at least one parent or guardian. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the owner, operator or employee of each massage and bodywork therapy business to ensure that no person under the age of 18 years becomes a patron of the business unless such person possesses verified written permission from at least one parent or guardian or is accompanied by at least one parent or guardian. It shall be presumed that an owner, operator, or employee knew a person was under the age of 18 unless such owner, operator or employee asked for and was furnished photo identification issued by a governmental agency reflecting that such person is 18 years of age or older. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.320. - Proper diploma or certificate required. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or employee possessing a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school, only for the work or practice of reflexology, to engage in activities beyond those defined under reflexology herein. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.330. - Prohibited devices and preparations in reflexology. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or employee engaged in the activities of reflexology, to apply to any patron any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, hot packs or cold packs, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, water, liniments, oils, powder, creams, ointments, or other similar preparations. Antiseptics may be applied only to a patron's feet. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.340. - Prohibited businesses—Masseurs or massage parlors. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any masseur or masseuse to massage any person in any building, structure, or place used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation, prostitution, or masturbation for hire. 
B.  Activities in accordance with this chapter may be licensed, and physical therapy conducted by a licensed physical therapist or conducted under the supervision of licensed medical personnel is permitted. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
5.40.350. - Hearing on revocation of business license. 
A.  When a matter is transmitted by the business license director or the sheriff to the clerk of the board of commissioners for possible suspension or revocation, the chairman of the board of commissioners shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall make such investigations as it deems necessary and shall conduct the hearing as the chairman shall see fit. 
B.  The licensee shall be notified in person or by mail at his business address of the date and time of the hearing. The licensee may appear in person or be represented by counsel. 
C.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the board of commissioners, based upon evidence submitted at the hearing, shall enter an order making a finding of fact and then: 
1.  Find that the evidence does not authorize revocation or suspension; or 
2.  Issue a warning to the licensee; or 
3.  Suspend the business license and probate the suspension; or 
4.  Revoke the business license and probate the revocation; or 
5.  Suspend the business license; or 
6.  Revoke the business license; or 
7.  Take any other appropriate action regarding the license. 
(Res. of 6-6-00(2), § 2) 
CHAPTER 5.50. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

 

5.50.010. - Definitions. 
A.  All definitions set forth in section 5.10.020 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia are incorporated herein by reference and shall be included in this chapter. 
B.  "Hall County, Georgia" as used in this chapter means the unincorporated as well as any incorporated area within Hall County, Georgia. 
C.  "County" as used in this chapter means the area within the legal boundaries of Hall County, Georgia. 
D.  "Gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
E.  "Depository financial institutions" shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Res. of 1-8-04(2), § 3) 
5.50.020. - Business license tax on depository financial institutions. 
A.  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within Hall County at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said depository financial institutions. 
B.  The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00. 
C.  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the business license department of Hall County on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Said return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The board of commissioners of Hall County shall assess and collect the tax levy pursuant to this section based upon the information provided in said return. 
D.  Taxes levied pursuant to this section shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by this section unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 1-8-04(2), § 3) 
5.50.030. - Violation of chapter; penalty. 
A.  In addition to other remedies available to the county for the collection of special taxes, occupation taxes and regulatory fees due the county from persons subject to the tax or fee who fail or refuse to pay the tax or fee, the officer charged with the collection of the tax or fee shall issue executions against the delinquent taxpayers for any or all of the following: 
1.  The amount of the taxes or fees due when the taxes or fees become due. 
2.  Any penalty imposed by section 5.10.180(A) of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. 
3.  Any interest imposed by [section] 5.10.180(A) of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia; 
B.  The court of competent jurisdiction (Hall County Magistrate Court) for the enforcement of ordinances of the local government which has levied the tax or imposed the fee may impose a civil fine for failure to pay the occupation tax or regulatory fee. Such a civil fine shall not exceed $500.00 and may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. 
(Res. of 1-8-04(2), § 3) 
CHAPTER 5.60. - DISTILLED SPIRITS 

 

5.60.010. - License issuance. 
Wholesale and consumption on the premises licenses for the sale of distilled spirits outside municipalities in Hall County will be issued by the board of commissioners of the county pursuant to the rules and regulations set forth in the following sections of this chapter. The holding of any of said licenses is declared to be a privilege and not a right. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1) 
5.60.020. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term: 
A.  Hall County, Georgia as used herein shall be construed to mean the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia; wherever the term "county" is used herein, it shall be construed to mean the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia. 
B.  Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine, or fortified wine. 
C.  Brown bagging means possession of an open glass bottle, can, or other container containing an alcoholic beverage or consumption of an alcoholic beverage on premises: 
1.  For which a county business license has been issued; and 
2.  [Which] occurs at a location different from where said alcoholic beverage was purchased. 
D.  Director means the Business License Director for Hall County. 
E.  Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
F.  Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
G.  Election Day means that period of time beginning with the opening of the polls and ending with the closing of the polls. As used in this section, the term "election" is defined as any statewide primary election and the statewide general election and any runoff held for such primary or general election. The term also includes "local elections." 
H.  Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any licensed consumption on the premises business that has been licensed pursuant to the regulations of this chapter for sales off the premises of alcoholic beverages for catered functions. 
I.  Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by any fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product or any combination of such products in water containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager, beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
J.  Nonprofit private club means a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state or a fraternal or veterans' organization associated with and a part of a recognized national fraternal or veterans' organization which is organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofit purposes and which immediately prior to the application for a license hereunder: 
1.  Has at least 100 members regularly paying dues; and 
2.  Has tax exempt status under the provisions of section 501(a) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code; and 
3.  Owns or leases a building or space for the reasonable use of its members; and 
4.  Has no members or officers, agent or employees of the club receiving compensation directly or indirectly in the form of commissions or other compensation based on the amount of profits from the sale of distilled spirits beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at an annual meeting or by its governing body out of the general revenue of the club; and 
5.  Has no part of the net earnings inuring to the benefit of any shareholder or member; and 
6.  Has been in continuous operation for at least one year prior to the application for a license hereunder. 
K.  Premises means the space or area owned, leased or controlled by the licensee and used by him for the purpose of operating under the license. It shall be limited to one location for each license and there shall be a separate license for each premises outlet, except in the case of a licensee where: 
1.  A golf course is located adjacent to and contiguous with a restaurant, premises shall include the playing area of the golf course. 
2.  Where a SportsCar, SCCA (Sports Car Association of America), ACO (Automobile Club De L'Quest) CART (Championship Auto Racing Teams), or NASCAR (National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing) sanctioned motor sport road race track facility is located adjacent to and contiguous with a restaurant. 
3.  In these exceptions the premises shall include the permanent concession points, grandstands and other event viewing areas; provided however, that alcoholic beverages may only be served at permanent concession points on the premises operated by the main licensed location and approved in advance by the county business license director or such other official as may be designated by the board of commissioners. 
L.  Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and interior or exterior seating capacity of at least 30 people, with at least one meal per day being served for not less than three days a week for at least six months each calendar year, and the serving of such meals being the principal business conducted, with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. 
M.  Retail package means sales of distilled spirits packaged to go and not for consumption on the premises sales. 
N.  Veterans' organization means a veterans group duly certified by their national organization and with a membership of not less than 25 persons. 
O.  Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this chapter. 
P.  Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1; Res. of 4-23-09(2), § 1; Res. of 4-26-12(3), § 1) 
5.60.030. - License required. 
No person shall engage in the business of wholesaling, retailing or otherwise providing distilled spirits of any kind in the unincorporated area of the county without first obtaining a license therefor under this chapter. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1) 
5.60.040. - License classifications. 
Only the following classes of licenses shall be authorized: 
A.  Distilled spirits: 
1.  Consumption on the premises; 
2.  Wholesale; 
3.  Consumption off the premises catering; 
4.  Event permit; and 
5.  Event permit—(Nonprofit charitable and civic organizations): 
a.  Bona fide nonprofit charitable organizations, nonprofit civic organizations, colleges and universities desiring to sell alcoholic beverages may apply and submit completed forms furnished by the Commissioner of the State Department of Revenue and a permit from the Commissioner authorizing the organization to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages for a period not to exceed three days as provided in Rule 560-2-2-43 of the Rules and Regulations of the State Department of Revenue, as amended. 
b.  Bona fide nonprofit charitable organizations, nonprofit civic organizations, colleges and universities if approved for a temporary event, may sell distilled spirits for consumption on premises only, subject to O.C.G.A. §§ 3-9-3 and 3-9-5. 
c.  Provided a permit has been issued to a nonprofit charitable organization, nonprofit civic organization, college or university, said organization, college or university shall be considered the same as any other licensee and subject to all laws, rules and regulations and other applicable sections of this chapter relating thereto. 
(Res. of 4-23-09(2), § 2; Res. of 10-25-12(2), § 1) 
Editor's note— Res. of 4-23-09(2), § 2, deleted the former § 5.60.040, and enacted a new § 5.60.040 as set out herein. The former § 5.60.040 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
5.60.050. - License fees. 
A.  The applicant for any alcoholic beverage license shall pay a fee of $25.00 for an application package. Application packages include application instructions, a check-off list indicating all documents required, the multi-page application form, all other required forms, and a complete copy of the alcoholic beverage code. 
B.  The applicant for a consumption on the premises license for the sale of distilled spirits shall pay to the business license director at the time of application the sum of $2,500.00 as an annual license fee for operation for one year at one location or one business where the product will be sold. The first or initial license may be issued on a quarterly basis if application is made after January 1 of the current annual license term with the license fee being prorated by the quarter (one quarter fee minimum with one-half or more of the quarter to be counted as a full quarter). Thereafter the total annual fee shall be due at the time the application is submitted notwithstanding the date of renewal. 
C.  Any wholesale dealer in distilled spirits licensed by the state or the agent of such wholesale dealer will be granted a license upon payment of $100.00; the distribution to be made outside the municipalities in the county. All appropriate and pertinent parts of this chapter shall be applicable to any applicant for or holder of a wholesale license to sell and/or distribute distilled spirits under this chapter. 
D.  Each application for license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee. Should the applicant be denied a license or should the applicant(s) withdraw the application prior to its being submitted to the commission, the license fee shall be refunded; however $150.00 for investigation and application processing shall be retained. 
E.  The above license fees shall not be prorated for applicants whose businesses operate for less than one year. No refund shall be made to license holders who have their licenses revoked or suspended by the county commission. 
F.  The applicant for a consumption off the premises distilled spirits catering license whose consumption on the premises license is current shall pay to the business license director at the time of the application the sum of $250.00 as an annual license fee. 
G.  Where a catered function is to be held in the unincorporated area of Hall County by a caterer holding a valid consumption on the premises and a catering license issued by Hall County, the caterer shall be required to apply to Hall County for an event permit, such application to include the name of the caterer, the date, address and time of the event, and the caterer's distilled spirits catering license number and shall pay to the business license director the sum of $25.00 at the time of filing the application. Where the applicant for an event permit has a valid consumption on the premises license from a governmental entity other than Hall County, the event permit fee shall be $50.00 to be paid to the business license director at the time the application is filed. 
H.  Upon the filing of an application and payment of a fee of $25.00 by a bona fide nonprofit organization, college or university, the business license director may issue a permit authorizing the organization, college or university to sell alcoholic beverages pursuant to section 5.60.040, subject to any law regulating the time for selling such beverages. 
1.  No more than six permits may be issued to an organization in any one calendar year pursuant to this section. 
2.  Permits issued pursuant to this section shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit. 
3.  Applicants under this section do not have to obtain alcohol bonds. 
I.  Alcohol licensed locations/license holders who have their alcoholic beverages license suspended for a period of time shall pay to the business license director a reinstatement fee of $350.00 before the suspended license may be reissued. 
J.  License fees for permanent concession points for the sale of alcoholic beverages as set forth under the definition of "premises" in subsections 5.60.020, paragraph I. shall be as follows: 
1.  An annual inspection fee of $100.00 for 1—4 concession locations; 
2.  An annual inspection fee of $200.00 for 5—10 concession locations; and 
3.  An annual inspection fee of $300.00 for more than ten concession locations shall be charged to offset the cost of concession site inspections. 
4.  Licensing fees for concession points shall not be pro-rated and shall be due and payable at the same time the alcoholic beverage license is renewed each year. 
5.  Alcohol concession permits will be issued for each concession point as a supplementary license to the main licensed location. 
6.  Any new concession locations added during the licensing year shall be charged an initial inspection fee of $50.00, and then the new concession location shall be added to the annual renewal fee the following year. 
7.  Fees set forth in section 5.60.050, paragraph J., subparagraphs 1—3 shall be waived if such fees have already been paid in connection with a Hall County Distilled Spirits Consumption on the Premises License. 
(Res. of 5-14-2009(1), § 1(Exh. C); Res. of 10-25-12(2), § 2) 
Editor's note— Res. of May 14, 2009, § 1(Exh. C), deleted § 5.60.050, and enacted a new § 5.60.050 as set out herein. The former § 5.60.050 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
5.60.060. - License application. 
A.  All applications for licenses to sell distilled spirits shall be made in person by the applicant to the business license director in writing on forms made available by the Business License Director. The application shall contain, but is not restricted to, the following information: 
1.  Name; 
2.  Age; 
3.  Address; 
4.  Length of residency of the applicant; 
5.  Name of business; 
6.  Location of business; 
7.  Current, valid Hall County Business License for proposed alcohol licensed location; 
8.  Description of the premises or place of business where the license is to be effective; 
9.  Statement as to whether the applicant or any person with any interest in the applicant has made application previously for any alcoholic beverage license and the disposition of such application; 
10.  Whether the applicant or any person with any interest in the application has ever been convicted of a crime other than traffic violations; 
11.  Whether a previous license issued to the applicant or any person with any interest in the application has been revoked by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government, and the reason for said revocation; 
12.  Whether any other person is interested directly or indirectly in the profits or losses of the proposed business; 
13.  Each applicant for a distilled spirits license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the business premises or a copy of the current lease for the premises upon which the license is to be effective; and 
14.  Only after meeting all requirements for licensing by the applicant shall the application be submitted to the commission for approval. Current license holders applying for additional locations shall be exempt from this provision. 
B.  Every application for a license shall be accompanied by a scale drawing showing the nearest church, funeral chapel, school or college or shall have attached thereto an affidavit of a registered surveyor that the proposed location of the licensed premises complies with the distance requirements of this chapter and any state or federal law. 
C.  If the applicant for a distilled spirits consumption on the premises license currently maintains a valid beer and/or wine license issued in Hall County, the license can be issued by the business license director without the applicant having to appear before the county commission. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1; Res. of 4-23-09(2), § 4) 
5.60.065. - Application for sales off-premises for catered functions. 
A.  Licensed distilled spirits consumption on the premises licensees eligible for off-premises catering licenses shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Any alcoholic beverage licensee that possesses a valid license from Hall County which authorizes the licensee to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises may be issued an off-premises catering license which authorizes such licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to sell distilled spirits by the drink off the premises and in connection with an authorized catered function within the unincorporated area of Hall County. 
2.  Any alcoholic beverage licensee that possesses a valid license from Hall County which authorizes the licensee to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises shall make application for an off-premises catering license as provided in paragraph F of section 5.60.050 and shall pay to the business license director an annual license fee for operation for one calendar year. 
B.  Event permits will be issued for all catered functions located within Hall County. In order to distribute or sell distilled spirits for consumption off the premises at an authorized catered function, a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall be required to: 
1.  Possess a valid current distilled spirits consumption off the premises catering license from Hall County which authorizes the licensee to sell distilled spirits by the drink. 
2.  Provide satisfactory reports to the director on forms provided by the department stating the quantity of any and all alcoholic beverages transported from the licensee's primary premises to the location of the authorized catered function and such other information as required by the director; and maintain original local event permits and documents required by the department in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered function at all times. 
(Res. of 4-23-09(2), § 5; Res. of 4-26-12(3), § 2) 
5.60.070. - License approval procedures. 
A.  After filing an application with the director, the applicant for a license shall publish a notice of the application in a local newspaper in the county at least four times within two weeks prior to the regular county commissioner meeting at which the application is to be presented and considered. The notice shall contain the name of the person applying for the license and the name of the person for whom the application is submitted, if different, and the location of the proposed premises. An affidavit of the publisher or his authorized agent certifying that the advertisement has been published shall accompany each application. 
B.  After filing an application with the director, the applicant for a license shall place a sign in the establishment where alcoholic beverages are to be sold. This sign shall remain on the premises from the date of the initial filing of the application with the director, and shall remain until the application has been approved or denied. The sign shall be visible form the street or thoroughfare on which the establishment where alcoholic beverages are to be sold. The sign shall contain the words "NOTICE: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSE APPLIED FOR." The words shall appear in bold type and be clearly visible from the street or thoroughfare on which the establishment where alcoholic beverages are to be sold is located, and be located at the main entrance to the establishment. Letters on this sign shall be not less than four inches in height. The day, month, and year the license was applied for and dates and place of the hearings shall also appear on said sign. 
C.  The application may be reviewed and considered by the county commission at the next regularly scheduled county commission meeting following the necessary publication of the application. The county commission shall not act upon or vote upon the application until the second regularly scheduled county commission meeting following the publishing of the application. 
D.  Applications for new alcoholic beverage licenses may be approved for locations currently under construction, or for locations where new construction will begin within 30 days of commission approval, providing said construction must be completed, certificates of occupancy be issued, and the business license and alcoholic beverage license issued, in accordance with regulations contained in this Code, within 12 months of the date of approval by the Hall County Commission. Extensions may be requested and granted by the licensing director for extenuating circumstances only. Any and all applicable fees or renewals fees due or normally associated with the license during this 12-month period will be due and payable as set forth in this Code. Locations not meeting the requirements or time restrictions of this paragraph will be required to apply for a new license after the expiration of 12 months from the date of initial approval by the commission. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1; Res. of 4-23-09(2), § 6) 
5.60.080. - License renewal and transfer. 
A.  A licensee who desires to renew his license for a subsequent calendar year must file a renewal application with the director on or before November 15 of the preceding year. Payment of license fees for renewal shall be made at the time of application, and, upon approval of the renewal application by the director, the license will be issued. Applications for renewal shall be treated as applications for new licenses but need not be advertised and/or resurveyed unless requested by the director. Any renewals submitted after the due date of November 15, shall be considered delinquent and assessed a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the fees due. Interest on delinquent fees shall be assessed at one percent for each month or fraction thereof of delinquency. 
B.  No license may be transferred from one person to another or from one managing agent to another without the approval of the director pursuant to written application. 
C.  Upon change of a license holder or owner (unless the owner is a corporation and stock is traded publicly or listed on a major stock exchange) the license shall be transferred and will remain in effect for no longer than 90 days or until the transfer is granted or refused under this chapter, whichever shall occur first. Payment of the transfer fee of $150.00, if made within five days of the transfer, or $300.00 if more than five days after the transfer, shall be due at the time of application. After 90 days, the license shall immediately be temporarily suspended until such time as a new license holder or registered agent appointed. Reinstatement fees as indicated in section 5.60.050(H) would apply. A time extension for the transfer may be granted by the director due to extenuating circumstances. 
D.  Upon the death of any license holder, his personal representative or heirs may continue to operate under the original license for the balance of the year without payment of any fee, provided those persons are otherwise qualified as license holders. Otherwise, the license may be transferred to a qualified transferee within 30 days after the condition of the estate of the deceased licensee will permit. In such case, the transferee shall pay a transfer fee of $150.00. 
E.  Any licensee desiring to discontinue business at one location and commence business at another location must make a completely new application for the new location. 
F.  No refund of renewal fees shall be made once the renewal application is submitted approved and license is issued. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1; Res. of 4-26-12(3), § 3) 
5.60.090. - Qualifications of license holders. 
A.  All applicants for a license shall be at least 21 years of age. 
B.  All sole proprietor owners who are permanent residents of the State of Georgia shall make application for a license in their own name. Where the owner is a corporation, partnership, or other association, the application shall be made in the name of an officer, partner, or associate who owns a substantial interest in the business. In the event that there is no qualifying officer, partner, or associate who is a permanent resident of the State of Georgia, the application shall be made in the name of an agent of the business who is a permanent resident of the State of Georgia. In such cases the application shall show that the license is for the use of the owner who shall be named in the application. 
C.  For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise indicated, applicant means the corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other organization, and the managing agent. 
1.  Every managing agent applicant for a Hall County Distilled Spirits license shall be at least 21 years of age, a U.S. citizen or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residency, and a resident of the State of Georgia, and shall make application on forms furnished by the business license office and in connection therewith shall, under oath, answer all questions, supply all information, and furnish all certificates, affidavits, and other supporting data as required thereby. 
2.  Where the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and an officer or agent who meets the requirements as set forth in section 5.60.090. The officer or agent named as the applicant shall be an individual who does in fact have regular managerial authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed fulltime by the corporation. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." 
3.  Where the application is made on behalf of a partnership, the license shall be issued jointly to the partnership and either the managing general partner thereof, or an individual who meets the requirements set forth in section 5.60.090 does in fact have managerial authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed full time by the partnership. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." 
4.  Where the application is made on behalf of a sole proprietorship, the license shall be issued jointly to the sole proprietorship and an individual who meets the requirements set forth in section 5.60.090 who does in fact have management authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed full time by the proprietor. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." The "managing agent" may be the sole proprietor, if he/she otherwise qualifies under this section. 
5.  Where the application is made on behalf of any other type organization, the license shall be issued jointly to the organization and an individual who meets the requirements set forth in section 5.60.090 who does in fact have management authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed full time by the organization. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." In the case of a nonprofit private club, the managing agent may be an officer of the organization in lieu of a full-time employee if the individual is otherwise qualified under section 5.60.090. 
6.  A license application may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
7.  The written application for the license shall be a permanent record which the licensee must maintain current as required by this chapter. Failure to maintain a current application shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
8.  In the event the "managing agent" changes, or ceases to meet requirements as set forth in paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5) of this section, the licensee shall notify the business license director within five days of the change. A fee of $150.00 will be charged for the processing of an application for the change of the "managing agent," or if after five days a fee of $300.00, and such applicant must be approved by the director. 
D.  Registered agent. 
1.  All applications for licenses under this chapter shall nominate and name in the application one or more residents of Hall County, Georgia, as the registered agent and representative of the applicant to receive all communications, notices, services or process or other papers or documents, on behalf of the applicant in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any county license. If the managing agent is a permanent resident of Hall County, Georgia, then he/she may serve as the registered agent. The applicant shall furnish a notarized affidavit from such registered agent, and the mailing to any registered agent at that address of any notice required to be given under this chapter or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the applicant/licensee. 
2.  A registered agent must be a U. S. Citizen or a legal alien of at least 21 years of age. 
3.  Such registered agent shall be a permanent resident of Hall County, Georgia, and must be approved by the business license director. The business license director shall refuse to approve any registered agent who is not a bona fide resident of Hall County, Georgia, or who has been convicted, within the five years preceding his nomination, of any felony of any kind or any misdemeanor relating to an alcoholic beverage violation or any state law, or county or municipal ordinance violation relating to alcoholic beverages. 
4.  If any registered agent shall cease to be a resident of the county or in any manner ceases to meet the requirements of paragraph 3 of this section, the licensee shall notify the business license director in writing of such event and shall nominate a new registered agent within five days after such event occurs. Such new registered agent shall meet the requirements in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of this section and must be approved by the business license director. The county shall charge a fee of $50.00 for a change of the licensee's registered agent; provided, however, that if the licensee fails to notify the county and nominate a new registered agent within said five-day period, then the county shall charge a fee of 100.00 for a change of the licensee's registered agent and/or revoke the licensee's license. 
5.  No license may be transferred from one registered agent to another without the approval of the director pursuant to written application. 
6.  Upon change of a registered agent the license shall be transferred and will remain in effect for no longer than 90 days or until the transfer is granted or refused under this chapter, whichever shall occur first. After 90 days, the license shall immediately be temporarily suspended until such time as a new license holder or registered agent appointed. Reinstatement fees as indicated in section 5.60.050(H) would apply. A time extension for the transfer may be granted by the director due to extenuating circumstances. 
E.  Where an application for a license is submitted for a nonprofit private club or veterans' organization, the application shall be made in the name of the highest elected officer and/or the manager of the club or organization. 
F.  When contrary to the public interest and welfare, no license shall be issued by the county commission to an applicant under the following circumstances: 
1.  The applicant's business experience, financial standing, trade associations, personal associations, arrest record or reputation in any community in which he has resided indicates he is not likely to operate the business for which he is seeking a license in conformance with federal, state or local laws, rules, regulations, or resolutions; 
2.  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony involving moral turpitude; 
3.  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony not involving moral turpitude within ten years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the license; 
4.  The applicant was convicted of or pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a misdemeanor, including, but not limited to, laws involving alcoholic beverages, distilled spirits, drugs, pornography, gambling, or tax law violations, if such conviction or plea tends to indicate that the applicant will not operate the business for which he is seeking a license in conformance with federal, state or local laws, rules, regulations, or resolutions; for at least five years from the date of conviction. 
5.  The applicant is an official or employee of the county; 
6.  The applicant is a person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation where any manager, partner, officer, or director thereof has been convicted of or pled guilty to any felony or lesser offense involving moral turpitude. 
7.  An application which is for an applicant with any of the above convictions shall be automatically denied by the director. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1; Res. of 4-23-09(2), § 7; Res. of 4-26-12(3), § 4) 
5.60.095. - Lake Lanier Olympic Venue at Clarks Bridge Park licensing. 
A.  The sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises at the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue shall be allowed. 
B.  The consumption on the premises license provided for herein is exempted from the food sale requirements provided for in section 5.60.110 paragraph B of this chapter. 
C.  The county shall offer for bid an alcoholic beverage license, except as provided in subsection E below: 
1.  For consumption on the premises at the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue; 
2.  Each bid shall be according to the terms and provisions set forth in the invitation to bid by the county commission; 
3.  The right to sell alcoholic beverages under this bid system shall go to the highest and best bidder which is deemed in the overall best interest of the county, and shall entitle each license holder to the exclusive sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue; 
4.  All sales of alcoholic beverages under each license shall be competitive and be of sufficient quality as is required by the franchise agreement that will be entered into between the county and the grantee of the franchise. 
5.  The bidder must provide sufficient proof that he would be entitled to a business license and an alcoholic beverage license for consumption on the premises under this article. 
D.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, possessed or consumed on the premises of the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue unless the alcoholic beverages are delivered by or sold by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license provided for in paragraphs C and E of this section. 
E.  The director of the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue, or his designee, may hold an alcoholic beverage license for the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue, or the director of the Hall County Parks and Leisure Services, or his designee, may hold an alcoholic beverage license for the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue so that the orderly operation of the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue will not be interrupted in the event the person or entity holding the alcoholic beverage license for the facility is unable to serve alcoholic beverages for any reason. There shall be no county license fee paid by the director of the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue, or his designee, or the director of the Hall County Parks and Leisure Services, or his designee. 
F.  The hours of sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises of the Lake Lanier Olympic Venue shall be the same as provided in section 5.60.120 of this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises. 
(Res. of 4-23-09(2), § 8) 
5.60.100. - Building and location requirements. 
A.  No license shall be issued for a location not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the county commission because of traffic congestion, or general character of the neighborhood, or because of the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties and neighborhood. 
B.  No license shall issue for a location within an area where, in the judgment and discretion of the county commission, the number of distilled spirits licenses already granted makes it contrary to the public interest or welfare. 
C.  No license shall issue for a location where a valid and current Certificate of Occupancy has not been issued, or where the operation of such a licensed business would violate the zoning rules and regulations of the county. 
D.  No license shall issue for a location where a previous license has been revoked or suspended, and where, in the judgment of the county commission, the problems which have arisen from the operation of a licensed business at such a location indicate that it is not in the interests of public health, safety, welfare, or morals that the sale of Distilled spirits be permitted at such a location. 
E.  No license shall issue for a location where it would violate state or local law, regulations or resolutions. 
F.  No license shall issue for a location where the nearest point of the main structure of the business is located within 100 yards of the location of the main structure of the business from a church building or 200 yards from any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus as measured in a straight line between the two structures. The word "school" shall include kindergartens, primary and secondary schools, colleges and other educational institutions whether public or private. Provided, however, this provision shall not apply where it would prohibit the renewal, or transfer, of an existing alcoholic beverage license for the sale of distilled spirits wine at a location where a license holder had been granted a license under the terms of any prior county resolution relating to the sale of distilled spirits. In the event a church subsequently locates within 100 yards of licensed premises, or a school subsequently locates within 200 yards of a licensed premises, this provision shall not be applicable under such circumstances and such an event would not cause a license holder to be in violation of this provision or prohibit the renewal or transfer of a license. In such cases, the license may be renewed by the same license holder for the same place of business, or transferred to a new license holder, as long as all of the other provisions of this Chapter are complied with. No license shall issue for any location in which the licensed premises contain a drive-in window for the sale of distilled spirits. 
G.  The licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by authorized personnel of the county. 
H.  Consumption on the premises licenses shall be issued only to restaurants and nonprofit private clubs and veterans' organizations as defined herein. 
I.  Licensed premises must be open for business at least six months of each calendar year. Licensed premises may close for seasonal or remodeling reasons only. Closures due to being out of business, or change in ownership will require an application for a new license. Once the business is "closed" the license ceases to be valid and is revoked. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1; Res. of 4-23-09(2), § 9; Res. of 4-26-12(3), §§ 5, 6) 
5.60.110. - Required reports and notices. 
A.  The licensee must report to the director within five days any change in any interests in the licensee's business, including but not limited to: 
1.  Any change in the division of the profits of the licensed business; 
2.  Any change in the division of net or gross sales for any purpose whatsoever; 
3.  Any change in the payment of rents or leases; 
4.  Any change in the ownership of any lease or building or land used in such business; 
5.  Any change in the ownership of stock of any corporation that has an interest in the licensed business except for the sale of stock over the counter or through a recognized stock exchange; 
6.  Any change in the local managing agent or registered agent of a corporate business licensed under this chapter. 
B.  Reserved for future use. 
C.  Copies of summaries of sales and state form ATT-122 shall be furnished to the business license director not later than the tenth day of each month by wholesale dealers selling distilled spirits to licensees. The report shall apply to deliveries made during the previous month. Copies of these reports shall be submitted with the excise tax described in section 5.60.200. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1; Res. of 4-26-12(3), § 7) 
5.60.120. - Hours of operation. 
A.  The hours of sale for consumption on the premises of distilled spirits shall be 11:00 a.m. to 12:45 a.m. Monday through Fridays, and 11:00 a.m. to 11:30 p.m. on Sundays. Hours on Saturday and Christmas Eve shall be 8:00 a.m. to 11:45 p.m. 
B.  In the event that a licensed business is open for less than the hours stated in the preceding paragraph, then sales of distilled spirits shall be restricted to those regular business hours; however, in no event shall sales be made during hours other than described in the preceding paragraph. 
C.  All licensed businesses for the consumption of distilled spirits shall remove the beverages from the area of the premises used by customers within 15 minutes after closing time for the sale of the beverages. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1; Res. of 4-26-12(3), § 8; Res. of 1-24-19(1), § 1) 
5.60.130. - Advertising. 
Advertising of the sale of distilled spirits shall be in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia and the regulations adopted by the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1) 
5.60.140. - Minors. 
A.  All persons seeking to purchase alcoholic beverages within the unincorporated area of the county (regardless of their apparent age) shall be required to provide "proper identification" showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. "Proper identification" as defined for purposes of this subsection means any document issued by a state or U.S. governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth, and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification and, driver's license and/or certified birth certificate. Violations of this section shall be subject to a fine of no less than $100.00 on the first offense, and for a second offense, a fine of no less than $250.00. This fine shall be levied against the actual license holder, at the licensed location, not specifically to the person failing to request the ID. 
B.  Any license holder, agent or employee of any license holder, who sells alcoholic beverages to a person under the age of 21 years, without requiring proper identification as that term is defined in paragraph A. above, shall, upon first conviction thereof, be sentenced to a mandatory sentence of a minimum of one weekend (48 hours) in confinement and a fine of not less than $500.00. Subsequent convictions shall be punished as provided by section 5.30.230 of this Code. 
C.  Any license holder, or agent or employee of a license holder, who fails to require proper identification and who sells alcoholic beverages to a person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, may, at the sole discretion of the board of commissioners, be subject to the revocation or suspension of his/her license on the first offense. 
1.  For a second offense, at the same licensed location, the board of commissioners may suspend the license for no less than 30 days, or at its discretion suspend the license for a longer period of time or revoke the license based on the severity of the offense, unless the second offense occurs within three years from the first offense, wherein the board of commissioners shall suspend the license for no less than 90 days, or at its discretion suspend the license for a longer period of time or revoke the license, based on the severity of the offense. This suspension may, at the sole discretion of the board of commissions, be less than 90 days if the license holder can provide proactive documentation showing training and education of its employees, and offers other programs to prevent the sale of alcoholic beverages to a person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages. This educational program must be in place at the time of the violation in order to show the business as being proactive and qualify for the lesser suspension. 
2.  For a third offense, occurring within three years of the first offense, at the same licensed location, the board of commissioners shall revoke the license, and an application for a new license shall not be authorized until the expiration of 12 months following the date of revocation, providing the license holder has an educational/training program for employees of the business, and has other programs in effect to prevent the sale of alcoholic beverages to a person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages. If the license holder does not have this educational program in place, then an alcoholic beverage license may not be applied for, for any business in which he may have any interest. 
3.  Businesses that have a proactive alcoholic beverage education program in effect, after three years of operation using the proactive program with no violations of underaged sales, may be considered as having no violations. Businesses that do not have an alcoholic beverage education program in effect, after ten years with no violations, may be considered as having no violations. 
4.  The board of commissioners, in its sole discretion, may suspend the license for a longer period of time, or revoke the license depending upon the severity of the offense evidenced by the facts in each case, including but not limited to, consideration of prior violations of law by the license holder. Where the board of commissioners has suspended the license of a specific location, such suspension shall not be relieved prior to its expiration notwithstanding the sale of the licensed premises or the business located thereon unless authorized by the board of commissioners pursuant to a public hearing held thereon. 
D.  License holders may not allow a person under 18 years of age to sell malt beverages or wine. 
E.  No person shall knowingly and intentionally act as agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, or otherwise procure for or furnish to a person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as defined by state law, any alcoholic beverage, except for medical purposes upon the written prescription of a duly licensed physician under the laws of the state. 
F.  It is unlawful for any person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to falsely misrepresent his or her age in any manner whatsoever in violation of this chapter or applicable laws. 
G.  It is unlawful for any person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to purchase, drink, or possess any alcoholic or malt beverages or wine as defined herein in the county outside of any municipalities. 
H.  It shall not be considered a violation of this chapter for a person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to purchase, drink, or possess any alcoholic or distilled spirits if such person is at the time bona fidely acting for and on behalf of law enforcement agencies conducting investigations of license holders and/or their employees. 
(Res. of 5-14-2009(1), § 1(Exh. D)) 
Editor's note— Res. of May 14, 2009, § 1(Exh. D), deleted § 5.60.140, and enacted a new § 5.60.140 as set out herein. The former § 5.60.140 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
5.60.150. - Gross sales requirement. 
Consumption licenses shall be revoked if gross sales of food products (excluding sales of alcoholic beverages) fall below 50 percent of the combined business volume of food products and alcoholic beverages sold on an annual basis. On or before the 20th day of each month, each licensee shall furnish to the business license director an affidavit showing the gross sales of food products (excluding sales of distilled spirits), the gross sales of distilled spirits, and the gross sales of other merchandise for the preceding month. The business license director will furnish the form for this affidavit. The licensee must attach to the affidavit a copy of the Georgia Sales and Use Tax Report for the same period. These reports shall remain confidential. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1; Res. of 4-26-12(3), § 9) 
5.60.160. - Sale on Christmas Day and election day. 
A.  Except as specifically authorized by law, no person knowingly and intentionally shall sell or offer to sell alcoholic beverages on Christmas Day. 
B.  Alcoholic beverages are authorized to be sold on any election day as defined herein. 
(Res. of 4-26-12(3), § 10) 
Editor's note— Res. of 4-26-12(3), § 10, repealed former § 5.60.160, and enacted a new § 5.60.160 as set out herein. Former § 5.60.160 pertained to sale on Sunday, Christmas Day and election day and derived from Res. of 9-14-06, § 1. 
5.60.170. - Sale, dispensing and miscellaneous regulations. 
A.  License holders may not sell distilled spirits on the licensed premises to any person who is in an intoxicated condition. 
B.  License holders shall not permit any disorderly conduct or breach of the peace on the licensed premises. 
C.  License holders may not sell, offer for sale, possess or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of alcoholic beverages or distilled spirits which a license holder is not authorized to sell under his license. The license holder shall not allow "brown bagging" on the licensed premises. 
D.  Distilled spirits may not be sold or offered for sale through vending machines on the licensed premises. 
E.  Deliveries of distilled spirits to the licensed premises may be made only by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a license from the board of commissioners to deliver such beverages in the county. 
F.  No retail license holder shall accept delivery of distilled spirits from any wholesale dealer unless the wholesale dealer has fully complied with the state laws regulating and taxing the sale of such beverages at wholesale. 
G.  No retail or consumption license holder shall deliver distilled spirits at any location other than the licensed premises. 
H.  All licensees shall store all distilled spirits in their possession only on the premises for which the license was issued. 
I.  Every license holder shall have available on the licensed premises a copy of this chapter and shall be responsible for compliance with this chapter by all persons on the premises. 
J.  Reserved. 
K.  Any and all costs associated with or for signs, notices, and/or advertisements as required by this chapter shall be borne by the applicant. Applicant shall be responsible for any and all fees charged for legal advice or consultations associated with this application. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1; Res. of 4-23-09(2), § 10) 
5.60.180. - Grounds for revocation or suspension of license. 
The following shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of a distilled spirits license. The existence of such grounds shall be determined by the board of commissioners in its sole discretion, to wit: 
A.  Violation by the licensee of any state or federal law or regulation, except misdemeanors, or of any resolution or ordinance of the county, other than traffic violations. 
B.  The failure of the licensee or his employees to report promptly to the sheriff's department any violation of law, regulation, county resolution or breach of the peace, disturbance, or altercation occurring on the premises. 
C.  Any conduct on the part of the licensee or his employees contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals. 
D.  Operating or conducting a business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals, or in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
E.  The violation of any state or federal law or regulation, municipal ordinance, or county resolution or ordinance pertaining to alcoholic and distilled spirits. This ground specifically includes any violation of any provision of this chapter. 
F.  The violation by the licensee of the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
G.  The violation by the licensee of any federal, state or local law prohibiting the sale of pornographic materials. 
H.  Failure of the licensee to furnish to the business license director any report required by this chapter or any report requested in writing by the director. 
I.  Allowing a person to work in the licensed business who had an alcoholic beverage license revoked by any jurisdiction for violation of its laws or rules within a period of five years immediately preceding the filing of an application for a license under this chapter. 
J.  Allowing a person employed by a licensed business to sell or assist in the sale of alcoholic beverages after being convicted of or having pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony involving moral turpitude. 
K.  Allowing a person employed by a licensed business to sell or assist in the sale of alcoholic beverages after being convicted of or having pled guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony not involving moral turpitude within ten years from date of conviction. 
L.  Allowing a person employed by a licensed business to sell or assist in the sale of alcoholic beverages after being convicted of or having pled guilty to any law of the United States or any state law pertaining to the sale of malt beverages, wines or alcoholic beverages within the past five years from date of conviction. 
M.  The conviction of the license holder or his employee(s) for driving under the influence within the past five years from date of conviction. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1; Res. of 12-10-09(2), § 1) 
5.60.190. - Hearing on revocation or suspension of license. 
A.  A license holder shall be entitled to a hearing by the board of commissioners concerning any alleged violation which could lead to revocation or suspension of the license. 
B.  Upon the report of any violation of this chapter by the license holder or agents to the board of commissioners, the business license director shall give notice to the registered agent in writing that the managing agent shall show cause before the commission why the license should not be revoked or suspended. 
C.  A written notice from the director shall specify the time and place for the hearing, which shall be not less than three days nor more than 14 days from the date of service of the notice. 
D.  The board of commissioners shall have the power to suspend any license issued under this chapter for a period of time not to exceed 14 days pending the hearing before the board of commissioners on the question of whether or not the license shall be further suspended or revoked for cause. 
E.  At the hearing the licensee shall have the opportunity to show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked. 
F.  The board of commissioners shall hear relevant evidence as to the alleged violation of the chapter. 
G.  The hearing need not be at a regular meeting of the commission but may be at such time and place as shall be fixed in the notice. 
H.  The decision of the board of commissioners shall be by majority vote of the members present at the hearing; provided, however, three members must concur to pass any order. 
I.  Within three days from the date of the hearing, the board of commissioners shall render a decision in writing and furnish a copy of the decision to the registered agent. A decision of the board shall be effective immediately, whether or not the licensee, managing agent, or registered agent can be personally served with a written copy of the decision. 
J.  Except as otherwise provided herein, a licensee who has had his license revoked may reapply for a license after 30 days have passed from the effective date of the revocation. Such a reapplication shall conform with all procedural requirements applicable to a new application. The board of commissioners shall consider all matters relevant to the application, including the previous revocation. 
K.  If the Sheriff of Hall County shall find that a business holding a license under this Chapter is in violation of a law of the State of Georgia, or in violation of a law or resolution of Hall County, and that the continued operation of the business would create a clear and present danger to the health, safety and general welfare and security of Hall County, the sheriff shall be empowered to seize and temporarily suspend the license of the business. The sheriff shall deliver the license to the business license director on the next working day. The chairman of the board shall then schedule a special hearing of the board to consider further action upon the order within five days of the date upon which the business license director received the license from the sheriff. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1) 
5.60.200. - Excise taxes on mixed drinks consumed on the premises. 
A.  Imposition and rate of tax. There is hereby imposed and levied upon every purchaser of a distilled spirit for beverage purposes by the drink within Hall County a tax in the amount provided in O.C.G.A. 3-4-131. 
B.  Authority and requirement of licensee to collect the tax. Every licensee or his agent is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed herein from purchasers of distilled spirits by the drink within the licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be required by the county to facilitate the collection of the tax. 
C.  Collection of tax; records; rules and regulations. In all cases where the collection of food and drinks is by deferred payment or credit, the licensee is liable at the time of and to the extent that such credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The county shall have authority to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax. 
D.  Determination, returns and payments. 
1.  Due date of taxes. The tax imposed by this section shall become due and payable from the purchaser at the time of purchase of any mixed drink in this county. All amount of such taxes collected by the licensee shall be due and payable to the county monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period for which this tax is imposed; provided, however, that upon a proper showing that the tax imposed will not be collected until after a regular billing period of the collecting agent, then the collection of the tax may be deferred by the county for an additional period not exceeding 30 days. 
2.  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the county in such form as the county may prescribe by every licensee liable for the payment of tax hereunder. All returns shall show the gross receipt of the sale of distilled spirits by the drink and the amount of the tax collected on such drinks. 
3.  Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the "Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act," approved February 20, 1951, as now or hereafter amended (O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq.). 
E.  Deficiency determinations. 
1.  If the county has cause to believe that the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the county by any person is not proper, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is within or may come into its possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly period. 
2.  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
3.  Notice of determination; service. The county or its designated representatives shall give to the licensee written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his address as it appears in the records of the county. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
4.  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
F.  Determination if no return made. 
1.  Estimates of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the county shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in this county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in possession of or may come into the possession of the county official. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in paragraph E(3). 
2.  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the tenth day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof would have been returned, until the date of payment. 
G.  Penalty for nonpayment. Any person who fails to pay the tax herein imposed or fails to pay any amount of the tax required to be collected and paid to the county within the time required shall pay a penalty of 25 percent of the tax or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of the tax plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in paragraph F(2). 
H.  Action for tax; tax credit, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected; duty of successors or assignees of licensee to withhold tax from purchase money; liability for failure to withhold. 
1.  At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the county may bring an action in the courts of this state any other state or of the United States in the name of the county to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the county under this article, it may be offset against any future liability for the tax. If the licensee determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the county, he will have three years from the date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the commission, the excess amount paid the county may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or from his administrators or administrators. 
2.  Duty of successors or assignees of licensee to withhold tax from purchase money. If any licensee liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the business license director either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
3.  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchase of a business fails to withhold purchase as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
I.  Administration. 
1.  Records required from licensee: Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in the county shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the county may require. 
2.  Examination of records and audits: The county or any person authorized in writing by the county may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee for sale of distilled spirits by the drink and any licensee liable for the tax in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
3.  Authority to require reports: In administration of the provisions of this paragraph, the county may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to purchases which are subject to the tax. Reports shall be filed with the county when required by the county and shall set forth the purchase price for each purchase, the date or dates of purchase, and such other information as the county may require. 
J.  Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this subsection shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1.50.020 of the Official Code of Hall County. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the subsection is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any licensee or any other person who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the county or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1) 
5.60.210. - Brown bagging. 
A.  Brown bagging as defined in this chapter means possession of an open glass bottle, can, or other container containing an alcoholic beverage or consumption of an alcoholic beverage on premises: 
1.  For which a county business license has been issued; and 
2.  [Which] occurs at a location different from where said alcoholic beverage was purchased. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for a licensee or any other business to allow customers to bring with them their own alcoholic beverages which is known as "BYOB" or "brown bagging". 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any alcoholic beverages to be allowed to be brought into, served, stored, kept or consumed by any person on the premises of any business establishment for which a Hall County Business/Occupation Tax Certificate has been issued and which business establishment has no alcoholic beverage license issued by Hall County. 
D.  The prohibitions and restrictions in paragraph C. shall not apply to a private function in which attendance is by invitation only: 
1.  All alcoholic beverages served at a private function shall be provided by the host or hosts; 
2.  The cost of the alcoholic beverage(s) served at a private function are to be paid for by the host or hosts; 
3.  There are no business transactions conducted during the private function; and 
4.  There is no cost to attend the private function either by donations or any other means. 
(Res. of 6-27-13(1), § 1) 
5.60.220. - Distribution of required forms. 
A.  Any forms required by this chapter shall be printed by the county and furnished to applicants and license holders. 
B.  License forms shall be printed by the county and signed by the person in charge of issuing licenses for the county. 
C.  A copy of this chapter shall be furnished to each license holder by the county. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1) 
5.60.230. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the Court. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1) 
5.60.240. - Additional remedies. 
In the event any provision of this chapter has been violated or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, Hall County may revoke the license or permit and/or may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or abate such violation. 
(Res. of 9-14-06, § 1) 
CHAPTER 5.70. - FORTUNE-TELLING AND RELATED PRACTICES 

5.70.010. - Occupation tax certificate required, application 
A.  All persons, firms or corporations desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of fortune-telling, astrology, phrenology, palmistry, clairvoyance, or related practices where a charge is made, or a donation is accepted for services; shall, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, make application for business license in the form and manner prescribed by the Hall County Business License Director. 
B.  The application shall include but shall not be limited to the information required on all business license applications 
(Res. of 2-8-07(4), § 1) 
5.70.020. - Regulatory fee. 
Pursuant to the provisions of section 5.10.570 of this chapter, a regulatory fee shall apply as set forth in said section with regard to the sheriff's approval, background checks, permits requiring board of commissioners' approval and renewal applications. 
(Res. of 2-8-07(4), § 1) 
5.70.030. - Criminal background investigation required. 
Prior to the issuance of business license, and for all renewal licenses, a criminal background investigation shall be required for the owner(s), manager(s) and employee(s). 
(Res. of 2-8-07(4), § 1) 
5.70.040. - General operating provisions. 
A.  It shall be the duty of all persons holding a business license under this section to annually file, along with the renewal application for the business license, the names of all employees, their home address, home telephone number and any other places of employment. The holder of business license issued under the provisions of this chapter must additionally report changes in the list of employees with the names and required supplemental information for new employees to be filed with the business license director within ten days from the date of such change. 
B.  It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this section to maintain correct and accurate records of the name and address of the persons receiving services at such establishment; the type of services administered; and the name of the person at the establishment administering the services. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the business license director, or designee, or the Hall County Sheriff or designee. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to patronize any fortune-telling or related establishment unless such person carries with him at the time of such patronage, written permission of the underage person's parent or guardian. It shall be the duty of the holder of the business license to determine the age of the person attempting to patronize an establishment and to prohibit such patronage by an underage person. 
D.  Records required to be maintained under this chapter shall be kept for a minimum of two years beyond the expiration date of the business license. Records shall be made available to the business license director, at a location in Hall County, within ten business days of any such request. 
(Res. of 2-8-07(4), § 1) 
5.70.050. - Inspection of registered establishments. 
Sworn officers of the Hall County Sheriff's Department shall have the authority to inspect establishments registered under this chapter during the hours in which the premises are open for business. Such inspection shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter. This section is not intended to limit the authority of the business license director or any other county officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of the Code. 
(Res. of 2-8-07(4), § 1) 
5.70.060. - Applicant disqualification. 
No business license shall be granted to any person under the age of 18 or who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of ten years prior to the date of application for such certificate and has been released from parole or probation. 
(Res. of 2-8-07(4), § 1) 
5.70.070. - Zones where establishments permitted. 
No fortune-telling, astrology, phrenology, palmistry, clairvoyance, or related business shall be located on any premises unless the location has been zoned highway business district (HB), light industrial district (I-I) or heavy industrial district (I-II) under the zoning laws of Hall County. 
(Res. of 2-8-07(4), § 1) 
5.70.080. - Violations; penalty; additional remedies. 
A.  Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
B.  The county is hereby authorized to punish violations of this chapter under the provisions of the Official Code of Hall County, Chapter 1.50. 
C.  Any fortune-telling, astrology, phrenology, palmistry, clairvoyance, or related business operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. In addition to or in lieu of any other penalties or remedies, the county may commence an action or actions to enjoin, abate, or remove any violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be considered due cause for the suspension or revocation of any licenses issued by the county to the offending party. Such revocation or suspension shall occur by way of a hearing before the board of commissioners as provided by this chapter. 
(Res. of 2-8-07(4), § 1) 
CHAPTER 5.80 - CANVASSERS, SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS 

 

5.080.010. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the sale of goods and services by solicitation of residences and businesses in Hall County, and to prohibit criminal activity and abusive techniques utilized by canvassers or solicitors which would adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare of the people. 
(Res. of 9-9-10(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
5.80.020. - Definitions. 
A.  Applicant shall mean the person seeking a license or a permit. 
B.  Canvasser shall mean one who offers one or more services or goods for sale to residents or one who seeks political support or inquiries as to issues of public opinion or sentiments. This term shall be interchangeable with "solicitor" and "peddler". 
C.  Canvassing shall mean travelling from place to place or door to door on foot or in a vehicle and offering to sell goods or services, or the seeking of political support or the act of inquiring as to issues of public opinion or sentiment. This term shall be interchangeable with "soliciting" and "peddling". 
D.  Goods shall mean any sort of personal property, including but not limited to brushes, vacuums, magazines, newspapers, luggage, house wares, electronics, computers, furniture, food, agricultural products, flowers, tools, clothing, decorative accessories, rugs, paintings, sculpture, dishes, and other types of wares and merchandise. 
E.  License shall mean a business license. 
F.  Peddler shall mean one who offers goods or merchandise for sale along the street or from door to door or house to house on behalf of a business, individual, vocation or occupation; one who engages in peddling. This term shall be interchangeable with "canvasser" and "solicitor." 
G.  Peddling or to peddle shall mean travelling from place to place or door to door on foot or in a vehicle and exhibiting, offering to sell or selling goods or services to households, businesses or passers-by. It shall also mean travelling from place to place, door to door taking orders for the sale of goods or services for delivery at another time or place. The solicitation of orders combined with a separate transaction to make delivery to the purchaser as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed peddling. Visits by sales representatives pursuant to a previously arranged appointment with a specific business or person or as a part of an on-going business relationship shall not be deemed peddling. This term shall be interchangeable with "canvassing" and "soliciting." 
H.  Permit shall mean the authorization by the Hall County Business License Director granting a canvasser, peddler or solicitor permission to canvass, peddle or solicit in Hall County, and shall be referred to as a "solicitor's permit." 
I.  Services mean the provisions of any sort of professional or trade service to another to include general maintenance, construction, painting, lawn service, house cleaning, mending, sharpening, motor repair, appliance repair, etc. 
J.  Solicitor shall mean one who offers one or more services or goods for sale to residents or requests contributions by either traveling from place to place or door to door on foot or in a vehicle. This term shall be interchangeable with "canvasser" and "peddler". 
K.  Soliciting shall mean travelling from place to place or door to door on foot or in a vehicle and exhibiting, offering to sell or selling goods or services to households, businesses or passers-by or requesting contributions. This term shall be interchangeable with "canvassing" and "peddling". 
(Res. of 9-9-10(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
5.80.030. - General information. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation engaging or offering as a canvasser, solicitor, or peddler in person at residences and places of business in the unincorporated areas of the county, with or without the consent or invitation of the occupant, for the purpose of canvassing, soliciting, or peddling orders, sales, subscriptions, contributions, or conducting business of any kind, including giving away any goods or services shall be referred to as a solicitor. 
B.  Any person, firm or corporation engaging or offering as a canvasser solicitor, or peddler in person at residences and places of business in the unincorporated areas of the county, with or without the consent or invitation of the occupant, for the purpose of canvassing, soliciting, or peddling orders, sales, subscriptions, contributions, or conducting business of any kind, including giving away any goods or services shall be required to obtain a permit, an identification badge, a business license, and a state peddler's license. 
(Res. of 9-9-10(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
5.80.040. - Registration, permit and license required. 
A.  A solicitor prior to soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions, contributions, or conducting business of any kind, including giving away any goods or services in person at residences and places of business in the unincorporated areas of the county without the consent or invitation of the occupant shall: 
1.  Be 18 years of age at the time of application; 
2.  Be a citizen of the United States or a legal alien; 
3.  File an application for a permit with the business license director; 
4.  Obtain a business license from the business license director or be the agent or employee of a firm, or individual with a valid business license. 
B.  Persons requesting permits for soliciting door to door in private residential areas, shall be required to produce information on each vehicle(s) being used, including at least two photos of each vehicle (front/side view and rear/side view which photographs the vehicle license plate. This information will be provided to the Hall County Sheriff's Office. 
C.  Each individual person must obtain a permit, to include those persons driving for the person performing the actual soliciting or peddling. 
D.  Any individual working as an employee of a business may apply for a permit using the owner's business license, but must show proof of employment from the owner of the business and have written permission from the owner to apply for a permit. Proof of employment shall be two current pay check stubs, or evidence of an employment agreement. 
E.  An independent contractor (persons independently employed or receiving 1099 forms instead of a W-2 form) must apply for a separate permit and business license. 
F.  All application for permits must include at a minimum the following information and shall be signed by the applicant: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant; 
2.  Date of birth; 
3.  Social Security Number; 
4.  Physical description; 
5.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer; 
6.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant's supervisor; 
7.  Brief description of products or services to be sold; 
8.  Description of motor vehicles to be used by the applicant in conducting the canvassing or solicitation; 
9.  Criminal history; 
10.  Photocopy of driver's license or other official photo identification of the applicant. 
(Res. of 9-9-10(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
5.80.050. - Peddler's license requirements. 
A.  In addition to the requirements of this chapter, peddlers as defined by state law must first obtain a license from the probate court of Hall County under the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq. The requirements of that statute are separate from this chapter and obtaining that license shall not satisfy the requirements of this chapter. The applicant is responsible for payment of any fees for a state peddler's license. 
(Res. of 9-9-10(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
5.80.060. - Fees. 
A.  The fee for a solicitor's permit shall be $100.00 for each permit. This fee includes the application, background investigation, copy of the solicitation code and an ID badge. 
B.  Permits for residential solicitation will be issued for a period of two weeks only and may be renewed only once during the calendar year, providing no complaints have been received. 
C.  A renewal fee shall be $50.00. 
D.  Fees are nonrefundable. 
(Res. of 9-9-10(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
5.80.070. - Authorization of permit. 
A.  A permit shall be granted or refused after an investigation of the applicant and any canvassers, solicitors peddlers named in the application. 
1.  Upon approval of the application and issuance of a permit to canvass, solicit, or peddle, an identification badge will be issued to the applicant. 
2.  Each solicitor must wear the identification badge issued by the business license director at all times while, canvassing, soliciting or peddling is underway; and show other photo identification if requested by any citizen, homeowner, resident or law enforcement personnel. 
3.  Permits shall be displayed at the request of any citizen or law enforcement personnel. 
4.  It shall be a violation of this chapter to fail or refuse to display a permit or official identification badge when requested. 
(Res. of 9-9-10(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
5.80.080. - Investigation and background check. 
A.  A background investigation to review the criminal history records of the applicant is required prior to the issuance of a permit. 
B.  Two forms of positive identification are required of the applicant. 
C.  Fingerprints of the applicant shall be taken by the sheriff's office for identification and background check purposes. Applicant is responsible for fingerprint charges. 
1.  Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fees, the Hall County Sheriff's Office will transmit both sets of fingerprints to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation (GBI). The GBI will compare the subject's fingerprints against its criminal file and if no disqualifying conduct is found there in or if necessary, submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) for a comparison with nationwide records. 
2.  The results of the FBI check will be returned to the GBI which will disseminate the state and national results to the Hall County Sheriff's Office. 
D.  The criminal history record shall be used for investigative purposes only and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of criminal history records, the application shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(Res. of 9-9-10(1), § 2(Exh. A); Res. of 6-13-13, § 1) 
5.80.090. - Disqualification and denial of permit. 
A.  No permit shall be issued to any applicant who provides any false or misleading information in connection with the application required by this chapter. 
B.  No permit or badge shall be issued to any applicant for canvassing or solicitation under the age of 18 or who shall have been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere for any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, or has pending a charge involving the elements of assault and battery, or any civil judgment involving unethical or improper business actions, including, but not limited to, actions which would constitute fraud and deceit under the laws of the state, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against a person or property, any crime of possession or sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses or attempts to commit any of these listed offenses. 
C.  If, as a result of the investigation authorized by this chapter, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the business license director shall endorse on such application his disapproval and the reasons for such denial, and shall notify the applicant that the application is denied. 
(Res. of 9-9-10(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
5.80.100. - Approval and issuance of permit. 
A.  If, as a result of the investigation authorized by this chapter, the applicant's character and business responsibility are found to be satisfactory, the business license director shall endorse on such application his approval and reasons for such approval, who shall, upon payment of regulatory fees as established issue a solicitor's permit. 
B.  A solicitor's permit shall contain the name, address, physical description and organizational affiliation of the permit; a description of the solicitation activity to be engaged in; an expiration date; and the signature of the business license director. The business license director shall keep a record of all solicitors' permits issued. 
C.  A solicitor's permit will be issued a minimum of ten days after initial application is made for a permit, in order to give time for processing, investigation and ID badge preparation. 
(Res. of 9-9-10(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
5.80.110. - Exemption from obtaining permit. 
A.  Persons, business and organizations exempted from local regulation by operation of state or federal law or by the Constitution of the United States, or of the state, are exempt from the requirements of this chapter; 
B.  Bona fide charitable organizations tax exempt under Section 501(C)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code are exempt from the requirements of this chapter unless so noted elsewhere; 
C.  Bona fide charitable or nonprofit organizations whose field sales representatives are under the age of 18 years are not required to obtain a solicitor's permit. 
D.  Solicitors for nonprofit organizations who are regularly enrolled in a public or private school in Hall County shall not be required to obtain identification badges or a solicitor's permit. 
E.  Persons engaging in political canvassing. 
(Res. of 9-9-10(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
5.80.120. - Regulations for canvassers, solicitors and peddlers. 
A.  Solicitors may only make one solicitation call at the same location/address for each individual business within any consecutive six-month period, unless specifically invited back by the homeowner/occupant. 
B.  Solicitors must inform homeowner/resident immediately in English in understandable terms the purpose for the solicitation. 
C.  Solicitors may not represent the solicitor is participating in any contest, game or other competitive endeavor, or offering the occupant an opportunity to participate in any such contest, game or endeavor. 
D.  Solicitors may not use vulgar, insulting or threatening language in the course of any solicitation. 
E.  Solicitors may not remain on any part of the property of the residence after the occupant has verbally indicated for the solicitor to leave or a refusal to make a purchase. 
F.  Solicitors may not lend, rent, or sell their permit to another person or business, or use the permit of another solicitor, except as provided in subsection 5.80.040(D). 
G.  Door to door solicitation in residential communities or neighborhoods may occur only during the hours of 9:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. No solicitation is allowed on Sundays or holidays. 
H.  Only one solicitor may go to any one residence at a time, unless more are invited back by the homeowner/resident. 
I.  Solicitors may not solicit from anyone under the age of 18 or request entrance into a private residence from anyone under the age of 18. 
J.  Solicitors may not enter private residences unless specifically invited by the homeowner/resident who is at least 18 years of age. 
K.  Solicitors may only use the main or front entrance of the residence. 
L.  Solicitors must respect all "No Solicitation" signs, if there is a sign prohibiting solicitation at the entrance to a community, subdivision, business or residence. 
M.  Solicitors may not approach a homeowner, resident or occupant when the homeowner, resident or occupant is in the yard where a "No Solicitation" sign prohibiting solicitation in a community or subdivision, business or residence is posted. 
N.  Solicitors may not touch or in any way attach any information to the homeowner, resident or occupant's mailbox, paperbox, or mailbox post, or to the entrance door or residence porch, porch columns, railings, or wall of the residence. (See Section 508.3.13 of the Domestic Mail Manual - DMM) 
O.  Solicitors may not throw, lay, or in any way toss items into a private business, homeowner, or resident's yard or in any other way "litter". 
P.  Solicitors shall not engage in any aggressive or intimidating sales or solicitation practices, and such will not be tolerated. 
Q.  Soliciting at commercial businesses shall be allowed only if the owner or duly authorized agent agrees in writing for solicitation on the business premises. 
R.  If a complaint is registered against a solicitor soliciting in a residential area of Hall County, all permits for the group or business may be revoked immediately by the Hall County Business License Director after investigation of such complaint. 
(Res. of 9-9-10(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
5.80.130. - Regulations for solicitation on streets and/or highways. 
A.  Soliciting on streets/highways is permitted only for nonprofit and/or charitable organizations with a current valid business license registered with Hall County (unless exempt under Hall County Business License Regulations). 
B.  Soliciting on streets/highways will only be allowed Mondays through Fridays and only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. and from 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
C.  Soliciting is prohibited at the following intersections: 
1.  Jesse Jewell and Limestone Parkway. 
2.  Memorial Park Road and Atlanta Highway. 
3.  Memorial Park Road and Old Flowery Branch Road. 
4.  Hog Mountain Road and Spout Springs Road 
D.  Based on public safety concerns, one person for each intersecting point shall be allowed to solicit on streets/highways. 
E.  Any one group or business will be limited to five days each year to solicit on streets/highways in Hall County. 
F.  Solicitors on streets/highways shall not engage in any aggressive or intimidating sales or solicitation practices, and such will not be tolerated. 
G.  If a complaint is received against any person or persons soliciting on a street/highway, all permits for the group or business may be revoked by the business license director after investigation of the complaint. 
(Res. of 9-9-10(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
5.80.140. - Due process. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership who believes he/she has been denied due process of law under this chapter shall be entitled to a hearing upon written appeal to the board of commissioners which appeal shall allege denial of due process. Unless such hearing is requested within five working days after the alleged denial of due process, such person shall be presumed to have accepted summary process. 
(Res. of 9-9-10(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
5.80.150. - Violations and enforcement. 
A.  Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any of the above regulations may have its solicitor's permit revoked by the Hall County Business License Director upon investigation of the alleged violation. 
B.  Persons canvassing, soliciting or peddling without a permit or in violation of the permit shall be issued a citation punishable as set forth in paragraph C. of this section. 
C.  Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the magistrate or state court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
D.  The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted by the business license director, marshal's office or county sheriff's department. 
(Res. of 9-9-10(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
CHAPTER 5.90 - FILM AND MUSIC PROJECT PERMITS 

5.90.010. - Purpose and findings. 
A.  This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to govern and authorize individuals and film companies to conduct filming activities in Hall County without unreasonably impacting the peace and comfort of the residents of the community; to assure that such activities are consistent with considerations of the public health, safety, and general welfare; to ensure the protection of property; and to provide a streamlined process for issuing film production permits. The requirements provided in this chapter shall be separate and in addition to those provisions of the Hall County Business License Code, and/or other codes adopted by reference, regarding business regulation and licensing. 
B.  The purpose of this chapter is to regulate filming and recording activity within Hall County in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Res. of 4-13-17(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
5.90.020. - Definitions. 
Business license office shall mean the Hall County Business License Office, which for purposes of this chapter shall be considered an agent of the board of commissioners. 
Camera ready liaison shall mean the designated staff person of the Lake Lanier Convention and Visitors Bureau, Inc. who serves as the camera ready liaison for the Georgia Film Office. 
Engineering shall mean the designated staff person from the Hall County Engineering Office. 
Film permit shall mean written authorization from the Hall County Business License [Office] to conduct the filming activity outlined in the permit. 
Filming activity shall mean the staging, shooting, filming, videotaping, photographing, or other similar process conducted for the making of still photographs, motion pictures, television programs, music videos, commercials, and other commercial and non-theatrical productions. 
Fire marshal shall mean the serving Fire Marshal of Hall County or his designee. 
Municipalities shall mean duly constituted cities located in whole or part within Hall County. 
News purposes shall mean filming, videotaping, or otherwise recording news events for television, radio, or Internet news casting by reporters, photographers, or audio or camera persons in the employ of a newspaper, news service, or similar entity where the event is not preplanned, and the film or tape is originally broadcast within 24 hours of the event, not including magazine or documentary programs. 
Planning and zoning shall mean the designated staff person from the Hall County Planning and Zoning Office. 
Sheriff shall mean the serving Sheriff of Hall County or his designee. 
Studio shall mean a fixed place of business where filming activities are regularly conducted upon the premises. 
(Res. of 4-13-17(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
5.90.030. - Permit required. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 5.90.040, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in filming activity as defined in section 5.90.020 any place within Hall County, other than an established studio as defined in section 5.90.020 or within an enclosed structure or building, without a film permit from the business license office. 
(Res. of 4-13-17(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
5.90.040. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Noncommercial filming or videotaping activities conducted solely for private or family use; 
B.  Film activity conducted for use in a criminal investigation or civil or criminal court proceeding; 
C.  Film activity conducted for news purposes as defined in section 5.90.020; 
D.  Film activity conducted for education, government, and public access and local origination for public television or public cable or public Internet channels within the State of Georgia; 
E.  Nonprofit 501(c) tax exempt organizations and other governmental agencies if their film project is not for commercial use; or 
F.  Any film activity deemed by the Hall County Commission to be in the public interest. 
Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of the business license office, sheriff, fire marshal, engineering, planning and zoning or Hall County Commission to suspend film activity otherwise excepted herein when deemed necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, or general welfare, or when such film activity poses an immediate hazard to persons and/or property. (Res. of 4-13-17(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
5.90.050. - Permit application. 
The business license office shall provide an application form and make it available for anyone who desires a film permit. A completed application must be provided to the business license office at least two weeks prior to the date on which the film activity is proposed. Upon a showing of good cause, applications filed after the deadline may be considered by business license office. The business license office shall determine in its sole discretion, not to be exercised in a discriminatory manner, whether there is time to ensure all requirements to protect the public health, safety, and welfare can be timely met before the film activity is to commence. After filing and approval, permit applications can be amended only with the approval of business license office and only after the business license office determines that requested modifications will not negatively impact the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Res. of 4-13-17(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
5.90.060. - Application review and permit conditions. 
A.  Before granting a film permit, the business license office shall review the application and consult with the sheriff, fire marshal, engineering, planning and zoning, and the camera ready liaison as appropriate, and determine that the proposed film activity will not unreasonably interfere with the public health, safety, and general welfare, or unreasonably endanger any property. Appropriate county and city officials shall be consulted to review the application as deemed necessary by the business license office. In granting a film permit, any reasonable conditions may be imposed as necessary to protect public health, safety, general welfare, and property. Factors which may be taken into consideration in granting and conditioning a permit include but are not limited to: noise, traffic congestion, traffic hazards, environmental problems, interference with street maintenance work, unreasonable interference with normal business operations or residential peace and quiet and whether the proposed activity would violate federal, state, or local law. 
B.  Conditions which may be attached to the film permit may include but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Requirements regarding the presence of governmental employees, such as police officers or firemen, at the permittee's expense; 
2.  Requirements regarding traffic control, such as the placement of traffic control devices and signs at the permittee's expense; 
3.  Requirements regarding cleanup and restoration of property used in the film activity; 
4.  Restrictions regarding the use of firearms and noise-creating or hazardous devices; 
5.  Restrictions regarding stunts involving pyrotechnics, vehicle crashes, and other hazardous materials and/or activity; 
6.  Requirements relating to partial or full nudity in public places; 
7.  Restrictions regarding the time of the film activity; and 
8.  Requirements regarding notifications to nearby businesses and/or residences. 
(Res. of 4-13-17(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
5.90.070. - Fees. 
The fee for permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be an application fee of $75.00 and a permitting fee of $100.00 per day or as may be adjusted from time to time considering the duration and scope of any particular project. The applicant shall pay such fee upon delivery of the application to the business license office. Any amounts representing the estimated cost of reimbursement of governmental personal and equipment shall be paid at the time of permit issuance. Should the actual costs of governmental personal and equipment exceed the estimated cost, the permit holder may be invoiced for the difference by the business license office. 
(Res. of 4-13-17(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
5.90.080. - Insurance. 
The applicant shall provide the business license office with evidence of insurance for general liability and covering any liability of the permittee, permittee's lessees, any state or local governmental authorities within whose jurisdiction the film activity is to occur, including their/its officers, employees, and agents arising out of the film activity. The insurance policy shall be in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 or such higher amount as determined by the business license office to be appropriate to protect against foreseeable risks for bodily and personal injury liability and property damage arising from or in connection with the film activity. The applicant shall furnish the business license office with proof of such insurance coverage in a form and manner that is satisfactory in all respects to the business license office prior to the start of the film activity. 
(Res. of 4-13-17(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
5.90.090. - Indemnification and liability. 
The permittee shall hold harmless, indemnify, and defend all state and local governments and their officers, employees, and agents from and against any and all loses, claims, or judgments for damages to any person or property arising from the film activity or issuance of the film permit. 
(Res. of 4-13-17(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
5.90.100. - Permit revocation. 
The business license office may revoke the film permit if the permittee, or any agents, employees, volunteers, or contractors of the permittee fail to comply with the permit conditions and requirements, or if it is determined after issuance that the permit application is materially false. The business license office shall provide the permittee with grounds for revocation in writing within a reasonable time of determining the basis for the revocation. 
(Res. of 4-13-17(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
5.90.110. - Permit suspension. 
Any permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be subject to immediate suspension by the business license office if it is found necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, or general welfare. Any employee of a local governmental entity within whose jurisdiction film activity is occurring and who has public safety responsibilities for that local government may suspend the film permit upon a determination by that employee that the film activity poses an immediate hazard to persons and/or property and the permit holder's representative in charge will not or cannot prevent the hazard after being instructed to do so by the employee. 
(Res. of 4-13-17(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
5.90.120. - Appeals. 
The permit applicant or permittee may appeal a permit denial, revocation, suspension, or refusal to waive a deadline set forth in this chapter. The appeal shall be filed in the board of commissioners' office no later than three business days after the date notice of the decision is given. The appeal shall be heard by the chairman of the board of commissioners or his or her designee no later than three days after the appeal is filed. A decision shall be rendered no later than two business days after the appeal hearing. The decision of the chairman of the board of commissioners or his or her designee shall be final. 
(Res. of 4-13-17(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
5.90.130. - Unlawful conduct not sanctioned. 
The granting of a permit does not absolve the permittee or its agents from complying with all federal, state, and local laws, other than for conduct expressly described in the application and not subject to a condition or requirement of the permit. (For example, the permit might allow stunts that include speeding on a roadway that would otherwise be prescribed by law.) 
(Res. of 4-13-17(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
5.90.140. - Violation. 
A.  Violations of any of the provisions of this chapter or any of the terms and conditions of a film and music project permit is a misdemeanor punishable under the provisions of chapter 1.50 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. 
B.  It shall also be a misdemeanor to: 
1.  Provide false or fraudulent information to the county during the permit application process; 
2.  Provide any false or fraudulent information to the county after the permit has been issued, including, but not limited to, the possession or existence of consent or permission from property owners when required; or 
3.  Fail or refuse to cease any film activities when ordered to do so by Hall County Administration due to violations of any provision of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, including this chapter, state law or federal law. 
C.  If an applicant violates any provisions of this chapter or a permit issued pursuant thereto, Hall County may provide the applicant with verbal or written notice of such violation. If the applicant fails to correct the violation, Hall County may immediately revoke the permit and all activity must cease. 
D.  Any filming or related activity conducted contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be an unlawful action and a public nuisance. The Hall County Commission may authorize the commencement of an action at law or in equity in the name of the county in any court of competent jurisdiction against the applicant to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter. All remedies prescribed herein will be cumulative and the use of any one or more remedies by the county shall not preclude the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, nor shall the county's delay or failure to exercise any remedy result in a waiver of that remedy. 
(Res. of 4-13-17(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY[1] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Park regulations, § 2.50.080 et seq.; special requirements for licensing of certain businesses, § 5.10.420; animals, tit. 6; public peace, morals and welfare, tit. 9; jumping off bridges prohibited, § 10.50.010; public services, tit. 13; buildings and construction, tit. 15; water and sewer system requirements in subdivisions, ch. 16.80; mobile home and travel trailer parks, ch. 17.310. 

CHAPTER 8.10. - TATTOO ARTISTS, OPERATORS, STUDIOS AND ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Business licenses and regulations, tit. 5; background investigation required for operators of tattoo establishments, § 5.10.550. 

8.10.010. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following definitions will apply: 
A.  Tattoo shall mean to mark or color the human skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting coloring matter so as to form indelible pigments, dyes, marks or figures under the skin or by the production of scars; provided, however, that the word "tattoo" shall not mean a tattoo placed upon the skin by a physician for medical identification purposes and shall not apply to the tattooing of farm or domestic animals for the purpose of identification. 
1.  Body piercing shall mean to cut or to penetrate the human skin for the purpose of implanting a decorative device or an object of adornment such as jewelry; provided however, that the word "body piercing" shall not mean a surgical procedure administered by a physician for medical purposes and shall not apply to the application of identifying tags on farm or domestic animals, nor shall it include the practice of ear piercing. 
B.  Tattoo artist means any person who actually performs the practice of tattooing or body piercing upon humans, except that the term "tattoo artist" shall not include in its meaning any physician or osteopath licensed under chapter 34 of title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia, nor shall it include any technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-5-71(a). 
C.  Tattoo establishment and/or tattoo studio shall mean any facility, building, room or place on a fixed foundation where the tattooing of humans is practiced or where body piercing is practiced or where the business of tattooing and/or body piercing is practiced or conducted or any part thereof. 
D.  Tattoo operator shall mean any person who controls, operates, conducts or manages any tattooing or body piercing establishment or tattoo studio, whether actually performing the work of tattooing or body piercing or not. 
(Res. of 11-23-94; Code 1991, § 8.02.010; Res. of 1-10-08, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 
8.10.020. - Prohibited practices. 
A.  No person shall operate a tattoo establishment/studio or engage in the practice or business of tattooing human skin as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist unless the person has first secured a permit to do so from the Hall County Board of Health, has obtained a license from the Hall County Business License Office to do business in Hall County, has complied with the regulations as contained in section 5.10.550.C of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, and has paid the business occupation tax. 
B.  No person shall operate a tattoo establishment/studio or engage in the practice or business of tattooing as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist without following an approved exposure control plan as described by section 8.10.030 of this resolution [chapter]. 
C.  No tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall tattoo any person while such tattoo operator or tattoo artist is under the influence of alcohol, drugs or other stimulants or depressants, nor shall such tattoo operator or tattoo artist tattoo any person who is a minor (under the age of 18), or who is under the influence of either alcohol, drugs or other stimulants or depressants, or any person of unsound mind. 
D.  No person shall operate a tattoo establishment/studio or engage in the practice or business of tattooing as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist unless he is duly licensed by the applicable state authority as a licensed practical nurse, registered nurse, physician's assistant, physician, or doctor of osteopathy, provided, however, that any person who has lawfully operated a tattoo parlor in Hall County for a period of one year immediately prior to the effective date of this resolution [chapter] with no violations of law and no history of the creation of health hazards shall be entitled to engage in the business of a tattoo operator notwithstanding the provisions of this subparagraph; provided, further, that such operator shall not be relieved of any other requirements of this chapter. 
(Res. of 11-23-94; Code 1991, § 8.02.020) 
8.10.030. - Permit from county board of health required; inspection fee; exposure control plan. 
A.  A condition precedent prior to applying for a business license in Hall County shall be satisfactory proof that the tattoo establishment/studio has secured from the Hall County Board of Health a permit to operate the establishment. 
B.  The applicant shall be required to submit with his application an annual inspection fee of $75.00, or such fee as shall be set from time to time by the county board of health. Thereafter, such inspection fee shall be due and payable on an annual basis. 
C.  The tattoo operator shall submit and the Hall County Board of Health shall approve an exposure control plan generally conforming to the applicable standards set out in 29 C.F.R. 1910.1030(d), which shall include but are not limited to the following: 
1.  The entire premises and equipment shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and in good repair; 
2.  Thorough cleaning of reusable sharps, needles, and any portion of the tattoo apparatus which touches the skin after every use and prior to sterilization; 
3.  Autoclave sterilization of the reusable sharps, needles and any portion of the tattoo apparatus which touches the skin; 
4.  Cleaning of work surfaces with a chemical germicide at least daily when there is a known contamination of a work surface with blood; 
5.  Hands should be washed before and after customer contact; 
6.  Disposable gloves should be worn during the tattoo procedure; 
7.  Sharps and disposable needles should be discarded in a puncture resistant, leak-proof container with a biohazard warning label and taken to a biomedical facility for disposal; 
8.  Other biomedical waste containing blood and other bodily fluids should be placed in closable containers which are labeled with biohazard warning labels and taken to a biomedical disposal facility for disposal; 
9.  Inquiries shall be made, and anyone giving a history of jaundice or hepatitis shall not be tattooed; 
10.  No person, customer, or patron having any skin infection or other disease of the skin or any communicable disease shall be tattooed; 
11.  All infections resulting from the practice of tattooing which become known to the operator shall be promptly reported to the Hall County Board of Health by the person owning or operating the tattoo establishment/studio, and the infected client shall be referred to a physician; 
12.  All bandages and surgical dressings used in connection with the tattooing of a person shall be sterile; 
13.  The Hall County Board of Health or its designated representatives may conduct periodic unannounced inspections of any tattooing establishment/studio for the purpose of determining whether or not said establishment/studio and the person performing the art of tattooing therein are in compliance with all applicable health provisions contained within this resolution [chapter] and the exposure control plans filed by the applicant. 
D.  In addition to the above, informed consent by the person receiving a tattoo must be given and written records maintained by the operator of the tattoo establishment/studio. 
E.  Procedures for ensuring adequate explanation to consumers of the proper subsequent care of a tattoo must be given, and written records maintained by the operator of the tattoo establishment/studio. 
F.  The permit shall be valid until suspended or revoked and shall not be transferable with respect to person or location. 
(Res. of 11-23-94; Code 1991, § 8.02.030) 
8.10.040. - Enforcement; right of entry. 
The Hall County Board of Health or its designated representative, in order to enforce compliance with this resolution [chapter] and the rules and regulations adopted hereof [pursuant to this chapter], shall be able to enter upon and inspect the premises of a tattoo establishment/studio at any reasonable time and in a reasonable manner. 
(Res. of 11-23-94; Code 1991, § 8.02.040) 
8.10.050. - Authority of board of health to suspend, revoke or deny permit. 
The Hall County Board of Health or its designated representative may suspend or revoke permits where the health and safety of the public requires such action. When, in the judgment of such board or its duly authorized agents, it is necessary and proper that such application for a permit be denied or that a permit previously granted be suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder of the permit shall be so notified in writing and shall be afforded an opportunity for hearing pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-5-2. In the event that such application is finally denied or such permit finally suspended or revoked, the applicant for or holder of such permit shall be given notice in writing, which notice shall specifically state the reasons why the application or permit has been suspended, revoked or denied. 
(Res. of 11-23-94; Code 1991, § 8.02.050) 
8.10.060. - Appeal of suspension or revocation of permit. 
Any person substantially affected by any final order of the Hall County Board of Health denying, suspending, revoking or refusing to renew any permit provided under this resolution [chapter] may secure review thereof by appeal to the department of human resources as provided by O.C.G.A. § 31-5-3. 
(Res. of 11-23-94; Code 1991, § 8.02.060) 
8.10.070. - Permit issued by the board of health not in lieu of business license. 
The permits issued hereunder by the Hall County Board of Health shall be cumulative and are not in lieu of any license issued by the Hall County Business License Office to do business in Hall County. 
(Res. of 11-23-94; Code 1991, § 8.02.070) 
8.10.080. - Application for business license. 
Any person desiring to operate a tattoo establishment/studio or desiring to operate as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall make application for a license at the business license office of Hall County, Georgia. The applicant, in addition to the payment of the business occupation tax as required by section 5.10.010 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, shall also be charged a background investigation fee of $15.00 to defray the cost of application processing. The minimum age of each applicant shall be 18 years of age. Applicants shall furnish two photographs showing a front and side picture of the full face of the applicant, size 2½ inches by 2¾ inches. Applicants shall present a medical certificate from a medical doctor licensed to practice in Georgia certifying that the person is sound physically and mentally, has good eyesight and is not affected with a disease which can be communicated through openings in the human skin. The applicant shall also submit an approved permit as issued by the Hall County Board of Health pursuant to the provisions of section 8.10.030 of this resolution [chapter] and shall comply with all other requirements of this resolution [chapter]. 
(Res. of 11-23-94; Code 1991, § 8.02.080) 
Cross reference— Business occupation tax and licensing regulations, ch. 5.10. 
8.10.090. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 11-23-94; Code 1991, § 8.02.090; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
8.10.100. - Effective date. 
This resolution [chapter] shall become effective on January 1, 1995. 
(Res. of 11-23-94; Code 1991, § 8.02.100) 
CHAPTER 8.20. - AMBULANCE FEES[3] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of 3-10-11, § 1(Exh. A), deleted former Ch. 8.20, §§ 8.20.010—8.20.030, which pertained to the same subject matter and enacted provisions designated as a new Ch. 8.20, to read as herein set out. The derivation of this chapter is as follows: Res. of 9-11-08(1), § 1. 
Cross reference— Administration generally, tit. 2. 

8.20.010. - Definitions. 
A.  Advanced Life Support Level 1 Transport: Normal emergency call for service. 
B.  Advanced Life Support Level 2 Transport: Extended emergency call for service. This level encompasses any time three or more medications or three doses of the same medication (excluding oxygen, IV therapy, or aspirin) are administered or any time an advanced procedure including but not limited to any of the following is performed: 
1.  Endotracheal intubation; 
2.  Manual defibrillation/cardioversion; 
3.  Cardiac pacing; 
4.  Central venous line; 
5.  Chest decompression; 
6.  Surgical airway; or 
7.  Intraosseous line. 
C.  Advanced Life Support Level Nonemergency: Calls determined to be a nonemergency response include nonemergency transfers, discharges, and other nonemergency transportations. 
D.  "Fire chief" shall mean the Fire Chief of Hall County Fire and Emergency Services, Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 3-10-11, § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.20.020. - Fees. 
The following is the schedule of fees that shall be charged by the fire chief for ambulance and transport services rendered by the Hall County Fire and Emergency Services: 
A.  ALS 1 Transport ..... $775.00 
B.  ALS 2 Transport ..... 775.00 
C.  ALS N.E. ..... 775.00 
D.  Non-transport ..... 300.00 
If ALS or extended assessment/treatment services are provided; pharmaceutical administration; air transport with on-scene treatment. 
E.  Mileage, per mile ..... $12.00 
Mileage shall include the distance between the patient's point of pickup and the receiving facility. This charge shall be applied for both in and out of county transports. 
F.  From time to time, upon the concurrent recommendation of the Hall County Administrator and the Chief of Hall County Fire Services, the above ambulance and transport fees may be revised as deemed necessary. 
(Res. of 3-10-11, § 1(Exh. A); Res. of 4-12-12, § 1) 
8.20.030. - Collection of fees. 
The fire chief shall issue invoices for such services as set forth in this chapter and shall collect such fees on behalf of Hall County, which shall be used to purchase equipment, training, and other services and supplies for the Hall County Fire and Emergency Services. 
(Res. of 3-10-11, § 1(Exh. A)) 
CHAPTER 8.25. - HAZARDOUS RESOURCE MATERIALS RECOVERY 

 

8.25.010. - Definitions for hazardous materials emergency response team. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases defined in this section shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context. Where terms are not defined herein, ordinarily accepted meanings within the proper context shall apply. 
1.  Fire chief: "Fire chief" means the fire chief of Hall County Fire and Emergency Services, Hall County, Georgia. 
2.  Disposal: "Disposal" means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any hazardous substances or hazardous waste into or on any land or water so that such substances or waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any water, including ground water. 
3.  Hazardous substance: "Hazardous substance" means a substance which satisfies any one of the following requirements; 
a.  A substance which, because of the toxic or hazardous properties which it exhibits, is determined by the fire chief to represent a significant risk to the public health and safety as a result of foreseeable use, handling, accidental spill, exposure, or contamination. 
b.  A substance which is known by the employer to present a significant risk of personal injury or illness in the workplace in Hall County, Georgia, as a result of foreseeable use, handling, accidental spill, exposure, or contamination. This section shall not be construed as requiring any employer to compile or generate new data. 
c.  A substance or material that has been determined to pose an unreasonable risk to health, safety, and property. 
d.  A substance defined under Section 9601(14) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act. (CERCLA). 
e.  Any biological agent and other disease causing agent which after release into the environment and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation, or assimilation into any person, either directly from the environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, will or may reasonably be anticipated to cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutation, physiological malfunctions (including malfunctions in reproduction) or physical deformations in such persons or their offspring. 
f.  Any substance listed by the U. S. Department of Transportation as hazardous materials under 49 CFR 172. 
4.  Hazardous waste: "Hazardous waste" mans any solid waste which has been defined as hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Federal Act which is in force and effective February 1, 1986, codified as 40 CFR Part 261 and those substances defined as hazardous waste in 49 CFR 171. 
5.  Hazardous waste generation: "Hazardous waste generation" means the act or process of producing hazardous waste. 
6.  Person: "Person" means and includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, state, municipality, political subdivision of a state, and any agency or instrumentality of the United States government or any other entity and includes any officer, agency, or employee of any of the above. 
7.  Substance: "Substance" means any element, entity, compound, combination, or any mixture thereof, whether organic or inorganic. 
8.  Automatic aid: "Automatic aid" means a written agreement between two or more public safety agencies that permits dispatchers to send the nearest available unit automatically, regardless of jurisdictional boundaries. 
9.  Mutual aid: "Mutual aid" means a written agreement between two or more public safety agencies to respond to request for assistance under specified conditions or a formal verbal request from a public safety agency requesting a response for assistance. 
10.  Duly-authorized agency: "Duly-authorized agency" means any private company or public agency deemed necessary, by the fire chief or his designee, to assist in the mitigation of a possible or actual discharge of a hazardous substance and/or hazardous waste. 
(Res. of 9-26-02(2), § 2) 
8.25.020. - Hazardous material resource recovery fees. 
A.  Mitigation rates based on per hour. The mitigation rates below are average "billing levels," and are typical for the incident responses listed, however, when a claim is submitted, it will be itemized and based on the actual services provided. 
B.  Motor vehicle incidents. 
Level 1. Provide hazardous materials assessment and scene stabilization. This will be the most common "billing level." This occurs almost every time the fire department responds to an accident/incident. ..... $435.00 
Level 2. Includes Level 1 services as well as clean up and material used (sorbents) for hazardous fluid clean up and disposal. We will bill at this level if the fire department has to clean up any gasoline or other automotive fluids that are spilled as a result of the accident/incident. ..... $495.00 
Level 3—Car fire. Provide scene safety, fire suppression, breathing air, rescue tools, hand tools, hose, tip use, foam, structure protection, and clean up gasoline or other automotive fluids that are spilled as a result of the accident/incident. ..... $605.00 
C.  Add-on services. 
Extrication. Includes heavy rescue tools, ropes, airbags, cribbing, etc. This charge will be added if the fire department has to free/remove anyone from the vehicle(s) using any equipment. We will not bill at this level if the patient is simply unconscious and fire department is able to open the door to access the patient. This level is to be billed only if equipment is deployed. ..... $1,305.00 
Creating a landing zone. Includes air care (multi-engine company response, mutual aid, helicopter). We will bill at this level any time a helicopter landing zone is created and/or is utilized to transport the patient(s). ..... $400.00 
Itemized response. Hall County has the option to bill each incident as an independent event with custom mitigation rates, for each incident using, itemized rates deemed usual, customary and reasonable (UCR). These incidents will be billed, itemized per apparatus, per personnel, plus products and equipment used. 
D.  Additional time on-scene. 
Engine, per hour ..... $400.00 
Truck, per hour ..... $500.00 
Miscellaneous equipment ..... $300.00 
E.  HAZMAT. 
Level 1—Basic response. Claim will include engine response, first responder assignment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, set-up and command. ..... $700.00 
Level 2—Intermediate response. Claim will include engine response, first responder assignment, HAZMAT certified team and appropriate equipment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, set-up and command, level A or B suit donning, breathing air and detection equipment. Set-up and removal of decon center. ..... $2,500.00 
Level 3—Advanced response. Claim will include engine response, first responder assignment, HAZMAT certified team and appropriate equipment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command, Level A or B suit donning, breathing air and detection equipment and robot deployment. Set-up and removal of decon center, detection equipment, recovery and identification of material. Disposal and environment clean up. Includes above in addition to any disposal rates of material and contaminated equipment and material used at scene. Includes three hours of on-scene time. Each additional hour is $300.00 per HAZMAT team. ..... $5,900.00 
F.  Additional time on-scene. For all levels of service: 
Engine, per hour ..... $400.00 
Truck, per hour ..... $500.00 
Miscellaneous equipment ..... $300.00 
(Res. of 9-26-02(2), § 2; Agrmt. of 11-13-14(1), Exh. A) 
8.25.030. - Review of hazardous material resource recovery fees. 
With concurrence of the county administrator, the fire chief will periodically review and revise the fees stated above, based on established practices, to reflect the prevailing cost of equipment and personnel. 
(Res. of 9-26-02(2), § 2) 
8.25.040. - Collection of fees. 
The fire chief shall issue invoices for such services as set forth in this chapter and shall collect such fees on behalf of Hall County, which shall be used to purchase equipment, training, other services and supplies for Hall County Fire and Emergency Services. 
(Res. of 9-26-02(2), § 2) 
CHAPTER 8.30. - INDIGENT CARE[4] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Administration generally, tit. 2. 

8.30.010. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Indigent Care Chapter." 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 1(1); Code 1991, § 8.08.010) 
8.30.020. - Designation of certifying agency. 
The department of family and children services (DFACS) shall be the certifying agency for each of the programs set forth in this chapter, and shall certify persons for indigency based upon the standards of the sections of this chapter under which assistance is sought. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 1(2); Code 1991, § 8.08.020) 
8.30.030. - Administration duties. 
DFACS is instructed to institute procedures in order to insure the efficient and prompt disposition of all cases. DFACS is authorized to prepare application blanks, affidavits, and certificates and other forms deemed necessary to properly administer its duties hereunder. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 1(3); Code 1991, § 8.08.030) 
8.30.040. - Monthly reports. 
The director of DFACS is directed to submit monthly reports by the tenth of each month to the clerk of the board of commissioners reflecting the persons by name who were certified in each of the programs governed by this chapter in the preceding month. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 1(4); Code 1991, § 8.08.040) 
8.30.050. - Change of certifying agency. 
The board of commissioners of the county reserves the right to change the certifying agency at any time that such a change appears to the commission to be in the best interest of the county. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 1(5); Code 1991, § 8.08.050) 
8.30.060. - Grammatical construction. 
Wherever there is reference herein to the masculine gender it shall be interchangeable with the feminine. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 1(6); Code 1991, § 8.08.060) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §§ 1.20.010, 1.20.040. 
8.30.070. - Eligibility requirements. 
A.  All general assistance requests shall be investigated within a 24-hour period. In no instance should an application involving an emergency be delayed until the next day. 
B.  The general assistance program provides assistance to persons who are unemployable, and who meet certain eligibility requirements. In order to receive general assistance a person must: 
1.  Be unemployable; 
2.  Be in need according to standards hereinafter prescribed; 
3.  Not be receiving any type of monetary assistance except in extreme situations approved by the DFACS board; 
4.  Meet residence requirements. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 2(1); Code 1991, § 8.08.070) 
8.30.080. - Eligibility requirements; unemployability. 
A.  To be eligible for general assistance, the applicant must be mentally or physically incapacitated to such a degree that he is incapable of performing productive work. This condition is determined by a written statement from a reputable practicing physician. In certain cases where mental or physical incapacity is obvious, a medical report may not be prerequisite to relief. 
B.  In cases of extreme hardship, one emergency order may be given pending receipt of the medical report. Instances of extreme hardship shall be determined at the discretion of the caseworker and supervisor. 
C.  No individual or group shall be determined as eligible for assistance if there are one or more able-bodied persons living in the home of the individual or group, whether the able-bodied person is employed or not, except as hereinbefore provided. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 2(2)(A); Code 1991, § 8.08.080) 
8.30.090. - Eligibility requirements; need criteria. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following criteria are to be used to determine need: 
A.  A recipient and spouse may both be eligible; 
B.  A child under 16 years of age may be included in the determination of need until the family is certified for AFDC; 
C.  A child over 16 years of age who is mentally or physically unable to work may be included in determination of need; 
D.  An applicant/recipient will not be ineligible by virtue of having a relative living with him if that relative would meet all eligibility requirements; 
E.  All resources available to the applicant/recipient shall be taken into consideration, [including the following,] but not limited thereto: 
1.  Allowable reserve. A maximum of $200.00 allowable for general assistance recipients; 
2.  Real and personal property. No person who claims any taxable real estate shall be eligible except in cases of extreme hardship. The cases of extreme hardship shall be determined by the sole discretion of the DFACS board. Ownership of tools, machinery, an automobile, or any such personal property will be allowed only when essential to the work of the applicant/recipient upon his recovery from incapacity; 
3.  Income. If an applicant/recipient has had any income during the two weeks prior to his application, he is ineligible. General assistance is never to be utilized to supplement income except in extreme cases which are approved by the DFACS board; 
4.  Responsible relatives. An applicant/recipient is ineligible for general assistance if he has responsible relatives capable of providing assistance. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 2(2)(B); Code 1991, § 8.08.090) 
8.30.100. - Eligibility requirements; residence. 
A.  A person moving from another state to the county or a person moving from another county in Georgia to Hall County must reside in the county to be eligible. 
B.  A transient should be referred to the Salvation Army for lodging and food. If employable, efforts should be made to verify his place of legal residence and to return him to same through use of United Way funds. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 2(2)(C); Code 1991, § 8.08.100) 
8.30.110. - Entitlement generally. 
A.  Rent shall be paid in emergencies to prevent eviction. DFACS will verify with the sheriff that eviction papers have been taken, and will also verify with the landlord that, if rent is paid, the tenant will be allowed to remain. Rent must be paid by check to the landlord. 
B.  Reserved. 
C.  Reserved. 
D.  General assistance funds for the purchase of medicine shall be limited to a doctor's prescription and to instances in which the attending physician states that the medication is absolutely necessary. 
E.  Reserved. 
F.  In no event shall the total amount of general assistance funds received by an individual and/or family exceed $200.00, exclusive of assistance to fire victims. 
G.  In case of fire, for victims without fire insurance, a nominal cash amount (not to exceed $100.00) may be issued without applying eligibility requirements. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 2(3); Code 1991, § 8.08.110) 
8.30.120. - Hospital care benefits entitlement. 
A person shall be entitled to be certified to the Northeast Georgia Medical Center for treatment as an indigent at county expense if he or an authorized representative submits to DFACS a sworn affidavit by the applicant to the effect that his income is not in excess of the amounts hereinafter set forth to be the maximum income a person or family is allowed to earn and remain eligible. If, after investigation, such person is found to be qualified to receive hospitalization, he, the hospital, and the doctor will be notified. (Medical forms are sent to the doctor as well as the county.) 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 3(1); Code 1991, § 8.08.120) 
8.30.130. - Period for filing application for hospitalization benefits. 
When a person is admitted to the hospital without authorization from DFACS, a member of the family or authorized representative must come to DFACS within seven days from the date of admission and apply for county hospitalization; provided, however, the period within which to file an application may be extended to 14 days when there are extenuating circumstances. Extenuating circumstances shall be determined in the sole discretion of the case worker and supervisor. In any event, it is not permissible to wait until the patient is ready to be dismissed from the hospital to file an application. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 3(1); Code 1991, § 8.08.130) 
8.30.140. - Eligibility standards for hospitalization benefits. 
A.  A person shall be considered eligible for hospital benefits if his income is less than listed in the table below, provided he is not disqualified for other valid reasons. 

 
Add $60.00 per additional person for families over seven. 
B.  If a person or head of a family owns real estate (home) which has an unencumbered market value in excess of $29,000.00 such person or any member of the immediate family shall be disqualified from receiving aid under this chapter as an indigent. 
C.  No person shall be certified as an indigent person for purposes of this chapter when that person, his or her spouse, his or her father or mother, or any member of his immediate family living in the same household owns five or more acres of land. 
D.  If a person has resources, including cash or savings, nonhome property, stocks, bonds, automobile (loan value), the aggregate value of which (inclusive of the cash and loan value of life insurance) exceeds $4,100.00, the person shall be disqualified from receiving aid under this chapter. 
E.  If a person possesses hospital insurance, the proceeds of such insurance shall first be applied toward payment of the bill before aid is given under this chapter. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 3(2); Code 1991, § 8.08.140) 
8.30.150. - Noneligible hospitalization costs. 
A.  Hospitalization under this program shall not be provided for diagnostic procedures only, or for minor surgery and/or treatment that can be normally performed outside the hospital, with the exception of sterilization. However, inpatient diagnostic procedures shall be covered when done in conjunction with treatment. 
B.  No person shall be eligible for hospitalization under this program to the extent that he is otherwise eligible under any other public or privately approved program (Medicare cannot be supplemented). 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 3(3); Code 1991, § 8.08.150) 
8.30.160. - Extent of hospitalization. 
A.  Hospitalization shall not exceed 30 days per admission at county expense unless by approval of the DFACS board following a doctor's recommendation. However, total days under this program shall not exceed 45 days per calendar year. 
B.  An indigent patient shall be given a semi-private room or a private room if supported by a physician's statement that the illness or condition requires such. 
C.  Payment will not be made for televisions, cots, and other personal convenience items. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 3(4); Code 1991, § 8.08.160) 
8.30.170. - Payment of hospitalization costs by county. 
A.  The county will pay 75 percent of the charges for rendering inpatient medical care for all persons, excluding obstetric patients, who are certified by the DFACS as indigent. Such payment will be accepted by the hospital authority as full payment for covered services rendered, and patients will not be billed for the balance of covered charges. 
B.  Payment by the county for the care of obstetric patients shall be made in conformity with the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 31, chapter 8, article 2A. 
C.  The county will budget an amount each fiscal year to meet anticipated certifications based on needs as indicated by certifications during the previous two to three years. If, in any fiscal year of the county, payments required for certified indigent patients, based on the above criteria, exceed the amount budgeted for the fiscal year, the county will establish an accounts payable to the hospital authority for the amount of the excess. The county will budget an amount in the next fiscal year to cover the payable, with the payment of the payable made in 12 equal amounts. The county will also budget sufficient funds to meet the projected cost of indigent certifications for the new fiscal year. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 3(5); Res. of 10-9-89, § 1; Code 1991, § 8.08.170) 
8.30.180. - Review of hospitalization eligibility criteria and hospital records. 
A.  The criteria utilized by the county for certification of indigent patients for hospital care shall be reviewed every two years to determine if changes in the cost of living warrant changes in the income, assets, or other criteria utilized for certification. 
B.  The county independent auditing firm may have access to patient account records of the hospital authority every two years to verify that patients certified for indigent hospitalization are charged for services on the same basis as private patients of the hospital authority. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 3(7); Code 1991, § 8.08.180) 
8.30.190. - Out-patient clinic certification. 
The same regulations as outlined above shall also be applied to out-patient certification with the exception of income limits which are as follows: 

 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 3(8); Code 1991, § 8.08.190) 
8.30.200. - Funeral assistance; application. 
A.  An application for a funeral as an indigent at county expense must be made by a relative of the deceased, and must be certified by DFACS prior to burial. 
[B.  Reserved.] 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 3(9)(1); Code 1991, § 8.08.200) 
8.30.210. - Funeral assistance; determination of eligibility. 
A.  If a person owns any property and/or personal possession at the time of his death, the total value of which is $200.00 or more, that person shall be ineligible for a funeral at county expense. 
B.  If a person owns any property and/or personal possessions at the time of his death, the total value of which is less than $200.00, such person shall be eligible for assistance under this chapter if he meets the other qualifications herein. 
C.  If a deceased's spouse or parent (if the deceased was a minor child) owns property and/or personal possessions, the total value of which exceeds $200.00, the person is ineligible for assistance under this chapter. 
D.  The deceased person must have been a resident of the county at the time of his death to be eligible for a funeral at county expense under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 3(9)(2); Code 1991, § 8.08.210) 
8.30.220. - Funeral assistance; extent of assistance. 
A.  If the deceased person dies owning property and/or personal possessions, the property and/or personal possessions shall first be applied to the cost of the burial. Funds will be provided pursuant to this chapter in an amount such that, when the funds are added to the property and/or personal possessions owned by the deceased at the time of his death, a total of $750.00 in the case of an adult or infant will be available for the burial. 
B.  In any event, the amount of assistance provided under this chapter shall not exceed $750.00 in the case of an adult or infant. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 3(9)(3); Res. of 8-14-85; Code 1991, § 8.08.220) 
8.30.230. - Funeral assistance; procedure. 
A.  DFACS shall make arrangements with a funeral director to furnish a suitable casket, embalming services, hearse, and funeral services at a cost of $750.00 in the case of an adult or infant. 
B.  The funeral director shall agree that he shall receive no funds whatever from any of the deceased's family, estate, friends, or other sources except those funds applied to the cost of the funeral in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  If any additional funds are obtained by the funeral director, he shall deduct the amount of same from the expense of the funeral or turn the funds over to the county. 
(Res. of 6-13-83, § 3(9)(4); Code 1991, § 8.08.230) 
CHAPTER 8.35. - COMMERCIAL CAR WASH 

 

8.35.010. - General provisions. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to reduce water consumption from commercial car wash facilities by requiring all new conveyor car washes to install operational recycled water systems. 
B.  Applicability. 
1)  This chapter applies to all new conveyor carwashes permitted and constructed after January 1, 2011, regardless of the water source. 
2)  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to conveyor commercial car washes that were permitted or constructed before January 1, 2011. 
3)  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to self-service car washes or in-bay car washes. 
C.  Compatibility with other regulations. This Chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other chapter, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other chapter, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
D.  Severability. If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(Res. of 1-27-11, § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.35.020. - Definitions. 
A.  "In-bay automatic car wash" means a commercial car wash where the driver pulls into the bay and parks the car. The vehicle remains stationary while a machine moves back and forth over the vehicle to clean it, instead of the vehicle moving through the tunnel. 
B.  "Conveyor car wash" means a commercial car wash where the car moves on a conveyor belt during the wash. The driver of the vehicle can remain in the vehicle or wait outside of the vehicle. 
C.  "Recycled water system" means a water system that captures and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles. 
D.  "Self-service car wash" means a commercial car wash where the customers wash their cars themselves with spray wands and brushes. 
(Res. of 1-27-11, § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.35.030. - Commercial car wash water recycling requirement. 
All new commercial conveyor car washes, permitted and constructed after January 1, 2011 must install operational recycled water systems. A minimum of 50 percent water utilized will be recycled. 
(Res. of 1-27-11, § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.35.040. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the magistrate or state court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 1-27-11, § 1(Exh. A)) 
CHAPTER 8.40. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of a resolution adopted Sept. 22, 2016, amended the title of Ch. 8.40 to read as herein set out. Said title formerly read "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control (Amended 2013)." See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Buildings and construction, tit. 15; flood protection, ch. 15.80; subdivisions, tit. 16; soil erosion and sedimentation control permit for subdivisions, §§ 16.30.200, 16.30.210; zoning, tit. 17; tree protection, ch. 17.280. 

8.40.010. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control." 
(Ord. of 6-10-10(1), § 1(Exh. A); Res. of 8-22-13(1), § 2(Exh. B); Res. of 9-22-16(1), § 1) 
8.40.020. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means those sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Coastal marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means a certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Department means the Department of Natural Resources. 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources, or an authorized representative. 
District means the Hall County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 8.40.040 C. of this chapter. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). 
Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 8.40.030 A.5. 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement, piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia shall mean the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, (5th Ed., 2000) as amended through January 1, 2001, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440, which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and stormwater pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and stormwater pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project by property boundary regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the Commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Hall County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., and subsection (f) of Code section 12-5-30. 
State waters includes any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, and land grading, etc. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov . Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout streams are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sediment control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment producing area by covering the soil with: 
1.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
2.  Temporary seeding, producing short term vegetative cover; or 
3.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 6-10-10(1), § 1(Exh. A); Res. of 9-22-16(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
8.40.030. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
A.  1.  Surface mining as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968", is exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying is exempt from this chapter. 
3.  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities, which result in minor soil erosion, are exempt from this chapter. 
4.  The exemption from this chapter shall apply to the construction of single-family residences, except that a building permit shall be acquired prior to any land-disturbing activity beginning on a site, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 8.40.040 of this resolution and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5, of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 feet and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 8.40.040 of this resolution and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
5.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for the use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds are exempt from this chapter. 
6.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting are exempt from this chapter. Provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (19) and (20) of section 8.40.040C. of this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices. 
7.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture is exempt from this chapter. 
8.  Any noncommercial project involving less than one acre of disturbed area that is not otherwise exempt under [subsections] 8.40.030A.1. through A.7. and A.9. through A.11. is exempt from general land-disturbing permit plan requirements, but is required to have a minor land-disturbing permit and shall meet the minimum requirements of [subsections] 8.40.040B., 8.40.040C. and 8.40.050A. Commercial projects of any size are not exempt from any provision of this chapter; provided, however, that the county engineer may specifically exempt certain projects from soil erosion plan requirements in cases where minimal land disturbance is to occur. These exemptions from soil erosion plan requirements shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one-acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs 1., 2., 3., 4., 5., 6., 7., 9. or 10. of this section. 
9.  Exemption from this chapter shall apply to the construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of code section 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
10.  Exemption from this chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
11.  Any public water system reservoir. 
B.  Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in subsections 8.40.040B. and C., the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(Ord. of 6-10-10(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.40.040. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
A.  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of this chapter and the NPDES permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections 8.40.040 B. and C. of this chapter. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
B.  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
1.  Best management practices as set forth in subsections 8.40.040 B. and C. of this chapter shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with this chapter or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to subsection (f) of Code section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
2.  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
3.  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of code section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
4.  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
5.  The local issuing authority may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections 8.40.040 C.19, 8.40.040 C.20, and 8.40.040 C.21, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
6.  All soil erosion and sedimentation control measures will be checked daily by the "operator," and any deficiencies noted will be corrected by the end of each day. Additional erosion and sediment control measures will be installed if deemed necessary by the local issuing authority after an on-site inspection. 
7.  If, at any time, any reasonably notable and visible quantity of sediment leaves the property lot lines, impacts other property or any stream buffer zone, additional and appropriate erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be added immediately to prevent future violations. 
C.  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
1.  A construction exit designed in accordance with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia must be the first element developed on a construction site. The construction exit must be maintained in such a way as to prevent any mud from being tracked onto public roads; 
2.  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
3.  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
4.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
5.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
6.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. The disturbed area on a project shall be no greater than 20 acres at any given time. Projects with proposed disturbed areas of greater than 20 acres will need to be graded in phases, and the proposed phasing plan and schedule will need to be shown on the approved soil erosion drawings. Mulch or temporary grassing shall be applied immediately to all exposed soil areas that have been inactive for 14 days. The mulch or temporary grassing coverage shall be maintained to a depth of two inches and shall have a continuous 90 percent soil surface coverage, or greater until final stabilization has occurred; 
7.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
8.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
9.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
10.  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, sediment barriers (silt fences, hay bales, rock dams, etc.) or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. Silt fences shall incorporate Georgia Department of Transportation approved fabrics and utilize posts and proper post spacing in conformance to the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. and meets the definition of final stabilization as defined in this chapter; 
11.  Any land disturbance within 200 feet of stream buffers, wetlands, or other critical areas designated by the Hall County Engineering Department shall require two rows of Type "C" silt fence, or one row of Type "C" silt fence backed by hay bales, appropriately installed, as per the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia; 
12.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills; 
13.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
14.  Cuts and fills may be no steeper than a ratio of two units horizontal to one unit vertical, unless a slope stabilization technique, such as a retaining wall, is used with written approval from the local issuing authority; 
15.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
16.  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts or other methods as approved by the local issuing authority on the permit provided that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
17.  Erosion and sedimentation control plans shall include provisions for treatment to control any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent streams beyond the levels specified in subsection 8.40.040 B.2. of this chapter; 
18.  Adequate erosion and sedimentation control measures which are approved by the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia shall be installed prior to, or concurrently with, any grubbing or grading activity, and be maintained until 'final stabilization' has been achieved. 
19.  Except as provided in paragraphs (20) and (21) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to Part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
(a)  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
(b)  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; or (iii) permitted uses specified in subsection 8.170.060 D.; and 
(c)  All requirements of Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 8.170.060 shall also be complied with. 
20.  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
(a)  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
(b)  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; or (iii) permitted uses specified in subsection 8.170.060 D.; and 
(c)  All requirements of Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 8.170.060 shall also be complied with. 
21.  There is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12, O.C.G.A., the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to Code section 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to Code section 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade stormwater detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph, "maintenance" shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
(a)  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
(b)  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
(c)  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015, if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
(d)  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in section 391-3-7-.01(r) [of the Rules of the Department of Natural Resources], provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet, are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
D.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections 8.40.040 B. and C. of this chapter. 
E.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 6-10-10(1), § 1(Exh. A); Res. of 8-22-13(1), § 3(Exh. C); Res. of 9-22-16(1), § 3(Exh. B)) 
8.40.050. - Application, permits process, generally. 
There are three types of land-disturbing permits: minor land disturbing, new home construction grading, and general land disturbing. 
A.  Minor land disturbing permit. Where required pursuant to subsection 8.40.030 A.8., no person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the unincorporated area of Hall County without first obtaining a minor land-disturbing permit from Hall County Development Services to perform such activity. Additionally, a minor land disturbing permit shall be required for the construction of secondary driveways. The application for a minor land-disturbing permit must contain a current plat or drawing of the property containing the project which indicates all easements, streams, buffer zones, wetlands, and roadways. Said application must be submitted to Hall County Development Services. A fee as established in Appendix "I", Hall County Plan Review and Inspection Fee Schedule will be charged for each application. From time to time, upon the recommendation of the director of public works and utilities of Hall County, Georgia, and approval of the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, said schedule may be revised as deemed necessary. The permit will expire six months from date of issuance. Additionally, where a minor land-disturbing permit is required subsection 8.40.050 C.4.(f) shall apply. 
B.  New home construction grading permit. The new home construction grading permit will apply where land disturbance activities (i.e. grading) are to be performed on residential properties but prior to issuance of a building permit. The total disturbed area for this permit shall not exceed one acre on single or adjoining properties. The application for a new home construction permit must contain a current plat or drawing of the property containing the project which indicates all easements, streams, buffer zones, wetlands, and roadways. Said application must be submitted to Hall County Development Services. A fee as established in Appendix "I", "Hall County Plan Review and Inspection Fee Schedule" will be charged for each application. From time to time, upon the recommendation of the director of public works and utilities of Hall County, Georgia, and approval of the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, said schedule may be revised as deemed necessary. The permit will expire six months from date of issuance. Additionally, where new home construction grading permit is required subsection 8.40.050 C.4.(f) shall apply. 
C.  General land-disturbing permit. All other required land-disturbing sites not fitting the minor land-disturbing requirement. 
1.  General. The property owner, developer, and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the local issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning regulations, watershed protection regulations, subdivision regulations, flood damage prevention regulations, this chapter, and the other provisions of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, and the laws of the State of Georgia which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
2.  Application requirements. 
(a)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the unincorporated area of Hall County without first obtaining an appropriate permit from Hall County Development Services to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to the EPD if applicable. 
(b)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. The plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 8.40.050 C.3. of this chapter. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of subsections 8.40.040 B. and C. of this chapter. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by the appropriate number of copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulation established by the board. Upon plan approval, one reduced size set of plans shall be submitted to Hall County Engineering Division. 
(c)  A fee established in Appendix "I" Hall County Plan Review and Inspection Fee Schedule, shall be charged for each application. This application fee allows for an initial review of plans and a second review of plans to ensure that redlined comments are addressed as well as an additional fee for plans that require third and subsequent reviews. After plans have been permitted, a fee shall be charged for each revision submitted to the county for review, as established in Appendix "I" Hall County Plan Review and Inspection Fee Schedule. From time to time, upon the recommendation of the director of public works and utilities of Hall County, Georgia, and approval of the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, the above Appendix "I" may be revised as deemed necessary. 
(d)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), in the amount of $80.00 per acre, or fraction of acres to the nearest one-tenth acre, of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and be paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each are of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. Out of the $80.00 per disturbed acre collected, $40.00 shall be submitted to the division; and any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division. 
(e)  Soil erosion and sediment control permits shall terminate 12 months from the date of issuance. If the land-disturbing activity has not commenced within said 12 months from the date of issuance, the person or entity in whose name the permit was issued shall make a new application and pay a reapplication fee as established in Appendix "I" Hall County Plan Review and Inspection Fee Schedule, to obtain a new permit pursuant to these regulations before commencing such land-disturbing activity. However, if the land-disturbing activity has commenced but not completed and inspections have been made by the local issuing authority within said 12 months from the date of issuance, the person or entity in whose name the permit was issued shall make a new application and pay a reapplication fee as established in Appendix "I" Hall County Plan Review and Inspection Fee Schedule, to obtain a new permit pursuant to this chapter before commencing such land-disturbing activity. Should the permit expire and the person or entity in whose name the permit was issued fail to make a new application within 12 months from the original date of issuance, the permit will be deemed terminated, and the person or entity will be required to permit the site from start by following subsections 8.40.050 C.2.(a)—(c) above. The foregoing notwithstanding, once the land-disturbing activity is commenced, it shall be completed within six months of the date of commencement. The reapplication fee for noncommercial sites meeting the criteria as set forth in subsection 8.40.030 A.8. shall be that fee established in Appendix "I" Hall County Plan Review and Inspection Fee Schedule, regardless of whether or not land-disturbing activity has commenced in the past year. Termination of the permit shall not relieve the property owner of the responsibility for fulfilling the soil erosion and sediment control requirements of the permit, or of this chapter. From time to time, upon the recommendation of the director of public works and utilities of Hall County, Georgia, and approval of the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, the above Appendix "I" may be revised as deemed necessary. 
(f)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 8.40.040 C.l9., 20., and 21. and bonding, if required as per subsection 8.40.050 C.2(g)(2), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(g)  (1)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this chapter, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of the State of Georgia, as amended, within three years prior to the date of the filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(2)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof, up to but not exceeding $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this chapter or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. This subsection shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
3.  Plan requirements. 
(a)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 8.40.040 B. and C. of this chapter. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological, and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways constructed waterway, sediment control and storm water management facilities, Hall County ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections of any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A § 12-7-20. 
(b)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
4.  Permits. 
(a)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variance and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district, and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsections 8.40.040 C.16. and 17. are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 8.40.050 C.2.(g)(2) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the unincorporated area of the county are met. If Hall County is the local issuing authority, then no permit shall be issued without the written approval of the Hall County Engineering Division and the Hall County Planning and Zoning Department. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district and the county planning and zoning department. 
(c)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances related to land development, as are applied to private persons, and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(d)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(e)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(f)  The local issuing authority may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(g)  No permit may be issued unless the applicant has secured necessary permits from other governing agencies, such as, but not limited to: U.S. Army Corps of Engineer Permits and Georgia Department of Transportation permits. 
(h)  The development or land-disturbing activity permit must be posted in clear view on the site. 
(Ord. of 6-10-10(1), § 1(Exh. A); Res. of 8-22-13(1), § 4(Exh. D); Res. of 9-22-16(1), § 4(Exh. C); Res. of 5-25-17(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.40.060. - Inspection and enforcement. 
A.  The local issuing authority will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and permits and if the measures required are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate both primary and secondary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written or verbal notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. If there is any reasonably notable and visible quantity of sediment leaving or that has left the property lot lines, impacting other property or any stream buffer zone, no verbal or written notice shall be required, and the person engaged in land-disturbing activities shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
B.  The local issuing authority shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
C.  Once a verbal or written warning or a citation has been issued for a violation of this chapter, no additional warning will need to be given for any violation on that site for enforcement action relating to this chapter. 
D.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
E.  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's erosion and sedimentation control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
F.  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to code section 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary correction action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 6-10-10(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.40.070. - General offenses. 
A.  No person shall remove, deface, obstruct or move any postings, notices, stickers, stop-work orders, or other material left on-site by the local issuing authority unless by the local issuing authority or its agent. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or cause any reasonably notable and visible quantity of sedimentation, mud or related debris to come onto any public highway, road, street, alley or thoroughfare. 
C.  With the exception of land-disturbing activity exempted under this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause any mud or sediment to impact any other property or any stream buffer as a result of any land-disturbing activity where best management practices are not properly designed, installed and maintained. 
(Ord. of 6-10-10(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.40.080. - Penalties and incentives. 
A.  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to double permit fees at the time the permit is obtained and/or revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. It is the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that the proper permit is obtained. 
B.  Stop-work orders. 
1.  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state, the director or local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
2.  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
3.  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
4.  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
5.  While a stop-work order is in effect, the building inspection department shall conduct no inspection on the property except for soil erosion inspections, and all work on the site, except that work necessary to achieve compliance with this chapter, shall cease until compliance is achieved. 
C.  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions subsection 8.40.050 B.2(g)(2). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
D.  Civil penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the county issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions of the Official Code of Hall County, the Magistrate Court of Hall County shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter likewise shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which a violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
E.  Penalty. Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the Court. 
(Ord. of 6-10-10(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.40.090. - Education and certification. 
A.  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection of any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
B.  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
C.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
D.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A § 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. of 6-10-10(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.40.100. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
A.  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Board of Commissioners of Hall County within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
B.  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Hall County. 
(Ord. of 6-10-10(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.40.110. - Liability. 
A.  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
B.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
C.  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 6-10-10(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
APPENDIX I. - HALL COUNTY PLAN REVIEW AND INSPECTION FEE SCHEDULE 

 
(Res. of 8-22-13(1), § 1(Exh. A); Res. of 5-25-17(1), § 2(Exh. B)) 
CHAPTER 8.50. - HAZARDOUS WASTE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste generally, ch. 8.60; incineration of solid waste and biomedical waste, ch. 8.70; sewage collection and disposal, ch. 13.10. 

8.50.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter shall be to prevent the disposal of hazardous wastes into the surface and subsurface waters within the county limits, or without the county limits when hazardous wastes are carried within the county limits by waters flowing into the county, when such disposal poses substantial hazards to public health, safety or welfare or to the environment. 
(Res. of 10-21-94; Code 1991, § 8.20.010) 
8.50.020. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter: 
Contaminate means to create undesired environmental effects. 
County means Hall County, Georgia. 
Designated hazardous wastes means any solid waste identified as such in regulations promulgated by the board of natural resources of the State of Georgia. The board may identify as "designated hazardous waste" any solid waste which the board concludes is capable of posing a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of or otherwise managed, based on the factors set forth in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act which is codified as 40 C.F.R. section 261.11(a)(3), in force and effect on February 1, 1991, if such solid waste contains any substance which is listed on any one or more of the following lists: 
A.  List of Hazardous Constituents, codified as 40 C.F.R. part 261, appendix VIII, in force and effect on February 1, 1991; 
B.  Groundwater Monitoring List, codified as 40 C.F.R. part 264, appendix IX, in force and effect on February 1, 1991; 
C.  List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities, codified as 40 C.F.R. table 302.4, and all appendices thereto, in force and effect on February 1, 1991; 
D.  List of Regulated Pesticides codified as 40 C.F.R. part 180, in force and effect on February 1, 1991; 
E.  List of Extremely Hazardous Substances and Their Threshold Planning Quantities, codified as 40 C.F.R. part 355, appendix A, in force and effect on February 1, 1991; or 
F.  List of Chemicals and Chemical Categories, codified as 40 C.F.R. part 372.65, in force and effect on February 1, 1991. 
Hazardous wastes means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act which is in force and effect on February 1, 1991, codified as 40 C.F.R. section 261.3, and any designated hazardous waste. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials, solid or dissolved materials in domestic [sewage]; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923). 
Solid waste handling facility means any facility, the primary purpose of which is the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal, or any combination thereof, of solid waste. 
Surface water, subsurface water, or waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, aquifers, and all other bodies of surface or subsurface waters, natural or artificial, within the county, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of an individual person, partnership, corporation or other entity. 
(Res. of 10-21-94; Code 1991, § 8.20.020) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 
8.50.030. - Prohibited disposal. 
The act of disposing in, causing to be disposed in or failing to take adequate precautions to prevent the accidental disposal of any hazardous waste into or onto the waters or subsurface waters of the county, or into or onto waters that could reasonably be expected to flow or carry hazardous wastes into or onto the waters of the county, shall be a violation of this chapter. Each and every day that such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. Adequate precaution as used herein shall mean the use of the best practicable control technology currently available for the containment of hazardous waste at the time the violation of this chapter occurred. 
(Res. of 10-21-94; Code 1991, § 8.20.030) 
8.50.040. - Enforcement. 
The enforcement officers of public safety department, enforcement division, of the county and any duly authorized law enforcement officer shall have the duty to cite any violator of this chapter. 
(Res. of 10-21-94; Code 1991, § 8.20.040) 
8.50.050. - Judicial disposition. 
The magistrate's court of the county shall have jurisdiction over all alleged violations of this chapter. The prosecuting officer shall give proper citation to all alleged violators of this chapter to appear before and have disposition of the alleged violation before the magistrate's court of the county in the manner provided by law. 
(Res. of 10-21-94; Code 1991, § 8.20.050) 
8.50.060. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 10-21-94; Code 1991, § 8.20.060; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 8.60. - SOLID WASTE GENERALLY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Hazardous waste, ch. 8.50; incineration of solid waste and biomedical waste, ch. 8.70; rubbish fires, ch. 8.110; abatement of nuisances, ch. 8.140; public services, tit. 13; sewage collection and disposal, ch. 13.10. 

8.60.010. - Solid waste management district established. 
A solid waste management district is created and established composed of all that unincorporated area within the county. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.010) 
Cross reference— Administration generally, tit. 2. 
8.60.020. - Intent. 
The intent of this chapter is: 
A.  To prevent the dumping of solid waste along and on the public streets, public rights-of-way, alleys and highways in all the county and the shoulders thereof; 
B.  To prevent the dumping of solid waste on public and private property in the county. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.020) 
8.60.030. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have these meanings: 
Commissioners means board of commissioners of the county. 
Construction/demolition waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings, or other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, asbestos-containing waste, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper cardboard, inert waste landfill material, and other nonputrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Debris means sand, dirt, broken brick, blocks, broken pavement or other similar materials suitable for fill. The term shall not include household garbage or other types of solid waste such as wood or wood products which are subject to decomposition or decay. 
Designated hazardous waste means any solid waste identified as such in regulations promulgated by the board of natural resources of the State of Georgia. The board may identify as "designated hazardous waste" any solid waste which the board concludes is capable of posing a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of or otherwise managed, based on the factors set forth in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act which are codified as 40 C.F.R. section 261.11(a)(3), in force and effect on February 1, 1991, if such solid waste contains any substance which is listed on any one or more of the following lists: 
(A)  List of Hazardous Constituents, codified as 40 C.F.R. part 261, appendix VIII, in force and effect on February 1, 1991; 
(B)  Groundwater Monitoring List, codified as 40 C.F.R. part 264, appendix IX, in force and effect on February 1, 1991; 
(C)  List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities, codified as 40 C.F.R. table 302.4, and all appendices thereto, in force and effect on February 1, 1991; 
(D)  List of Regulated Pesticides, codified as 40 C.F.R. part 180, in force and effect on February 1, 1991; 
(E)  List of Extremely Hazardous Substances and Their Threshold Planning Quantities, codified as 40 C.F.R. part 355, appendix A, in force and effect on February 1, 1991; or 
(F)  List of Chemicals and Chemical Categories, codified as 40 C.F.R. part 372.65, in force and effect on February 1, 1991. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final disposition of solid waste occurs, and includes, but is not limited to, landfilling and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. 
Domestic sewage means the liquid wastes from kitchens or laundries in dwelling units. 
Garbage means food waste including waste accumulations of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Harborage means the enclosed spaces which afford rats hidden or partly hidden shelter, and suitable facilities for breeding and protecting their young until maturity. 
Hauler means any person, firm or corporation which collects or transports solid waste in the unincorporated areas of the county, including sanitary contractors and municipalities. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act which are in force and effect on February 1, 1991, codified as 40 C.F.R. section 261.3, and any designated hazardous waste. 
Household garbage means all solid waste accumulation resulting from normal daily activities of private residents attendant to food preparation, personal hygiene, housekeeping and property maintenance, with certain exceptions. This definition does not include furniture or other wood products, yard trimmings, debris, concrete, paint containers, clothes, appliances, riding toys, liquid wastes or oversized material that cannot be containerized in plastic disposable bags (including household trash compactor bags) no larger than 39-gallon capacity size. 
Industrial liquid wastes means liquid or water-borne waste from an industrial process. 
Inert waste landfill means a disposal facility accepting only waste that will not or is not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, and land clearing debris such as stumps, limbs, and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed. Said term also excludes household garbage, liquid waste, hazardous waste and other similar types of refuse. 
Liquid waste means any waste material that is determined to contain "free liquids" as defined by method 9095 (Paint Filter Liquids Test), as described in Test Methods for the Evaluation of Solid Wastes, Physical/Chemical Methods (EPA Pub. No. SW-846). 
Litter means all garbage, rubbish, solid waste or any such noxious or offensive material improperly discarded or abandoned. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or agency. 
Public or private highway property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands or forests. 
Putrescible means that which is capable of being quickly decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include but are not limited to kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes, dead animals, garbage and wastes which are contaminated by such wastes. 
Recovered materials means those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recyclable corrugated cardboard shall mean that grade of paper composed of a three-layer construction having smooth inner and outer layers and a corrugated medium of kraft paper. Excluded would be any wax or plastic coated material as well as any recyclable corrugated cardboard that is soiled or otherwise contaminated so as to render it non-recyclable (grease, food waste, blood, or chemicals), or adhered to polystyrene or other plastic. 
Recycling means any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Refuse includes all putrescible solid wastes, with the exception of body waste. Such waste includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, street sweepings, dead animals and solid commercial and industrial waste. 
Rubbish means solid waste which does not result from commercial or business activities. 
Sanitary contractor means a person, firm, or corporation which collects or transports solid waste in the unincorporated areas of the county for a fee. This shall not include municipalities or the county. 
Septic tank pumpings shall mean waste removed from any septic tank. 
Sewage means sanitary sewage, domestic sewage, and industrial liquid wastes, separate or in any combination. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a waste water treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials, solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923). 
Solid waste handling facility means any facility, the primary purpose of which is the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal, or any combination thereof, of solid waste. 
Waste means solid waste and liquid waste. 
Yard trimmings means vegetative matter, including but not limited to leaves, grass clippings, trees (and parts thereof), prunings, and other natural organic matter, commonly accepted at inert waste landfills, resulting from landscaping maintenance and land clearing operations, both residential and commercial. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.030) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 
8.60.040. - System of household garbage collection. 
A.  The primary purpose of the district is to establish, maintain and operate within the district a system of household garbage collection. 
B.  The system of solid waste management shall be as follows: 
1.  The county shall locate, maintain and operate one or more landfills for the disposal of solid waste or enter into contracts for the services of other legally permitted solid waste handling facilities. 
2.  The county shall locate, maintain and operate household garbage containers for the deposit of household garbage by individuals within the county. 
3.  The county shall transport the household garbage placed in the containers to the landfill or other legally permitted solid waste handling facility. 
4.  The county may implement other measures as called for in the county's Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Plan. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.040) 
8.60.050. - Solid waste contracts. 
The county may enter into contracts to perform all or a part of the solid waste collection and/or disposal system; provided such contracts are entered into in accordance with Hall County bidding procedures. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.050) 
Cross reference— County contracts, ch. 3.10. 
8.60.060. - Rules and regulations governing solid waste system. 
From time to time, the board of commissioners may form and establish rules and regulations governing the use and operation of the solid waste system and to carry out the intention of this chapter, and instruct the administrator and other county personnel to carry out the same. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.060) 
8.60.070. - Solid waste director. 
The solid waste director shall be under the general direction of the director of public works, who shall be assisted by a position to be deemed solid waste director. The collection, transportation, and disposal of waste shall be under the supervision and control of the solid waste director. The solid waste director shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. For assistance and support, he may call upon whatever agency or department is necessary, with the approval of the public works director and the county administrator. Examples would be the office of the director of public safety, director of public health or any other local law enforcement agencies. The solid waste director shall have the right to appoint sanitation inspectors, who shall have authority, and whose duties shall be, to make routine inspections of matters within this chapter. All regulatory actions of the sanitation director must be approved, and are subject to review, by the public works director and county administrator, and are also subject to further review and approval by the commissioners. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.070) 
Cross reference— Administration and employees, tit. 2. 
8.60.080. - Inspections. 
The solid waste director is authorized to call upon the director of public safety and his staff to conduct inspections of the county sanitary landfill, disposal sites approved under sections 8.60.200 through 8.60.230, public rights-of-way leading to the disposal sites, county container collection sites, and other locations where unlawful dumping of wastes may have occurred. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.080) 
8.60.090—8.60.120. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Res. of December 14, 2006(2), § 2, repealed §§ 8.60.090—8.60.120, which pertained to unlawful littering; exceptions; collection of litter by depositor; littering from conveyance; and tracing litter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
8.60.130. - Authorized solid waste haulers. 
Solid waste may only be collected for disposal by the county, by municipalities, or by sanitary contractors. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.130) 
8.60.140. - Sanitary contractors; license required. 
All sanitary contractors shall obtain business licenses from the county. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.140) 
8.60.150. - Sanitary contractors; truck identification. 
All haulers must number their trucks and list the weight of each truck and capacity of the same. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.150) 
8.60.160. - Haulers to secure waste in vehicles. 
It is unlawful for any hauler to haul, convey, or cause to be conveyed any waste upon or along the public streets and roadways except when the material transported is adequately covered in such a manner as to prevent it from falling, leaking or being blown from the transporting vehicle. The operator and/or owner of the offending vehicle shall be personally responsible for any violation of this section. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.160) 
Cross reference— Vehicles and traffic, tit. 10. 
8.60.170. - Disposal of dead animals. 
If a domestic or companion animal or fowl shall die, the owner must bury the carcass deep enough to prevent stench therefrom after notice of the death and location of the carcass. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.170) 
Cross reference— Animals, tit. 6. 
8.60.180. - Deposit of waste by haulers. 
Haulers shall only deposit solid waste, except prohibited waste, at the county sanitary landfill in accordance with the regulations of the landfill. In no event shall haulers, except individuals transporting household garbage, deposit solid waste at county container collection sites. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.180) 
8.60.190. - Recovery of recyclable corrugated cardboard. 
A.  The purposes of recovering recyclable corrugated cardboard are as follows: 
1.  To encourage generators and solid waste haulers operating within Hall County, Georgia to reduce the amount of waste requiring deposition in disposal facilities located within Hall County; 
2.  To help meet the goals and objectives outlined in the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act and the Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act for Hall County and its municipalities; and 
3.  To work cooperatively with solid waste haulers in identifying, when possible, violating contributors of recyclable corrugated cardboard. It is not the intent of this section to act as a ban on the disposal of recyclable corrugated cardboard, but to provide incentives not to deposit this material for disposal. 
B.  Provisions for recycling corrugated cardboard and violations of this section are as follows: 
1.  In the event of contaminated loads of otherwise recyclable corrugated cardboard believed to be contaminated, a solid waste hauler may elect to have the questionable load inspected, provided the collection vehicle allows adequate inspection of the load on board the vehicle, prior to dumping, by county personnel at the Hall County recycling center. Inspection shall be available from 8:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, for an official determination as to a degree of contamination sufficient to render the material non-recyclable. If the load can be satisfactorily inspected and is determined to be contaminated, a report will be completed to that effect and a copy given to the hauler to accompany the load to any disposal facility in Hall County permitted to accept such material. 
2.  Disposal facility operators, permitted by state law to accept corrugated cardboard for disposal, shall provide suitable containers at their property for accepting for recycling recyclable corrugated cardboard. 
3.  It shall be considered to be a violation of this section for private disposal facility operators to accept for disposal recyclable corrugated cardboard in excess of the ten percent allowance. 
4.  In cases where violating loads are dumped at private disposal facilities, the facility operator shall notify Hall County Resource Recovery immediately, providing the time dumped and the solid waste hauler who brought in the violating load in order to avoid penalty. Disposal facility operators not adhering to these reporting and other requirements shall be subject to penalties as enumerated in section D.1 through 3 herein. 
C.  Penalties for the disposal of recyclable corrugated cardboard at the Hall County landfill and all other disposal facilities in unincorporated Hall County shall be determined as follows: 
1.  For the first violation by any given solid waste hauler, a written warning and charged the prevailing rate. 
2.  For the second and subsequent violations by any given solid waste hauler, a written warning and charged a surcharge three times the prevailing rate. 
D.  Penalties for knowingly permitting the disposal of recyclable corrugated cardboard at private disposal facilities shall be determined as follows: 
1.  The first violation as determined by inspection by county personnel: Written warning. 
2.  The second violation as determined by inspection by county personnel: Written warning and $500.00 penalty. 
3.  The third and subsequent violations as determined by inspection by county personnel: Written warning and $1,000.00 penalty. 
E.  User/tipping fees for the disposal of solid wastes at the county landfill shall be determined as follows: 
1.  All trucks, roll offs, flat beds (compacted or uncompacted), containers of solid waste or construction/demolition waste with trace amounts of recyclable corrugated cardboard or totally lacking same: Charge/surcharge is the prevailing rate. 
2.  All trucks, roll offs, flat beds (compacted or uncompacted), containers of solid waste or construction/demolition waste with ten percent or greater of recyclable corrugated cardboard: Charge/surcharge is three times prevailing rate. 
F.  The Hall County Department of Public Works shall have the right to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary and to inspect privately owned disposal facilities at its discretion to ensure that private disposal facilities comply with the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of Hall County and the State of Georgia. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.185) 
8.60.200. - Unlawful disposal of solid waste. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dump, or cause to be dumped, any solid waste anywhere in the unincorporated area of the county except as provided by this chapter, as amended from time to time, or by the express written approval of the board of commissioners under such terms and conditions as it may invoke from time to time. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.190) 
8.60.210. - Permits required prior to waste disposal at landfill. 
In addition to all other requirements of this chapter, no sanitary landfill, inert waste landfill or other landfill dump shall be used unless the owner of property used for such a purpose and the person causing the material to be dumped have first obtained all permits as may be required by the laws of the state and a permit from Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.200) 
8.60.220. - Private landfills. 
A.  Privately owned inert waste landfills, other landfills or dumps shall meet waste reduction goals of the Hall County Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Plan. 
B.  Privately owned inert waste landfills shall be allowed in the unincorporated area of Hall County provided that all interested parties fulfill the requirements of this section, and comply with the following regulations: 
1.  Access to a privately owned inert waste landfill located on property fronting on a road which is part of the county road maintenance system shall be approved by the Hall County Department of Engineering and the board of commissioners. 
2.  The road accessing the inert waste landfill from a road which is part of the county road maintenance system shall meet class C standard requirements, as set forth in the Hall County Guidelines for County Road Acceptance. The county will not maintain said road, and the owner of an inert waste landfill shall sign an affidavit and agreement to maintain all portions of said road to meet the standards recited herein. 
3.  Access to the inert waste landfill site shall be limited to authorized entrances, which shall be closed when the site is not in operation. 
4.  The applicant for a permit to use property as a privately owned inert waste landfill shall be responsible for providing evidence that the property is properly zoned for the desired purpose and that a site acceptability permit has been issued by the State of Georgia approving the use of said property as a privately owned inert waste landfill. 
5.  The applicant shall pay a $100.00 fee with each application for a permit to use property as a privately owned inert waste landfill, said fee to be used to defray the cost of processing the application. An additional $100.00 fee per year for renewal of the permit will be required. Permit and renewal of permit approval is at the discretion of the Hall County Board of Commissioners. 
6.  The owner(s) or permit holder shall be responsible for leveling the dumped material with appropriate grading equipment and obtaining maximum practical compaction. 
7.  A uniform compacted layer of clean earth cover no less than one foot in depth shall be placed over all exposed inert waste material at least monthly. 
8.  The inert waste landfill site shall be graded and drained to minimize runoff onto the landfill surface, to prevent erosion, and to drain water from the surface of the landfill. 
9.  Appropriate means shall be provided to prevent and control fires. Stockpiled soil is considered to be the most satisfactory fire fighting material. 
10.  A uniform compacted layer of final cover not less than two feet in depth and a vegetative cover shall be placed over the final lift not later than one month following final placement of inert waste within that lift. 
11.  The applicant for a permit to use property as a privately owned inert waste landfill site must furnish site plans and operational plans showing that the facility is consistent with the waste reduction goals of the Hall County Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Plan. Such plans shall be reviewed by the Hall County Department of Engineering for compliance. Annual reporting of weights of materials accepted, origin of wastes and weights, and weights processed (diverted from disposal for reuse) shall be required. Reporting shall be on a fiscal year basis (July 1 to June 30) to Hall County Department of Engineering. 
12.  The board of commissioners or its designee shall have the right to inspect privately owned inert waste landfill at its discretion to insure that said site complies with the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of Hall County and the State of Georgia. 
13.  Within 30 days of commencing solid waste handling activities, the operator will provide to the Hall County Department of Engineering a copy of the notice having been placed on the recorded property deed that the property will be used for landfilling operations. Upon final closure, all deeds for real property which have been used for inert waste landfilling shall include notice of the landfill operations, the date the landfill operation commenced and terminated, an accurate legal description of the actual location of the landfill, and a description of the type of solid wastes which have been deposited in the landfill. The owner or operator must submit concurrent with the submission of notice of final closure to the Hall County Department of Engineering confirmation that the information required in this section has been recorded on the property deed. 
14.  Notice of final closure must be provided to the Hall County Department of Engineering within 30 days of receiving the final load of waste. Any site not receiving waste for in excess of 180 days shall be deemed abandoned and in violation of this ordinance [chapter] unless properly closed. Notice of closure must include the date of final waste receipt and an accurate legal description of the boundaries of the landfill. 
15.  There shall be no less than two public hearings in regular meetings of the Hall County board of commissioners to consider whether or not to issue a permit for the operation of a privately owned inert waste landfill. The applicant shall be responsible for providing evidence of notice of a public hearing of said matter. Said notice shall state the dates, times and locations of the hearings, must be published in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days in advance of the first such hearing and must be posted on the property as required by the Hall County Planning Department. 
C.  No person, firm or corporation shall willfully empty, dump or otherwise place any solid waste, garbage, dead animals, other discarded materials or refuse upon the right-of-way of any public road, state highway, state aid road or public property, or upon the lands of another. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.210) 
Cross reference— Zoning regulations, tit. 17. 
8.60.230. - Identification of illegally dumped solid waste. 
If any of the matter or material dumped in violation of the provisions of section 8.60.200 can be identified as having last belonged to, been in the possession of, sent to or received by, or to have been the property of any person, firm, or corporation prior to its being dumped as prohibited herein, this identification shall be presumed to be prima facie evidence that the owner dumped, or caused to be dumped, this matter and material in violation of this chapter. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.220) 
8.60.240. - Operating hours of county landfill. 
Solid waste can only be deposited at the sanitary landfill under the supervision of the solid waste director during normal working hours, except by specific written permission of the county administrator. Normal working hours shall be as designated from time to time by the board of commissioners. The sanitary landfill is closed on Sunday and county holidays. At all other times access to the sanitary landfill is prohibited, and a gate at the entrance shall be kept locked. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.230) 
8.60.250. - Sanitary landfill; operation regulations. 
The sanitary landfill shall be operated in a safe and sanitary manner, and shall conform with all appropriate state and federal laws and regulations. Included among these regulations and requirements are the following: 
A.  All solid waste shall be compacted and covered with a minimum of six inches of clean soil or state approved alternative daily cover at the end of each day of operation; 
B.  No burning of waste is permitted; 
C.  When each portion of the sanitary landfill reaches its final grade, two feet of final cover will be placed on top of the lift, graded to drain and minimize erosion, and seeded to establish a stable vegetative cover. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.240) 
8.60.260. - Sanitary landfill; control of noise, odor and vermin. 
The sanitary landfill will be operated in a professional manner with due regard for controlling litter, noise, odor and vermin. The solid waste delivered to the sanitary landfill shall only be deposited at a location on the working face of the landfill operation under the direction of a county employee. In accordance with county ordinances and resolutions, no waste shall be deposited at the entrance or along the access road to the site. As necessary, a fence shall be erected at the site to limit access and to trap blowing litter. The entrance access road, and public rights-of-way leading to the site, shall be policed as necessary to control all litter which would give the landfill an unsightly appearance. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.250) 
8.60.270. - Sanitary landfill; sorting of materials. 
It will be the responsibility of the solid waste director to designate areas in which heavy scrap metals such as steel, iron, aluminum, etc., can be placed in an area in which the private individuals, firms or corporations, as well as the county, may deposit this these materials. These areas are to be clearly defined and clearly marked, and it will be under the general supervision of the landfill personnel. It will be the responsibility of the sanitary contractor or private individual, firm or corporation to separate materials reclaimable by the county. Failure to comply with this regulation will be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.260) 
8.60.280. - Sanitary landfill; fees. 
The solid waste director will be responsible for posting landfill fees at the direction of the board of commissioners and the county administrator. All persons, haulers, sanitary contractors, firms, or corporations, will be charged on a fee basis to be determined by the board of commissioners of the county. The fee shall be paid on-site, or the person, hauler, sanitary contractor, firm, or corporation may be billed on a monthly basis if an account has been established with the county in accordance with procedures established by the Hall County Comptroller with the approval of the Hall County Commission. The fee for the dumping of rubbish, garbage and other solid waste shall be as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. In lieu of point-of-purchase disposal fees collected by the county for designated wastes requiring special handling, the county shall levy fees at the point of disposal necessary to recover the true cost of disposal. Such wastes shall include but not be limited to tires, CFC/HCFC (chlorofluorocarbon/hydro- chlorofluorocarbon) containing appliances and other wastes as designated by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.270) 
8.60.290. - Solid waste compactor sites. 
A.  The purpose of special districts within the geographical boundaries of Hall County, Georgia, which special districts correspond with the geographical boundaries of Hall County, Georgia, shall be to provide for solid waste collection and disposal as effected through compactor site operations and such districts shall specifically be composed of all parcels or tracts of residential real property within Hall County, Georgia, upon which improvements have been made for the purpose of single- or multifamily dwellings, including but not limited to manufactured home parks, apartment complexes, condominiums, duplexes and single home subdivisions. Each separate residence within this special district shall be assessed an annual fee as established by the board of commissioners from time to time. Such fee shall be assessed residences located within the unincorporated portion of Hall County, Georgia, which does not provide garbage and solid waste collection services, and no fee shall be assessed if such dwelling is located within the municipal boundaries of any municipality within Hall County, Georgia, which provides a garbage and solid waste collection service. 
B.  The assessment shall be made by inclusion as a separate item with the ad valorem tax bill as sent to each Hall County residential owner annually and shall be due and payable upon or before the same date designated for the payment of ad valorem taxes therein. In the case of manufactured home owners who do not receive ad valorem tax bills due to the fact that their manufactured homes are not taxed as real property, the assessment shall be paid and collected at the time of the purchase or renewal of the manufactured home owner's annual location permit. 
C.  Hall County, Georgia, is further authorized to enforce the collection of such fees or assessments that become delinquent and unpaid in the same manner as authorized by Chapter 3 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 48-2-44, or other applicable law, for the enforcement of the collection and payment of taxes, fees or assessments. 
D.  The proceeds of the assessment provided for herein shall be used only to defray the cost of maintaining and operating the solid waste compactor sites located in Hall County, Georgia; provided, however, that such fees and assessments may be used to defray the cost of other solid waste disposal services operated by Hall County, Georgia, to the extent not required to meet the abovencompactor site management and operational needs. 
E.  The following provisions shall govern the use of the sites: 
1.  The sites may be used only by private individuals; residents or property owners in the county may deposit household garbage and/or recyclables at these sites. Non-residents of Hall County may deposit only recyclables. 
2.  Only household garbage and/or recyclables may be deposited at these collection sites. 
3.  All household garbage and/or recyclables shall be placed inside the containers. 
4.  Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of hauling household garbage for a charge of any kind shall not place the household garbage or recyclables in the containers. 
5.  No person, firm or corporation, other than authorized personnel of the county, shall scavenge or sort the contents of the containers or remove anything from the containers or from around the containers. 
6.  No person, firm or corporation shall set fire to the contents of any container or place highly inflammable liquids in the containers. 
7.  All household garbage deposited at these sites must be contained in sturdy paper or plastic, disposable bags (including, but not limited to, paper grocery bags, empty consumer product bags, or household trash compactor bags) no larger than 39-gallon capacity size. Animal feed bags may also be deposited. Any bags used for household garbage must be securely closed. All garbage contained in the bags shall be placed inside the containers provided by the county at the collection sites. No loose garbage will be accepted. 
8.  Persons, firms, or corporations who need to dispose of solid waste that is not household garbage must transport the solid waste to the county landfill. 
9.  Businesses wishing to deposit recyclables shall be directed to transport them to the county's recycling center. All residents (unincorporated or within municipal jurisdictions) and nonresidents may use this facility andthe recycling containers available at the site. 
(Res. of 3-26-09(2), § 1(Exh. A); Res. of 01-11-2018(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— Res. of Mar. 26, 2009(2), deleted former § 8.60.290, and enacted a new § 8.60.290 as set out herein. The former § 8.60.290 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
8.60.300. - Forbidden deposits and prohibited actions at county disposal sites; deposit or storage of junk. 
A.  None of the following shall be deposited or dumped at the sanitary landfill or at any county solid waste compactor site: 
1.  Waste originating outside of Hall County; 
2.  Liquid waste, except used motor oil for recovery; 
3.  Regulated quantities of hazardous waste as defined in the rules promulgated by the board of natural resources, chapter 391-3-11; 
4.  Septic tank pumpings and sewage; 
5.  Tires; 
6.  Yard trimmings; 
7.  Sludges which, upon certified laboratory testing, meet the definition of hazardous waste as defined herein. Industrial and commercial generators wishing to dispose of sludges in Hall County solid waste handling facilities shall first furnish test results, due annually January 1 of each year, certifying that such sludges are deemed non-hazardous. 
B.  It shall be unlawful to place, abandon, leave, keep or store junk and salvage material, including non-functioning motor vehicles, appliances, machinery, equipment or parts thereof, out of doors upon any public or private land, except within the confines of a permitted junk or salvage yard or designated public disposal area. All such materials shall be stored in such manner that will preclude the harborage of rodents and insects. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.290) 
Cross reference— Storage of junk, § 8.140.020; zoning regulations, tit. 17; screening, fencing and outdoor storage requirements, ch. 17.260; screening of junk yards, § 17.260.030. 
8.60.310. - Landfill pilfering. 
A.  Prohibition. No person shall pilfer, steal, or take any item which has been discarded and placed in the public landfill of the county. An exemption to this shall be provided to any items, which, in the opinion of the solid waste director, have obvious reuse potential. Such items shall be diverted from disposal by county personnel if such is safe and practical to do so. It shall be unlawful for any county employee to personally benefit from the recovery of any such diverted materials. 
B.  Enforcement. The enforcement officers of the public safety department, enforcement division, of the county or any duly authorized law enforcement officer shall have the duty to arrest and cite any violator of this section. 
C.  Judicial disposition. The magistrate's court of the county shall have jurisdiction over all alleged violations of this section. The prosecuting officer shall give proper citation to all alleged violators of this section to appear before and have disposition of the alleged violation before the magistrate's court of the county in the manner provided by law. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.300) 
8.60.320. - Enforcement; violations; penalty. 
A.  All law enforcement agencies, officers, and officials of the state or any political subdivision thereof, including enforcement officers of the public safety department, enforcement division, or any enforcement agency, officer, or any official of any commission of the state or any political subdivision thereof, are authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this chapter. 
B.  In the event that any person, firm, or corporation violates any provisions of this chapter, the county attorney or other appropriate authority of the county may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful act or to correct or abate such violation. 
C.  Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 5-26-94; Code 1991, § 8.24.310; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 8.65. - SCRAP TIRE MANAGEMENT 

 

8.65.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and enhance the quality of the environment of Hall County, Georgia, to revise and update existing laws, and to institute and maintain a comprehensive county-wide program for all scrap tire management which will assure that the storage, transportation, collection, processing and disposal of scrap tires does not adversely affect the health, safety, and well-being of the public and does not degrade the quality of the environment in furtherance of Hall County's responsibility to protect the public health, safety, and well being of its citizens. 
(Res. of 6-10-04(3), § 1) 
8.65.020. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
Manifest means a form or document used for identifying the quantity and composition and the origin, routing, and destination of scrap tires during transportation from the point of generation, through any intermediate points, to an end user, processor or disposer approved by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD). 
Person means the State of Georgia or any other state or agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association, or other entity in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government. 
Retail tire dealer means a person actively engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted in the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility. 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county, and state governments. 
Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the environmental protection division to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing. 
Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires. 
(Res. of 6-10-04(3), § 1) 
8.65.030. - Property owner's responsibility. 
The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposal of all scrap tires on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(Res. of 6-10-04(3), § 1) 
8.65.040. - Disposal of scrap tires. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to cause, suffer or allow the dumping of scrap tires at any place in Hall County including, and without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right of way thereof, any public or private property in the county or any waters in Hall County unless such scrap tires originate in Hall County or other areas authorized by the Hall County Board of Commissioners and: 
1.  The property is designated by the board of commissioners or its duly designated agent and the Georgia Environmental Protection Division for the collection or disposal of scrap tires and the person is authorized to use such property; 
2.  The scrap tires are placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property; and 
3.  The property has a valid solid waste handling permit or other applicable identification numbers, approvals and/or permits issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) when required. 
B.  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, scrap tire processors, including scrap tire sorters, and retail tire dealers shall be subject to rules as defined in Chapter 391-3-4, et seq. of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. and the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, Chapter 391-3-4, et seq. applicable to solid waste, except where requirements of this ordinance are more stringent. 
(Res. of 6-10-04(3), § 1) 
8.65.050. - Scrap tire accumulation and storage. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person in a residential zone to accumulate any amount of scrap tires on or around property, which they own or occupy. 
B.  A retail tire dealer may hold up to 100 scrap tires per garage bay in storage, up to a maximum of 1,000 scrap tires. 
C.  Tires must be stored in covered or enclosed areas to prevent the accumulation of water. 
(Res. of 6-10-04(3), § 1) 
8.65.060. - Scrap tire disposal certification. 
A.  A scrap tire disposal certification form shall be completed: 
1.  By any scrap tire generator each time that solid waste is transported to a solid waste disposal facility, 
2.  By any solid waste disposal facility each time any scrap tires are delivered, or 
3.  At the request of any officer empowered to enforce this chapter. 
B.  Said scrap tire disposal certification forms shall be maintained and made available for inspection by any scrap tire generator or solid waste disposal facility upon the request of any officer empowered to enforce this chapter. 
C.  Each scrap tire generator shall at least supply their full name, mailing address including city and state, street address including city and state, phone number, name of entity for which scrap tires are destined, street address including city and state of entity for which scrap tires are destined, the county of generation of the scrap tires as well as a signature of a legally authorized representative for the scrap tire generator on the scrap tire disposal certification form. Other information as may be specified by an authorized representative of Hall County may also be required on the scrap tire disposal certification form. 
D.  Each solid waste disposal facility shall at least supply their full name, mailing address including city and state, street address including city and state, phone number, name of entity from which scrap tires were received, street address including city and state of entity from which scrap tires are received, the county of generation of the scrap tires as well as a signature of a legally authorized representative for the solid waste disposal facility on the scrap tire disposal certification form. Other information as may be specified by an authorized representative of Hall County may also be required on the scrap tire disposal certification form. 
(Res. of 6-10-04(3), § 1) 
8.65.070. - Abatement and expenses recovery. 
A.  In the event that any person violates any provision of this ordinance, the county or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, cleanup or stop-work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, lien on property or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate any such violation. In addition, the county may immediately revoke or suspend any and all business, building, development or any and all other county issued permits related to the property or properties involved with the violation until such time that compliance is met, or until the ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction is obtained, at which time respective permits may be reissued. 
B.  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly address any violation of this chapter on their premises within 20 days after receipt of notice to correct said violation, the board of commissioners is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of scrap tires, dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of the ordinance on behalf of the county. The expenses incurred by the county shall be chargeable to the violator and the board of commissioners and/or the court shall send a statement of the amount due for said expenses by registered mail. 
C.  When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within 30 days after receipt of said statement as provided for in this section, the board of commissioners shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by the county, the dates of county action, the location of the property for which action was taken, and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recordation of such statement shall constitute a lien on the personal and real property of the person to be charged and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. 
D.  This section shall apply with full force and effect regardless of the provisions of any order of the court in which the violator was convicted. This section should not be construed as an excuse for failure on the part of the violator to perform any cleanup ordered by the court, nor shall it be considered as a mitigating factor in any contempt action against a violator who has failed to obey the order of the court. 
(Res. of 6-10-04(3), § 1) 
8.65.080. - Enforcement. 
A.  All law enforcement agencies, officers, and officials of the state or any political subdivision thereof, including the enforcement division, any environmental compliance officer, the Hall County Sheriff's Office or any enforcement agency, officer, or any official of any commission of the state or any political subdivision thereof, are authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this chapter. 
B.  Any person authorized to enforce this ordinance shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable or necessary times in order to properly inspect for violations of this ordinance, subject to the condition that to allow entry onto private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this ordinance must be visible from a public road or right of way, or upon said person having received a valid complaint alleging a violation of this ordinance, or by a judge's order upon said person having received information/allegations that constitute reasonable suspicion that an unlawful act or threat to the health and safety of the community and/or the environment has occurred or is about to occur. 
(Res. of 6-10-04(3), § 1) 
8.65.090. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall not preclude the county from choosing to seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the criminal prosecution, it being the intent of the county to have both the civil and criminal rights of prosecution in this area. 
(Res. of 6-10-04(3), § 1) 
CHAPTER 8.70. - INCINERATION OF SOLID WASTE AND BIOMEDICAL WASTE[9] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Business licenses and regulations, tit. 5; hazardous waste, ch. 8.50; solid waste generally, ch. 8.60; bonfires and rubbish fires, ch. 8.110. 

8.70.010. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Hall County Solid Waste Incinerator Ordinance." 
(Res. of 8-27-90, § 1; Code 1991, § 8.25.010) 
8.70.020. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
A.  Regulate the importation of solid waste into Hall County, Georgia, for disposal purposes in a manner so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to preserve the environmental resources of the county and to conserve the county landfill capabilities. 
B.  Regulate the location, operation and management of incineration facilities dealing with the storage, transfer, treatment or disposal of waste where the total incinerator capacity is greater than 250 pounds per hour. 
C.  Regulate the disposal of biomedical wastes which require special handling in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Hall County. 
(Res. of 8-27-90, § 2; Code 1991, § 8.25.020) 
8.70.030. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Principal use incinerator facility is an incinerator or incinerators at a single location where the incineration process is the primary business and where the facility has the total capacity of burning greater than 250 pounds per hour. 
(2)  Biomedical waste shall mean and include the following: 
(a)  Pathological waste, which means all recognizable human tissues and body parts which are removed during surgery, obstetrical procedures, autopsy, and laboratory procedures. 
(b)  Biological waste, which means bulk blood and blood products, exudates, secretions, suctionings, and other bulk body fluids which cannot or are not directly discarded into a municipal sewer system. 
(c)  Cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals, including cultures from medical and pathological laboratories, cultures and stocks of infectious agents from research and industrial laboratories, wastes from the production of biologicals, discarded live and attenuated vaccines, and culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate, and mix cultures. 
(d)  Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, their bedding, and other wastes from such animals which have been exposed to infectious agents, capable of causing disease in man, during research, production of biologicals, or testing of pharmaceuticals. 
(e)  Sharps, which means any discarded article which may cause punctures or cuts. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, items such as needles, IV tubing and syringes and needles attached, and scalpel blades. 
(f)  Chemotherapy waste, which means any disposable material which has come in contact with cytotoxic/antineoplastic agents (agents toxic to cells) and/or antineoplastic agents (agents that inhibit or prevent the growth and spread of tumors or malignant cells) during the preparation, handling, and administration of such agents. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, masks, gloves, gowns, empty IV tubing bags and vials, and other contaminated materials. The above waste must first be classified as empty, which means such quantity that it is not subject to other federal or state waste management regulations prior to being handled as biomedical waste. 
(g)  Discarded medical equipment and parts, not including expendable supplies and materials which have not been decontaminated, that were in contact with infectious agents. 
(3)  Incineration shall mean a controlled process by which solid, liquid and gaseous combustible wastes are burned and changed into gases and a residue produced which is relatively free of combustible materials. 
(4)  Incinerator shall mean all devices intended or used for the reduction or destruction of solid, liquid or gaseous wastes by burning. 
(5)  Incineration facility shall mean the combined incinerators under one ownership at a single location. 
(6)  Operator shall mean the person having direct supervision of daily field operations of an incineration facility to insure that the site operates in compliance with the permit. 
(7)  County commission shall mean the Hall County Board of Commissioners. 
(8)  Environmental quality board (EQB) shall mean a board of five citizens appointed by the Hall County Board of Commissioners to assist in the administration of this chapter. 
(9)  Uncontrolled emissions of dioxins shall mean the dioxins emissions measured from the incinerator at a location downstream of the last combustion chamber, but prior to the air pollution control equipment. 
(10)  Person shall mean the State of Georgia or any other state, or any agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, political subdivision, public or private corporation, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association or other entity in Georgia or any other state. The term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, special district empowered in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government. 
(11)  Incinerator ash shall mean the residue remaining after the incineration of solid waste. 
(Res. of 8-27-90, § 3; Code 1991, § 8.25.030) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 
8.70.040. - Permits required. 
A.  Owners and operators of incinerators shall be permitted as required by the rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. Any violation of the conditions of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources permit shall also be a violation of the conditions of any Hall County permit. 
B.  No person [shall] engage in the operation of a principal use incinerator and no person shall construct or operate a principal use incineration facility without having a permit issued by the Hall County Board of Commissioners pursuant to these regulations. 
C.  No person shall operate a biomedical waste incinerator or shall construct or operate a principal use medical waste incineration facility without having a valid principal use biomedical incinerator permit issued by the Hall County Board of Commissioners pursuant to these regulations. 
(Res. of 8-27-90, § 4; Code 1991, § 8.25.040) 
8.70.050. - Contents of permit application. 
A permit applicant shall prepare and file an incineration permit [application] with the Hall County Board of Commissioners. The permit application shall include all related documents submitted to the United States government and to the State of Georgia. 
A.  An application shall contain the following information: 
1.  A description of the company, information on its financial capability, and a detailed history of all its past activities in the field of incineration, including a synopsis of every other facility it has operated, and including a detailed account of all past and pending litigation, favorable and unfavorable. Include the record of any subsidiary or parent corporation having an interest greater than five percent of the outstanding shares of the applicant corporation. Also include a list of all past and present litigation, favorable and unfavorable, the subsidiary or parent corporation has been involved in. 
2.  Evidence of liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for sudden and $10,000,000.00 for non-sudden coverage. Evidence of $10,000,000.00 liability insurance is to run for five years subsequent to closure to cover post-closure costs. Also provide a history of any claims against the company at any site, including the record of any subsidiary or parent corporation as defined above. 
3.  Justification for and anticipated benefits from the project. 
4.  A description of the scope of the proposed project, including an estimated schedule of how much and what kinds of waste the facility would accept, where the material would come from, what pretreatment will be required of wastes unacceptable to the facility without such pretreatment, and how long the facility is expected to operate. 
5.  Yearly site operation expenses and an estimate of the costs for the lifetime of the project. 
6.  The proposed method of financing the project, including development, operation and closure stages. Include a list of the financial institution name(s) which will be funding construction. 
7.  Provide resumes of management personnel and the proposed number of employees and types of positions, including information on the training and experience required for each position, and safety precautions undertaken for the protection of personnel. 
8.  The anticipated date to begin construction. 
9.  The anticipated date to begin operation. 
10.  A detailed estimate of the types and amount of local government services required by the operator in each year. 
11.  A description of emergency procedures and safety and security precautions that will be in use at the facility. This information should include details on emergency assistance and emergency medical treatment that will be required from the area's medical facilities, Hall County Rescue Squad and community fire departments. 
12.  A description of the environmental protection measures to be taken by the applicant to prevent contamination in and around the facility site and the description of planned monitoring systems, with an estimated annual budget for each of these items. 
13.  A description of the environmental protection measures to be used during transportation of materials to and from the facility, with an estimated annual budget for these arrangements and an estimate of the volume of material to be transported during each year of operation. 
14.  A description of the site closure plan for the facility and the anticipated date of closure. 
15.  A description of anticipated need for post-closure care. 
B.  A map or other written material attached to the application shall include but is not limited to the following information: 
1.  Ownership. 
(a)  Name, address and telephone number of legal owner (and/or agent) of the subject property. 
(b)  Name, address and telephone number of professional persons responsible for the plat of survey. 
(c)  Description of any existing rights-of-way or easements affecting the property. 
(d)  Reference to any existing restrictive covenants on the property. 
2.  Description. Location of property tax map and parcel number. This description should include a reference to the deed book and page or other evidence of title the current property owner may have. 
3.  Features. Each map shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Drawn to scale of not less than 200 feet to the inch. 
(b)  Location sketch map showing relationship of the project to the surrounding area. 
(c)  Graphic scale, date, north arrow, and legend. 
(d)  Location of property with respect to surrounding property and roads, and the names and addresses of adjacent property owners according to county tax records. 
(e)  Zoning classification of the proposed project and adjacent property. 
(f)  The location of all boundary lines of the property. 
(g)  The total acreage of land in the project. 
(h)  The location of existing and/or platted streets, easements, buildings, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, sewers, water mains, culverts, wells and gas and electric transmission lines. 
(i)  The location of water bodies, water courses, groundwater aquifers, springs and other pertinent features. 
(j)  The location, dimensions, and acreage of all property proposed to be set aside for various uses on the applicant's property. 
(k)  The location of all test wells and/or borings. 
(l)  The location of the 500- and 100-year flood plain, and records of flood, including inundation due to dam break. 
(m)  The location of historic properties and gravesites, including any plans of relocation of graves and properties having historical significance. 
4.  Geological map. A map showing location of faults, dikes, sills and other pertinent geologic features, including bedrock type and strike and dip of any mappable bedding; the depth and degree of weathering (saprolite); identification and location of clay as to thickness, type and permeability; and location of the water table as to approximate depth, gradient and surface configuration. 
5.  Topographic map. A topographic map with contours at vertical intervals of not more than five feet at the same scale as to the project site map shall be included. Date, method of preparation and preparer of said survey shall be stated. 
6.  Transportation route map. A map showing proposed transportation routes to and from the facility site, including location of towns and emergency and safety facilities. Include an estimate of the volume of material to travel on each route. 
C.  The application shall address the following factors with regard to, but not limited to, on-site storage and/or disposal: 
1.  Contaminant flow to water table, including leachate monitoring, collecting and withdrawal systems; clay and synthetic liners (extra thickness, multiple liners); spill prevention and containment measures. 
2.  Contaminant movement with groundwater, including groundwater monitoring systems at the site and in potentially affected areas; subsurface "slurry wall" barriers' control and other groundwater withdrawals in the area. 
3.  Predictability of contaminant movement, based on preconstructed borings and groundwater modeling. 
4.  Potential effect on surface waters, planned collection systems for surface water run-off, and planned exclusion systems for surface water run-on. 
5.  Potential effect on aquifers, planned provisions for alternate water supply systems and facilities for immediate pumping and treatment of contaminated water. 
6.  Potential effect on public water supply, planned run-off collection and treatment and provisions for alternate supply systems. 
7.  Possibility of site flooding; and planned special facility design, special control dikes, and buffer zone setback in area of standard project flood area. 
8.  Potential human exposure to treated waste water, including planned safety procedures, clothing, instruction, and practice for employees; and planned oversized or redundant treatment capacity, effluent monitoring and automatic shutdown systems. 
9.  With respect to incineration, the nature and predictability of pollution movement, including planned stack height for incinerators with continuous stack monitoring and recording, until emission levels are predictable; and planned segregation of incompatible wastes. 
D.  In addition to the above, an application for principal use biomedical incineration facilities shall show the ability to comply with each provision of section 8.70.090 of this chapter. 
(Res. of 8-27-90, § 5; Code 1991, § 8.25.050) 
8.70.060. - Permit application processing fees. 
A.  The Hall County Board of Commissioners, upon the recommendation of the EQB, shall require a permit application fee in the amount of $100,000.00 to reimburse the county for the costs of any needed professional assistance that may be required to evaluate the permit application and amendments, verify its contents and evaluate the impact of such a permit on the community, public health and environment. This assistance may include, but shall not be limited to, the assistance of lawyers, biologists, geologists, engineers, chemists, hydrologists, emergency response, transportation and public health experts, land appraisers and professional testing laboratories. Funds not so expended in the legitimate review of the permit application shall be returned to the applicant. 
B.  Failure to provide these funds within 30 days of demand therefor shall result in termination of the permit process or cancellation of the permit. The Hall County Board of Commissioners may take legal action against the applicant for any costs incurred to the county up to the point of termination. 
(Res. of 8-27-90, § 6; Code 1991, § 8.25.060) 
8.70.070. - Review of permit application; permit issuance. 
A.  The permit applicant shall submit to the Hall County Board of Commissioners 12 copies of all information required by federal and state agencies for the facility for which it requests a county permit at the time such information is submitted to the state and federal government. The review procedure shall not begin nor shall the application be designated as complete until such time as all required data are submitted and the appropriate fees are paid, or suitable arrangements for payment have been approved by the Hall County Board of Commissioners. 
B.  A designee of the board of county commissioners shall compile copies of all reports, applications, minutes of the EQB meetings, reports by consultants and similar materials. These shall be placed in one location with free access by the public and availability of copying any portion or all of any document at cost. 
C.  Within 45 days of the submission of the application, the Hall County Board of Commissioners shall set a time for a public hearing so that the applicant can present its plans to the EQB and answer questions regarding the same. 
D.  After the hearing, the Hall County Board of Commissioners, after consultation with the EQB, shall have 60 days in which to determine if the application is complete and shall mail notice of its determination to the applicant. If it is not complete, the applicant will have six months to complete the application. However, the applicant may at the end of six months make a showing of cause to the Hall County Board of Commissioners, and, if the Hall County Board of Commissioners finds that the delay is justified and in good faith, they can grant the applicant a maximum three-month extension. 
E.  Each application shall require an analysis conducted by the county staff and a consultant or consultants selected by the Hall County Board of Commissioners upon the recommendation of the EQB. The analysis shall be completed within 90 days from the day the application is determined to be complete. In certain instances where the complexity of the application requires more than the usual 90 days, the county staff and/or consultant may request an additional 60 days from the Hall County Board of Commissioners, and the proponent has the option of requesting the Hall County Board of Commissioners to extend the analysis period to allow time for responding to staff and/or consultant requests for additional information on a completed application. In the event the integrated long-range solid waste management plan referred to in paragraph H.6 below shall not be completed by the end of the analysis period, the consultant or staff may request an additional 90 days to allow for the completion of the plan. 
F.  The Hall County staff and each consultant shall make reports on the application to the EQB at their meetings. 
G.  The EQB shall call a public meeting for public comment on the completed application along with the analysis of county staff and consultants. The purpose of this meeting shall be for public review of the application. The staff shall give notice by regular mail of the time and place of the public meeting to the owner and adjacent property owners as specified on the map. Said notice shall be mailed not less than 14 days prior to the date specified thereon. Notice of a public meeting shall be posted by the applicant on the proposed facility property on each and every street of access not less than 14 days prior to the date specified thereon. Said posted notice shall be at intervals of not greater than 1,500 feet. Notice shall also be placed by the applicant in the county newspaper not less than 14 days prior to the dates specified thereon. 
H.  Within 45 days after receipt of the final analysis, complete application and public comment, the EQB shall make a recommendation to the Hall County Board of Commissioners at a public meeting whether to accept the application, deny it, or accept it with modifications. This recommendation shall be made to the full board of commissioners, however, before making a recommendation to the county commissioners to accept the proposal or accept it with modifications, the EQB shall make the following determinations: 
1.  That there is a bona fide need for the facility and there is no reasonable alternative facility which will pose a lesser threat to the environment. 
2.  That the construction and operation of the facility will not pose an unreasonable health or environmental risk to the surrounding locality. 
3.  That the applicant (or facility operator) has the capability and financial resources to construct, operate and maintain the facility. 
4.  That the applicant or operator has taken or consented in writing to take any and all reasonable measures to comply with the applicable federal, state and local regulations and ordinances. 
5.  That the applicant's plan represents the best available technology for handling the waste for which the applicant has demonstrated that it will employ the best management practices in handling the waste at the proposed facility. 
6.  That the incineration facility is compatible with an integrated county long-range solid waste management plan, taking into account alternative methods of management such as recycling. 
7.  That the applicant has a valid contract with the operator of a state licensed landfill for the disposal of the projected ash production of the incineration facility for a three-year period. 
I.  At its next scheduled meeting, the Hall County Board of Commissioners shall make its decision to grant the permit, deny it, or grant it with specified conditions. 
J.  A permit shall be valid for no more than 24 months from the date it is granted by the Hall County Board of Commissioners unless the applicant begins construction of the facility prior to the expiration of the permit and continues to operate the facility according to specified conditions. 
(Res. of 8-27-90, § 7; Code 1991, § 8.25.070) 
8.70.080. - Control of emissions. 
A.  Emissions from all principal use incinerator facilities shall not cause any of the following ambient levels in milligrams per cubic meter at 77 degrees Fahrenheit and 29.92 inches of mercury (except for asbestos) to be exceeded beyond 300 feet of the incinerator stack: 

 
B.  After December 1, 1990 emissions from all principal use incinerator facilities shall not cause any of the following ambient levels and milligrams per cubic meter at 77 degrees Fahrenheit and 29.92 inches of mercury to be exceeded beyond 300 feet of the incinerator stack. 

 
C.  Ambient air concentrations shall be determined by using appropriate Environmental Protection Agency dispersion modeling procedures or other methods specified by the EQB. Ambient air concentrations are to be evaluated for an annual period over a calendar year, for 24-hour periods from midnight to midnight, for one-hour periods beginning on the hour, and for 30-minute periods beginning on the hour 30 minutes after the hour. The identification of each toxic air pollutant emitted and its corresponding emission rate shall be determined using mass balancing analysis, source testing, or other methods acceptable to the EQB. 
D.  For principal use incinerator facilities the emissions of hydrogen chloride shall not exceed four pounds per hour unless the emission is reduced by at least 99 percent by weight and mercury shall not exceed one pound per 24-hour period. 
E.  Special requirements for principal use biomedical incineration facility: 
1.  No person shall operate a principal use biomedical incineration facility unless: 
(a)  The dioxin emissions have been reduced by 99 percent or more of the uncontrolled emissions; 
(b)  The dioxin emissions have been reduced to ten nanograms or less per kilogram of waste burned. 
2.  For the purposes of demonstrating compliance with this paragraph, the owner or operator of a principal use biomedical waste incineration facility shall conduct a minimum of two annual source tests for the dioxins stack emissions using a test method approved by the State of California Air Resources Board, and a minimum of three sampling runs shall be conducted for the method. Annual source tests shall be conducted until at least two consecutive tests demonstrate compliance, at which time the frequency of future source tests is at the discretion of the EQB. For purposes of determining compliance with subparagraph (a)(i) [(1)a] of this rule, emissions shall be sampled simultaneously from the flue at the location where all the combustion is complete, but prior to the control equipment, and from the stack during source testing. For the purposes of determining compliance with subparagraph a(ii) [(1)b] of this rule, the source testing shall be conducted at the stack. The information regarding the composition (moisture content, and the amount of the total waste that is infectious, pathological, hazardous, or radioactive) and feed rate of the fuel charge during the source test shall be provided with the test results. The EQB can require additional necessary information regarding the composition of the waste. Source testing shall be conducted at the maximum waste firing capacity (plus or minus ten percent) allowed by the permit. A copy of all source test results conducted for purpose of demonstrating compliance with this rule shall be provided to the EQB. The EQB may in its discretion prescribe the testing company performing such test and may prescribe the time for performance of the test without advance notice to the owner or operator. 
3.  No person shall operate a principal use medical waste incinerator unless such individual who operates or maintains the incinerator obtains a certificate of training in medical waste incinerators issued by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers within nine months of the commencement of the training program. Copies of the training certificates for the operators and maintenance engineers shall be submitted to the EQB and shall be available for inspection at the facility along with the permit to operate. 
(Res. of 8-27-90, § 8; Code 1991, § 8.25.080) 
8.70.090. - Special procedures for transportation and handling of biomedical waste. 
No biomedical waste shall, for purposes of disposal in Hall County, be transported into Hall County or from place to place within Hall County except under the following conditions: 
A.  All transport shall be in refrigerated trucks maintaining a temperature of not more that 40 degrees Fahrenheit. 
B.  All trucks transporting medical waste shall be used exclusively for the transport of medical waste, and each truck shall have placed upon it at a prominent location a sign reading as follows: "Medical Waste Only—Not for Transportation of Other Materials." Such sign shall be in bright yellow letters readily discerned from a distance of 100 feet. 
C.  All biomedical waste shall be transported in leak-proof, puncture-proof boxes of the following specifications: 
Die cut body with lid attached. Blank sheet size 62 7/8 × 74 1/8 . Finished product size (inside dimensions) 18 × 18 × 23. 
Board: 400 double wall B/C flute, board combination 69/40/69/40/69 wet strength medium, water-proof adhesive. Board to be curtain coated with wax on both sides. All mediums to be wax impregnated. Box must have leakproof corners. Box will be self-locking. Outer liner of box to be of oyster white linerboard. Box to be printed four panels, one color. Print to include appropriate information on the contents and handling of the material contained in carton. 
Liner for above carton: Blank size: 39 13/16 × 74 5/8 . No joint scored sheet to fit above carton to further insure that it is leakproof. Board: 400 double wall B/C flute, board combination 69/40/69/40/69 wet strength medium, water-proof adhesive. Board to be curtain coated with wax on both sides. All mediums to be wax impregnated. 
D.  No biomedical waste shall be transported for purposes of disposal into Hall County, Georgia, in plastic bags having colorants which contain cadmium, arsenic, mercury, antimony, lead or selenium. The EQB may require random samplings of plastic bag material from any principal use medical incinerator facility to assure compliance with this section. The EQB may also require any owner or operator of a principal use biomedical waste incinerator to demonstrate that it has taken proper precautions and made proper arrangements with biomedical waste generators and handlers to assure compliance with this section. 
E.  No principal use biomedical waste incinerator may be operated in Hall County, Georgia, unless provisions have been made for storage of the waste in refrigerated facilities in accordance with state regulations. Such refrigerated storage facilities shall be served with a backup system of power generation preventing interruption by reason of electrical failure. The applicant shall show by calculation that adequate refrigerated space is provided to at least two days' volume of medical waste at the average rate of delivery. 
F.  No principal use biomedical waste incinerator facility shall be operated in Hall County, Georgia, unless the facility shall have in operation a screening device which automatically removes unburned particles or globules of a size of two centimeters or more and returns them to the incineration process. 
G.  Each owner or operator of a principal use biomedical incinerator in Hall County shall, at such time as may be determined by the EQB, at least two times per year, obtain from an EQB approved engineering firm, a putrescible matter determination test of the incinerator ash in accordance with Method A prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Performance Test Codes, paragraph 7.3. Should any test show that putrescible material is not being properly incinerated, the license for said incinerator shall be suspended until such time as the owner or operator thereof shall demonstrate to the EQB that appropriate corrective measures have been taken. 
H.  No principal use biomedical waste incinerator facility shall be operated in Hall County, Georgia, unless the incinerator ash produced by the facility contains no more than six percent by dry weight of combustible material as demonstrated at regular intervals of no more than six months apart. The incinerator ash shall be sampled and tested according to standard methods published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (PTC33) and American Society of Testing Materials. 
I.  The transportation of biomedical waste between medical facilities under one ownership for disposal purposes shall be exempt from the provisions of this section IX [8.70.090] provided that the total biomedical waste disposal by the owner of the facilities does not exceed 125 tons per year. 
(Res. of 8-27-90, § 9; Code 1991, § 8.25.090) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, tit. 10. 
8.70.100. - Enforcement. 
No building permit shall issue for construction of a principal use incinerator facility unless the property owner shall have fully complied with the terms of this chapter. A landowner shall comply with the terms hereof in order to obtain a permissive use permit under section 15-B-3 [subsection 3 of section 17.170.020] of the zoning regulations of Hall County. Any person, firm or corporation seeking permission to transport waste into Hall County pursuant to a resolution adopted on June 6, 1990, shall be required to produce written evidence that all waste to be incinerated will be disposed of at a facility meeting the terms of this chapter. 
(Res. of 8-27-90, § 10; Code 1991, § 8.25.100) 
8.70.110. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. In addition, any facility operated in violation hereof shall subject its owner to a fine of $1,000.00 per day for each day of illegal operation. 
(Res. of 8-27-90, § 11; Code 1991, § 8.25.110; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 8.80. - NOISE CONTROL[10] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Business licenses and regulations, tit. 5; abatement of nuisances, ch. 8.140; public peace, morals and welfare, tit. 9; zoning regulations, tit. 17. 

8.80.010. - Loud noises prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise which unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in Hall County, Georgia, and which is audible to a person of normal hearing ability more than 100 feet from the point of origin of this sound or noise. 
(Res. of 5-13-91, § 1; Code 1991, § 8.28.010) 
8.80.020. - Unlawful noises designated. 
The following are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
A.  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public area in the county except as a danger warning, the creation of any unreasonable loud or harsh sound by means of any signaling device and the sounding of any device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
B.  Radios, phonographs, similar devices. The using of, operating of, or permitting to be played, used or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for any producing or reproducing of sound in a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with a louder volume than is reasonably necessary for the convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle, or chamber in which this machine or device is operated, and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of the set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet from the room, building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
C.  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using of, operating of, or permitting to be played, used or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. 
D.  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity. 
E.  Noisy animals or birds. Anyone who keeps or maintains an animal or bird that unreasonably disturbs the comfort or repose of any person or persons because the animal or bird is emitting frequent or long continued sound or noise, and who continues to keep, maintain, or allow any animal or bird to so disturb the comfort or repose of any person or persons shall be deemed in violation of this section. This section shall apply to horses, livestock, poultry and other farm animals, provided they are maintained in accordance with the governing authority's zoning regulations or ordinances, with the following exception: Multiple roosters being raised on other than a bona-fide farm are subject to this section. Existing roosters are exempt until September 30, 2004. 
F.  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper county authorities. 
G.  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary or moving internal combustion engine or motor boat except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. Such are not in any event to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity. 
H.  School, courts, places of worship, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, instruction [institution] of learning, place of worship or court while in use, or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of that institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in those streets indicating a school, hospital or court is adjacent thereto. 
I.  Hawkers, peddlers, vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
J.  Noise to attract attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale. 
K.  Sound trucks. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other commercial purposes. The use of sound trucks for non-commercial purposes during hours and in places and with volume as would constitute this use as [is] a public nuisance. 
(Res. of 5-13-91, § 2; Code 1991, § 8.28.020; Res. of 4-8-04, § 1) 
Cross reference— Animals, tit. 6. 
8.80.030. - Exemptions. 
A.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, any activity which would naturally cause a loud noise such as a parade, Fourth of July fireworks display, construction of a building or similar type functions or activities which are properly permitted by the proper official or officials of Hall County, Georgia, shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance [chapter]. 
B.  It is also provided that the provisions of this ordinance [chapter] shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
1.  Any vehicle of the county while engaged in necessary public business. 
2.  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(Res. of 5-13-91, § 3; Code 1991, § 8.28.030) 
8.80.040. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 7-10-89, § 4; Code 1991, § 8.28.040; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 8.90. - PHOSPHATES CONTROL[11] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Business licenses and regulations, tit. 5; sewage collection and disposal, ch. 13.10. 

8.90.010. - Declaration of policy. 
It is declared to be the public policy of the county to encourage the use of clean, phosphate-free household laundry detergents and to prohibit the sale of household laundry detergents which contain more than 0.5 percent phosphorus by weight. The county finds that such use and sale will be a cost-effective way to reduce the amount of phosphorus in waste water discharge so as to protect Georgia's rivers and lakes downstream and promote health, safety and welfare, and prevent injury to human health, plant and animal life and property. It is vital to the health, well-being and welfare of present and future inhabitants of the county that these sources be protected against contamination and pollution. 
(Res. of 10-23-89, § 1; Code 1991, § 8.32.010) 
8.90.020. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
Hall County, Georgia means the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia. 
Household laundry detergent means a laundering cleaning compound in liquid, bar, spray, tablet, flake, powder, or other form used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. The term "household laundry detergent" shall not mean: 
1.  A dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner, degreasing compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner, or other substance that is intended to be used for nonlaundry cleaning purposes; 
2.  A detergent used in dairy, beverage, or food processing cleaning equipment; 
3.  A phosphorus acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener, acid cleaner, or metal conditioner; 
4.  A detergent used in hospitals, veterinary hospitals or clinics, or health care facilities or in agricultural production; 
5.  A detergent used by industry for metal cleaning or conditioning; 
6.  A detergent manufactured, stored or distributed for use or sale outside the county; 
7.  A detergent used in any laboratory, including a biological laboratory, research facility, chemical laboratory, and engineering laboratory; or 
8.  A detergent used in a commercial laundry that provides laundry services for a hospital, health care facility or veterinary hospital. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership or corporation. 
Phosphorous means elemental phosphorus. 
(Res. of 10-23-89, § 2; Code 1991, § 8.32.020) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 
8.90.030. - Percentage of legal phosphorus. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell at the retail level or to use a household laundry detergent which contains greater than 0.5 percent phosphorus by weight and is intended to be used for domestic clothes cleaning purposes. 
(Res. of 10-23-89, § 3; Code 1991, § 8.32.030) 
8.90.040. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 10-23-89, § 4; Code 1991, § 8.32.040; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
8.90.050. - Additional remedies. 
In addition to the penalty provided in section 8.90.040, the county may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this chapter. 
(Res. of 10-23-89, § 5; Code 1991, § 8.32.050) 
CHAPTER 8.100. - FIREWORKS[12] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention code, ch. 15.70. 

8.100.010. - State law adopted. 
O.C.G.A. title 25, chapter 10, "Regulation of Fireworks," as amended, is adopted as set forth herein. 
(Res. of 11-28-88, § 1(B); Code 1991, § 8.36.010) 
8.100.020. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term "fireworks" means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, balloons requiring fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, sparklers, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. The term "fireworks" shall not include model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content does not average more than 0.25 grains of explosive mixture per paper cap, or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns or other devices using such paper caps; nor shall the term "fireworks" include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes. 
(Res. of 11-28-88, § 1(B); Code 1991, § 8.36.020) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 
8.100.030. - Prohibited sale, possession or use. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to offer for sale at retail or wholesale, to use or explode or cause to be exploded, or to possess, manufacture, or transport any fireworks, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. 
(Res. of 11-28-88, § 1(B); Code 1991, § 8.36.030) 
8.100.040. - Permitted sale, possession or use. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the following: 
A.  The wholesale or retail sale of fireworks for use in a public exhibition or public display and the transportation of fireworks for such use, provided that any person selling at wholesale or retail or transporting fireworks for such use must have a duplicate copy of the permit which has been issued by the judge of the probate court to a person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership which has been authorized to hold a public exhibition or display; 
B.  Use by railroads or other transportation agencies of fireworks specifically designed and intended for signal purposes or illumination; 
C.  The sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletic or sports events or for use by military or police organizations; or 
D.  The manufacture of any fireworks not prohibited by Congress or any federal agency; the possession, transportation, and storage of any such fireworks by any manufacturer thereof; the possession, transportation, or distribution of any such fireworks to a distributor located outside this state; the sale of such fireworks by any such manufacturer to a distributor located outside this state; or the possession and transportation of such fireworks by any manufacturer or contractor or common carrier from the point of manufacture within this state to any point outside this state. 
(Res. of 11-28-88, § 1(B); Code 1991, § 8.36.040) 
8.100.050. - Permit for public displays. 
A.  Any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership desiring to conduct a public exhibition or display of fireworks shall first obtain a permit from the judge of the probate court of the county in which the exhibition or display is to be held. Application for a permit must be made in writing and filed with the judge not less than ten days prior to the date of the proposed exhibition or display of fireworks. The judge may grant a permit for the display on the following conditions: 
1.  That the display be conducted by a competent operator approved by the judge; 
2.  That the display shall be of such character as in the opinion of the judge, after site inspection by the fire marshal, will not be hazardous to persons or property; and 
3.  That the application be accompanied by a bond in the principal sum of $10,000.00, payable to the county in which the display is being held and conditioned for the payment of damages which may be caused either to persons or to property by reason of the display or, alternatively, that the application be accompanied by evidence that the applicant carries proper liability insurance for bodily injury in the amount of not less than $25,000.00 for each person and $50,000.00 for each accident and for property damage in the amount of not less than $25,000.00 and $50,000.00 aggregate, with an insurance company duly licensed by the insurance commissioner. 
B.  The permit provided for in subsection A of this Code section shall be limited to the time specified therein, such time not to exceed a two-week period. The permit shall not be transferable. In the event any fireworks bought and possessed under this Code section are not used by the licensee or in the event that there is a surplus or excess after the two-week period expires, it shall be the duty of the licensee to dispose of the fireworks by turning them over to the state fire marshal or any of his agents. Any fireworks bought pursuant to this Code section which are not used for the purpose of public display in the time specified shall, at the expiration of such time, be deemed contraband and subject to seizure by the state fire marshal, the Georgia State Patrol, or any sheriff or local police official, and shall be destroyed at the licensee's expense. 
C.  The judge of the probate court shall receive $10.00 for his services in granting or refusing the original permit and $1.00 for each copy issued, to be paid by the applicant. 
(Res. of 11-28-88, § 1(B); Code 1991, § 8.36.050) 
8.100.060. - Manufacture, storage or transportation. 
The annual license fee for any person, firm, or corporation conducting business in this state under section 8.100.040.D shall be $1,000.00 per year, payable to the safety fire commissioner. The license shall expire on December 31 of each year. The safety fire commissioner is authorized and directed to promulgate safety regulations relating to the manufacture, storage, and transportation of fireworks within this state in order to ensure the adequate protection of the employees of any such person, firm, or corporation and of the general public. The safety fire commissioner is further authorized and directed to conduct periodic inspections of the facilities of any person, firm, or corporation manufacturing, storing and transporting fireworks as provided in section 8.100.040.D in order to ensure compliance with fire safety rules and regulations. 
(Res. of 11-28-88, § 1(B); Code 1991, § 8.36.060) 
Cross reference— Business licenses and regulations, tit. 5. 
8.100.070. - Seizure of illegal fireworks. 
All fireworks manufactured, offered for sale, exposed for sale, or stored in violation of this chapter are declared to be contraband and may be seized, taken, and removed, or caused to be removed, and destroyed at the expense of the owner thereof by the state fire marshal, the Georgia State Patrol, or any sheriff or local police official. 
(Res. of 11-28-88, § 1(B); Code 1991, § 8.36.070) 
8.100.080. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to the high explosives covered by O.C.G.A. § 25-2-17 over which the safety fire commissioner has regulatory control. 
(Res. of 11-28-88, § 1(B); Code 1991, § 8.36.080) 
8.100.090. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 11-28-88, § 1(B); Code 1991, § 8.36.090; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 8.110. - BONFIRES AND RUBBISH FIRES[13] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste generally, ch. 8.60; incineration of solid waste, ch. 8.70; fire prevention code, ch. 15.70. 

8.110.010. - Prohibited burning; exceptions. 
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning at any place in the unincorporated areas of the county except as follows: 
A.  Carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for production or harvesting of crops; 
B.  The burning over of any forest land by the owners of such land; 
C.  For recreational purposes or cooking food for immediate human consumption; 
D.  Fires set for purposes of training fire-fighting personnel when authorized by the appropriate governmental entity and the guidelines set forth by the fire marshal are strictly observed; 
E.  Operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters and other flame-making equipment; 
F.  Setting and maintenance by contractors and tradesman of miscellaneous small fires necessary to such activities as street paving work, and installation or repair of utilities, provided that such fires are kept small in size, that no smoke emissions exceed 40 percent opacity, and that local ordinances and regulations do not prohibit such actions; 
G.  Disposal of all packing materials previously containing explosives, in accordance with U.S. Department of Labor Safety regulations. 
(Res. of 11-28-88, § 1(C); Code 1991, § 8.40.010) 
8.110.020. - Permitted burning. 
The following shall be permitted if adequate disposal facilities for the particular combustible materials involved are not reasonably available: 
A.  Reduction of leaves on the premises on which they fall by the person in control of the premises; 
B.  Destruction of combustible demolition or construction materials either on sight or transported to a burning facility approved by the fire marshal; 
C.  Disposal of tree limbs from storm damage; 
D.  For weed abatement, disease, and pest prevention; 
E.  Open burning in other than predominately residential areas for the purpose of land clearing or construction or right-of-way maintenance provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  Prevailing winds at the time of the burning are away from the major portion of the area's population; 
2.  The location of the burning is at least 1,000 feet from any dwelling located in a predominately residential area; 
3.  The amount of dirt on or in the material being burned is minimized; 
4.  Heavy oils, asphaltic materials, items containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any materials other than plant growth are not being burned; 
5.  Not more than one pile 60 feet by 60 feet, or equivalent, is being burned within a nine-acre area at one time; 
provided, however, that in no event shall the open burning of more than 100 cubic yards per day of material described in subsection E of this section be permitted unless the person performing such burning shall have first given two days' written notice of the time and place of such burning to the fire marshal. 
(Res. of 11-28-88, § 1(C); Code 1991, § 8.40.020) 
8.110.030. - Prohibited smoke. 
Except for a reasonable period to get a fire started, no smoke of a shade darker than a #2 of the Ringelmann Chart, or equivalent opacity, shall be emitted by any source of open burning listed in subsections A and B of section 8.110.020. 
(Res. of 11-28-88, 1(C); Code 1991, § 8.40.030) 
8.110.040. - Open burning during air pollution episodes. 
During an air pollution episode declared by the proper authorities, no open burning of any kind shall be permitted unless open burning is required in the performance of an official duty of any public office, or a fire is necessary to thwart or prevent a hazard which cannot be properly managed by any other means, or is necessary for the protection of public health. 
(Res. of 11-28-88, § 1(C); Code 1991, § 8.40.040) 
8.110.050. - Open burning regulations. 
The following regulations shall apply to open burning which is authorized in the unincorporated areas of the county: 
A.  No person shall kindle or maintain an open fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained without a permit or other proper authorization. 
B.  No person shall kindle or maintain an open fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any private land unless: 
1.  The location is not less than 50 feet from any structure and adequate provision is made to prevent fire from spreading within 50 feet of any structure; or 
2.  The fire is contained in an approved waste burner located safely not less than 15 feet from any structure. 
C.  Open fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until such fire is extinguished. Such person shall have a garden hose connected to the water supply, or other fire extinguishing equipment, readily available for use. 
D.  The fire marshal may further regulate or prohibit any or all open burning when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous and may determine whether a permit is required or otherwise give authorization for open burning authorized by sections 8.110.010 and 8.110.020. 
(Res. of 11-28-88, § 1(C); Code 1991, § 8.40.050) 
8.110.060. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 8.120. - CLEAN INDOOR AIR ORDINANCE[14] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference— Business regulations, tit. 5. 

8.120.010. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Hall County Clean Indoor Air Ordinance." 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 8.44.010) 
8.120.020. - Findings and purpose. 
The board of commissioners does hereby find: 
1.  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major source of the contributors to indoor air pollution; and 
2.  Reliable studies, including those published by the Surgeon General of the United States, have shown that inhalation of the smoke injected into an enclosed atmosphere by the use of tobacco products by others is a cause of and contributing factor of disease, including, without limitation, lung cancer, in healthy non-smokers. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health of non-smokers in public places, and to provide reserved areas for those who wish to smoke therein. This chapter is not intended to, and shall not be construed, to deny or to inhibit access to public buildings. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 8.44.020) 
8.120.030. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  Bar or cocktail lounge means an areas which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. Although a restaurant may contain a bar or cocktail lounge, the term "bar or cocktail lounge" shall not include the restaurant dining area. 
B.  Designated smoking area means any area, marked by a conspicuous and easily readable sign, where smoking is permitted. 
C.  Health care facility means any hospital, nursing home, or any other institution equipped for long-term medical care. 
D.  Kitchen means any food preparation area in any public place, from which food is served to customers, employees, residents of health care facilities, or any other person. 
E.  Person in charge means the person who ultimately controls, governs, or directs activities upon a public vehicle or within a place regulated by this chapter, regardless of the person's status as owner, lessee, or governmental official. 
F.  Place of work means an enclosed room where more than one employee works. 
G.  Public place means any enclosed area, room or vehicle, used by the general public or serving as a place of work, including but not limited to restaurants, stores, offices, waiting rooms, trains, buses, educational or health care facilities, auditoriums, arenas, and assembly and meeting rooms open to the public. 
H.  Smoke or smoking means the carrying of any lighted tobacco product. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 8.44.030) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 
8.120.040. - Regulation of smoking. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person may smoke in any public place, including any place of work. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 8.44.040) 
8.120.050. - Exceptions. 
The regulation of smoking pursuant to this chapter shall not apply in the following areas: 
A.  Designated smoking areas in restaurants and eating establishments. 
B.  Bars, retail alcoholic beverage package stores, and cocktail lounge areas. 
C.  Offices occupied exclusively by smokers and which are not subject to public access in the ordinary course of business. 
D.  Banquet or meetings rooms, when used for private functions, whether in public or privately owned buildings. 
E.  Retail establishments in which the sale of tobacco products designed for smoking comprise more than 50 percent of receipts. 
F.  Designated smoking areas, provided that no designated smoking area shall comprise more than 25 percent of the total area for occupancy by or access to patrons or employees in any public place which has been designated non-smoking. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Res. of 1-25-93, § 1; Code 1991, § 8.44.050) 
8.120.060. - Places where smoking prohibited. 
Smoking is absolutely prohibited, and no designated smoking areas may be established, in the following areas: 
A.  Kitchens in any public place. 
B.  Health-care facilities; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to private patient rooms occupied only by smoking patients. 
C.  Passenger elevators or stairwells. 
D.  Public meetings or public school or college classrooms, while meetings or classes are in session; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to classrooms where demonstration smoking is taking place as part of a lesson or as part of medical or scientific experiment. 
E.  The seating area of any indoor theater. 
F.  A licensed child care facility. 
G.  Any place on a public transportation vehicle which is used by the public and which is clearly designated by a no-smoking sign. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 8.44.060) 
8.120.070. - Posting of signs. 
"No Smoking" signs shall be clearly, sufficiently, and conspicuously posted in every public place where smoking is regulated by this chapter by the person in charge of such public place. Such signs shall contain letters of not less than two inches in height or the international symbol for "No Smoking," consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle, with a red bar bisecting the circle. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 8.44.070) 
8.120.080. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership who smokes or any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership who knowingly allows smoking in violation of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 8.44.080; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
8.120.090. - Enforcement. 
A.  Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Hall County Sheriff's Department, which may initiate any action to seek enforcement of this chapter either on its own motion or upon information provided by any citizen. Any officer of the Hall County Public Safety Enforcement Division also may initiate any action for any violation of this chapter which occurs in his/her immediate presence or upon information provided by any citizen. 
[B.  Reserved.] 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 8.44.090) 
8.120.100. - Declaration of smoke-free environment. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed, interpreted, or construed to restrict or to prohibit any person in charge of any public place to designate that public place a smoke-free environment and to prohibit smoking in areas which otherwise would be permitted by this chapter. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 8.44.100) 
8.120.110. - Other applicable laws. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed, interpreted, or construed to permit smoking in any public place or area where smoking is prohibited or restricted by any other applicable law. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 8.44.110) 
8.120.120. - Effective date. 
The effective date of this chapter shall be 90 days from and after the date of adoption hereof by the Board of Commissioners of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 11-9-92; Code 1991, § 8.44.120) 
CHAPTER 8.130. - BRADY BILL INVESTIGATION FEE 

 

8.130.010. - Authorization for sheriff to collect fee. 
The passage of The Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act having been signed by the President of the United States on February 28, 1994, provides for a five-day waiting period and an electronic records check of all prospective hand gun purchasers or receivers. The sheriff of Hall County, Georgia, is authorized and directed to charge and collect a $15.00 fee with each Brady Intent to Purchase Form received by the Hall County Sheriff's Office for investigative review. 
(Res. of 7-28-94, § 1; Code 1991, § 8.48.010) 
CHAPTER 8.140. - ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES[15] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of July 13, 2006, § 1, amended Ch. 8.140, in its entirety, to read as herein set out in §§ 8.140.010—8.140.240. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Animals, tit. 6; solid waste, ch. 8.60; noise control, ch. 8.80; sewage collection and disposal, ch. 13.10; disposal of wastewater by land application, ch. 13.30; buildings and construction, tit. 15; zoning regulations, tit. 17. 

8.140.010. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
(1)  " Applicable codes " means 
(A)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(B)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; and 
(C)  Any building codes adopted by ordinance of Hall County prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated adopted by Hall County after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
(2)  " Closing " means causing a dwelling, building or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
(3)  " Drug crime " means an act which is a violation of Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
(4)  " Dwellings, buildings or structures " means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this chapter, the term "dwellings, buildings or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
(5)  " Governing authority " means the Hall County Board of Commissioners. 
(6)  " Interested parties " means: 
(A)  Owner; 
(B)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(C)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(D)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right of way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(E)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
(6)  " Municipality " means any incorporated city within Hall County. 
(7)  " Owner " means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
(9)  " Public authority " means any member of Hall County, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the county or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, structures or properties in Hall County. 
(10)  " Public officer " means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and by this chapter of the Official Code of Hall County to exercise the powers prescribed by such ordinances or any agent of such officer or officers. 
(11)  " Repair " means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the unincorporated areas of Hall County, Georgia, where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
(12)  " Resident " means any person residing in Hall County where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.020. - Duties of owner. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the unincorporated areas of Hall County to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes, or such other provisions of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, and/or state and federal laws which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes, ordinances, regulations or statutes. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.030. - Appointment of a public officer. 
The Hall County Board of Commissioners appoint and designate the Hall County Building Official, Hall County Fire Chief, Hall County Fire Marshall, Hall County Enforcement Officers and his/her designees as public officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.040. - Investigation by a public officer. 
Whenever a request is filed with a public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the unincorporated area of Hall County charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.050. - Public officer's findings. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of Hall County. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; and 
(6)  Uncleanliness. 
(b)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.060. - Powers of a public officer. 
The public officer may exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose of this chapter, including the following powers in addition to others granted in this chapter: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the unincorporated area of Hall County in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.070. - Issuance of complaint in rem by a public officer. 
If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(a)  The complaint shall: 
(1)  Identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; 
(2)  Identify the interested parties; 
(3)  State with particularity the factual basis for the action; and 
(4)  Contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(b)  The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the Hall County Magistrate Court, at a date and time certain. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.080. - Service of complaints, orders and other notices, lis pendens notice. 
Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this chapter shall be served in the following manner: 
(a)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.090. - Hearing date. 
Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the Hall County Magistrate Court. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.100. - Answer, appearance and testimony. 
The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.110. - Courts' findings. 
If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, regulations or laws; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(a)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with all applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(b)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.120. - Posting of property. 
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to section 8.140.210 of this chapter or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.130. - Salvage of materials. 
If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and Hall County are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.140. - Demolition costs. 
The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the Hall County Tax Commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.150. - Lien. 
The lien provided for in section 8.140.140 of this chapter shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under section 8.140.080(c) of this chapter. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.160. - Notice to tax commissioner. 
Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this chapter, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this chapter shall transmit to the Hall County Tax Commissioner a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.170. - Collection of lien by tax commissioner. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the Hall County Tax Commissioner to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically in Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. A county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to this chapter in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The Hall County Tax Commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the county whose lien is being collected. 
(b)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this code section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the Hall County Tax Commissioner of the final determination of costs in accordance with this chapter. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this chapter. 
(c)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this chapter shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this chapter together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the Hall County in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.180. - Release of certain liens. 
Hall County may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with Hall County agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.190. - Appeal to superior court. 
Where the abatement action does not commence in the Hall County Superior Court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the Hall County Superior Court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.200. - Applicability to private property. 
All the provisions of this chapter including method and procedure may also be applied to private property where there exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, building inspector or Hall County Enforcement Officer that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima-facie evidence that said property is in violation of this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.210. - Injunction. 
Any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may petition to the Hall County Superior Court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be had by the court on petitions within 20 days. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this section. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.220. - Citations for ordinance violations. 
In addition to the procedures and remedies in this chapter, public officers may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance of the Hall County, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and seek to enforce such citations in the Hall County Magistrate Court or other court with proper jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.230. - Eminent domain. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing the owner or owners of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of this state nor as permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
8.140.240. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership, including an owner, occupant or tenant, who: 
(a)  Maintains a condition as provided in section 8.140.050 of this code, or 
(b)  Fails to comply with any notice or order provided for in this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Res. of 7-13-06, § 1) 
CHAPTER 8.150. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 

8.150.010. - General provisions 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the Hall County separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the Hall County separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this chapter are to: 
1.  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the Hall County separate storm sewer system by any person; 
2.  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the Hall County separate storm sewer system; 
3.  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the Hall County separate storm sewer system; and, 
4.  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
B.  Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply throughout the unincorporated area of Hall County. 
C.  Compatibility with other regulations. This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
D.  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
E.  Responsibility for administration. Hall County shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 12-14-06(1), § 1) 
8.150.020. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this chapter which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the Hall County separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 8.150.030A. of this chapter. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
1.  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
2.  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the Hall County separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b(14)). 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Hall County Separate Storm Sewer System means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, Hall County streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
1.  Owned or maintained by Hall County; 
2.  Not a combined sewer; and 
3.  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this chapter, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Res. of 12-14-06(1), § 1) 
8.150.030. - Prohibitions. 
A.  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the Hall County separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
1.  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
2.  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by Hall County as being necessary to protect public health and safety; and 
3.  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non- stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the State and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the Hall County separate storm sewer system. 
B.  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the Hall County separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
1.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
2.  A person violates this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the Hall County separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
3.  Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the appropriate sewer authority. 
4.  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written Notice of violation from Hall County requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to Hall County Engineering. 
(Res. of 12-14-06(1), § 1) 
8.150.040. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to Hall County Engineering prior to allowing discharges to the Hall County separate storm sewer system. 
(Res. of 12-14-06(1), § 1) 
8.150.050. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
A.  Hall County shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
1.  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of Hall County. 
2.  The owner or operator shall allow Hall County ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
B.  Hall County shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of Hall County to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
1.  Hall County may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to Hall County. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
C.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of Hall County and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
D.  Unreasonable delays in allowing Hall County access to a facility is a violation of this chapter. 
E.  If Hall County has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and Hall County is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then Hall County may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Res. of 12-14-06(1), § 1) 
8.150.060. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
A.  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the Hall County separate storm sewer system, State Waters, or Waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
B.  Said person shall notify Hall County Engineering in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to Hall County Engineering within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
C.  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified by the owner/operator or other person in charge of the facility at the time of the release. 
D.  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this chapter. 
(Res. of 12-14-06(1), § 1) 
8.150.070. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Violations. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
2.  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, Hall County is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. Hall County is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in section 8.150.070E. 
B.  Notice of violation. Whenever Hall County finds that a violation of this chapter has occurred, hall county may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
1.  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this Chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to Hall County Magistrate Court by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
2.  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and, 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
C.  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of Hall County. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before Hall County Magistrate Court shall take place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the appropriate authority or their designee shall be final. 
D.  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision of Hall County, then representatives of Hall County may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
E.  Costs of abatement of the violation. 
1.  Within 60 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 30 days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
2.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to Hall County by reason of such violation. 
F.  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as Hall County shall deem appropriate, after Hall County has taken one or more of the actions described above, Hall County may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
G.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, Hall County may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in Hall County Magistrate Court to answer charges for such violation. Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
H.  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 8.140 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia as well as by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
I.  Remedies not exclusive. 
1.  The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and Hall County may seek cumulative remedies. 
2.  Hall County may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Res. of 12-14-06(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 8.160. - LITTER CONTROL 

8.160.010. - General provisions. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this chapter are: 
1.  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout Hall County of any and all littering on public or private property; and, 
2.  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of Hall County and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
B.  Applicability. This chapter shall apply to all public and private property within Hall County. 
C.  Compatibility with other regulations. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other chapter, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other chapter, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
D.  Severability. If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(Res. of 12-14-06(2), § 1) 
8.160.020. - Definitions 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
A.  Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. §16-7-51(4). 
B.  Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(Res. of 12-14-06(2), § 1) 
8.160.030. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in Hall County or any waters in Hall County unless: 
A.  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; or 
B.  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property. 
(Res. of 12-14-06(2), § 1) 
8.160.040. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Res. of 12-14-06(2), § 1) 
8.160.050. - Construction site litter control. 
Construction site operators shall control waste such as discarded building material, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste to prevent it from entering or causing adverse impacts to Hall County Separate Storm Sewer System or state waters. 
(Res. of 12-14-06(2), § 1) 
8.160.060. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, may be subject to civil liability, may be restrained by injunction or may be subject to criminal liability as set forth in paragraph C. of this section. 
B.  Evidence. 
1.  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this chapter, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this chapter. 
2.  Except as provided in 8.160.060(B)(1), whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this chapter is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this chapter. 
C.  Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as follows: 
1.  As provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 1.50.020 with a fine of not less than $200.00 for each violation in the discretion of the Court. 
2.  In addition to the fine set out in 8.160.060(C)(1) the violator shall reimburse Hall County for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by Hall County; and 
3.  a.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pickup and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pickup and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pickup and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and, 
4.  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this chapter. 
(Res. of 12-14-06(2), § 1) 
CHAPTER 8.170. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

8.170.010. - General provisions. 
This chapter shall be known as "stream buffer protection." 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 3) 
8.170.020. - Findings and purposes. 
A.  The Board of Commissioners of Hall County, Georgia finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
1.  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
2.  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
3.  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
4.  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
5.  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
6.  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
7.  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
8.  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
9.  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
10.  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; and 
11.  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
B.  It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
1.  Create buffer zones along the streams of Hall County, Georgia for the protection of water resources; and 
2.  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 3) 
8.170.030. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by this chapter) lying adjacent to the stream. 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes, but is not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that does not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by Hall County, Georgia required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by this chapter extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
1.  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; or 
2.  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
3.  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, Hall County, Georgia may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 3) 
8.170.040. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.170.030. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law, and approval or exemption from these requirements does not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 3) 
8.170.050. - Grandfather provisions. 
This chapter shall not apply to the following activities: 
A.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this chapter. 
B.  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
C.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this chapter. 
D.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of this chapter. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 3) 
8.170.060. - Exemptions. 
The following specific activities are exempt from this chapter. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
A.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
1.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
2.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
3.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
4.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
5.  Unpaved foot trails, paths and elevated boardwalks; or 
6.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
B.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.170.060(A). 
C.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this chapter takes effect or approved under the terms of this chapter. 
D.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this chapter takes effect or approved under the terms of this chapter, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as are necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
E.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property is exempt. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the Hall County Engineering Department on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by Hall County, Georgia to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
F.  Forestry, silviculture and agricultural activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land-disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
After the effective date of this chapter, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.170.080. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 3) 
8.170.070. - Stream buffer and setback requirements. 
All land development activity subject to this chapter shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. This buffer shall not be altered or reduced by any method in this chapter. 
B.  An additional setback shall be maintained beyond the natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Stormwater management structures shall be allowed within this setback however, all other grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized. The setback shall be either of the following dimensions: 
1.  For a uniform distance of 25 feet, measured horizontally, from the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer boundary. 
2.  For a variable distance, measured horizontally, from the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer boundary, provided that the total area encompassed by this impervious setback on the land development activity is equal to, or greater than, the total area that would be encompassed by the uniform distance of 25 feet. 
C.  On properties between ten acres and 49.9 acres, the impervious setback area may be reduced such that the sum of the undisturbed buffer area and the impervious setback area do not exceed 12 percent of the total property area of the development activity. However, in no case shall the 50-foot undisturbed buffer be reduced or altered to achieve this percentage. 
D.  On properties of 50 acres or larger, the impervious setback area may be reduced such that the sum of the undisturbed buffer area and the impervious setback area do not exceed eight percent of the total property area of the development activity. However, in no case shall the 50-foot undisturbed buffer be reduced or altered to achieve this percentage. 
E.  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback, except that existing septic systems constructed prior to the effective date of this chapter may be maintained or replaced, but not enlarged within the required buffer and setback area. 
F.  For water supply watershed districts subject to the requirements of Chapter 17.225 of Title 17 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, the minimum stream buffer setbacks shall be the greater of the applicable requirements of this chapter or those in Chapter 17.225 of Title 17 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 3) 
8.170.080. - Buffer and setback variance procedures. 
Variances from the buffer and setback requirements in this chapter may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
A.  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this chapter, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this chapter, and the Hall County Engineering Department finds and determines that the requirements of this chapter prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the Hall County Engineering Department may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance requires mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
B.  Except as provided in § 8.170.080A. above, the Board of Commissioners of Hall County, Georgia shall grant no variance from any provision of this chapter without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the Board of Commissioners of Hall County, Georgia. The Board of Commissioners of Hall County, Georgia shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within Hall County, Georgia. Hall County, Georgia shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
1.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
2.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the chapter would create an extreme hardship. 
Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this chapter, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
C.  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
1.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
2.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
3.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
4.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
5.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
6.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
7.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and, 
8.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
D.  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
1.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
2.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
3.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
4.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
5.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; and, 
6.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 3) 
8.170.090. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 3) 
8.170.100. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
A.  Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
1.  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and, 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
2.  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and, 
3.  Any other documentation that Hall County, Georgia may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the requirements of this chapter are addressed in the approval process. 
B.  During development activities, and all phases of construction, the buffer perimeters shall be marked with a temporary sign at an interval of one per parcel, or every 100 feet, whichever is less. Signs shall remain in place prior to and during approved construction activities. The sign shall contain the following statement "Streamside Buffer - Do Not Remove or Alter Existing Native Vegetation." Other plainly visible marking methods are acceptable in lieu of the signage, including, but not limited to tree save fencing, painted markings on trees, or orange silt fence. 
C.  Replanting of the buffer shall be required where buffer disturbance has occurred. The replanting shall be accomplished within 14 days of the buffer impact using native vegetation or by following current Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) conservation practice standards. The Hall County Engineer or his/her designee shall approve the revegetation plan. 
D.  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 3) 
8.170.110. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon Hall County, Georgia, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 3) 
8.170.120. - Inspection. 
Hall County, Georgia may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist Hall County, Georgia in making such inspections. Hall County, Georgia shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 3) 
8.170.130. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this chapter. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
A.  Notice of violation. If Hall County, Georgia determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured the appropriate permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
1.  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Magistrate Court of Hall County, Georgia by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). 
B.  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, Hall County, Georgia shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, Hall County, Georgia may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
1.  Stop-work order. Hall County, Georgia may issue a stop-work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop-work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop-work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
2.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. Hall County, Georgia may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
3.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. Hall County, Georgia may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the Notice of Violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as Hall County, Georgia may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
4.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as Hall County, Georgia shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after Hall County, Georgia has taken one or more of the actions described above, Hall County, Georgia may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
5.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, any applicant, responsible person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 3) 
8.170.140. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
A.  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the Hall County Engineering Department pursuant to this chapter, may appeal in writing within 15 days after the issuance of such decision or order to the Board of Commissioners of Hall County, Georgia and shall be entitled to a hearing before the Board of Commissioners of Hall County, Georgia within 45 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
B.  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the Hall County Engineering Department, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 3) 
CHAPTER 8.180. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

8.180.100. - General provisions. 
This chapter shall be known as "post development stormwater management for new development and redevelopment." 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.110. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This chapter seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
A.  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
B.  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
C.  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
D.  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
E.  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
F.  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and, 
G.  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.120. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.180.130. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
A.  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
B.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
C.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by Hall County, Georgia to be a hotspot land use; or, 
D.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in A. and B. above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.130. - Exemptions. 
The following activities are exempt from this chapter: 
A.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
B.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
C.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; 
D.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by Hall County, Georgia; and 
E.  Residential subdivisions of six lots or less with all lots accessing existing Hall County, Georgia roads. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.140. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The Hall County Engineer and his designees are hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.150. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.160. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.170. - Stormwater design manual. 
For the stormwater design manual, Hall County, Georgia will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this chapter. All references to the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM) are presumed to be the "latest edition" as defined on the GSMM website at www.georgiastormwater.com. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
Article II. - Definitions 

8.180.200. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and Hall County, Georgia or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination system (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by Hall County, Georgia to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this chapter, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Private residential subdivision means a residential subdivision in which streets, parks, drains, easements, and public grounds shown on the final plat are dedicated to the use of the applicable homeowner's association forever. 
Project means a land development project. 
Public residential subdivision means a residential subdivision in which the streets, parks, drains, easements, and public grounds shown on the final plat are dedicated to use of the public forever. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions as defined in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 17.20.1210. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
ARTICLE III. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

8.180.300. - Permit application requirements. 
A.  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
B.  Unless specifically exempted by this chapter, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to Hall County, Georgia a permit application on a form provided by Hall County, Georgia for that purpose. 
C.  Unless otherwise exempted by this chapter, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
1.  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.180.310; 
2.  Stormwater management plan in accordance with Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.180.320; 
3.  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.180.330, if applicable; 
4.  Performance bond in accordance with Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.180.340 ; if applicable; and, 
5.  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with Official Code of Hall County, Georgia §§ 8.180.350 and 8.180.360. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.310. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the land owner or developer meet with Hall County, Georgia for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
A.  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
B.  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
C.  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: 
1.  Preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; 
2.  Location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; 
3.  Flow paths; 
4.  Location of floodplain/floodway limits; 
5.  Relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and 
6.  Preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
Local watershed plans, the county greenspace projection plan (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.320. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this chapter, including the performance criteria set forth in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.180.400 through § 8.180.480. 
This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and be prepared under the direct supervisory control of either a registered professional engineer or a registered landscape architect licensed in the State of Georgia. The reports, documents and other materials required by Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.180.320(C), (D) and (E) shall be prepared under the direct supervisory control of a registered professional engineer, who shall seal and sign the work. Portions of the overall plan may be prepared and stamped by a registered land surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia as appropriate, such as boundary surveys, contour maps, and erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this chapter are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. This includes: 
A.  Common address and legal description of site; 
B.  Vicinity map; 
C.  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. 
1.  The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, shall include: 
a.  A topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; 
b.  All perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; 
c.  All existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; 
d.  Direction of flow and exits from the site; 
e.  Analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and 
f.  Methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
2.  For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
D.  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: 
1.  A topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; 
2.  Total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; 
3.  Calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub-basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.180.400 to § 8.180.480; 
4.  Location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; 
5.  Documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; and 
6.  Methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.180.400 to § 8.180.480 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
E.  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: 
1.  A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; 
2.  A narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; 
3.  Cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; 
4.  Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); 
5.  Documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.180.400 to § 8.180.480; 
6.  Drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and 
7.  Where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
F.  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
G.  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with Chapter 8.40 of Title 8 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia or NPDES Permit for Construction Activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
H.  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: 
1.  The arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; 
2.  Information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; 
3.  Descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; 
4.  Density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and 
5.  A description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
I.  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
J.  Maintenance access easements. 
1.  Stormwater management facility easements, residential. The developer shall execute 20-foot easements in favor of Hall County, Georgia to include the following: 
a.  An easement encompassing the entire perimeter of the facility and shall be measured from the 100-year stormwater ponding limits or six inches above the elevation of the overflow; 
b.  A 20-foot access easement measured ten feet in both directions from the appropriate centerline of all associated piping, channels, ditches, streams or other areas that are designed for stormwater to flow to and from the stormwater management facility; 
c.  A 20-foot easement connecting the facility to the nearest public road; 
The easement(s) will be in favor of Hall County, Georgia to allow Hall County, Georgia to inspect and maintain the facility as necessary. No obstruction shall be built, constructed, or planted that would inhibit proper function of the facility, associated drainage systems, or the easement(s). No portion of the easement(s) to and from the Hall County, Georgia road and around the perimeter of the facility will be steeper than a grade of 3:1. The access easement must be clearly staked at the time of final platting. 
2.  Stormwater management facility easements, nonresidential. The property owner shall execute a 20- foot drainage easement surrounding the entire perimeter of the facility in favor of Hall County, Georgia to allow Hall County, Georgia to inspect and observe the facility as necessary. The easement boundary shall be measured from the 100-year stormwater ponding limit or six inches above the elevation of the overflow. The property owner shall additionally grant permission to Hall County, Georgia, its authorized agents and employees, to enter upon the property and to inspect the facilities whenever Hall County, Georgia deems necessary. Hall County, Georgia maintains the right to make emergency repairs to the facility as deemed necessary. No obstruction shall be built, constructed or planted that would inhibit proper function of the facility, associated drainage systems, or the easement(s). 
K.  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by Hall County, Georgia as provided in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.180.510, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.180.330. 
L.  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the Hall County Engineering Department that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.330. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which Hall County, Georgia requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by Hall County, Georgia, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by Hall County, Georgia prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, Hall County, Georgia may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.180.610 to § 8.180.630. 
Hall County, Georgia, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this Chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.340. - Performance and maintenance bonds. 
Residential stormwater management systems must be bonded as provided in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 16.30.360. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.350. - Application procedure. 
A.  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the Hall County Planning Department. 
B.  Permit Applications shall include the items set forth in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.180.300 above (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
C.  Hall County, Georgia shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
D.  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, Hall County, Georgia shall provide the applicant redline comments and a checklist of items needing revision. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.180.350(C) above and this subparagraph shall apply to such resubmittal. 
E.  Upon a finding by Hall County, Georgia that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this Chapter, Hall County, Georgia may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
F.  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this chapter and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
2.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
3.  Hall County, Georgia shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
4.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by Hall County, Georgia; and, 
5.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.180.510. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.360. - Application review fees. 
The fee for review of any stormwater management permit application shall be based on the fee structure established by Hall County, Georgia and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.370. - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the Hall County Engineering Department which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of Hall County, Georgia that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
A.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
B.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
C.  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
D.  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
E.  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.380. - Stormwater management facilities, design considerations. 
A.  Fencing. Fences and warning signs will be required on all detention ponds, constructed wetlands, retention ponds or similar devices where the sides of the device adjacent to the water are steeper than a 3:1 grade and the depth of the water in the pond is greater than three feet during a 25-year storm event. Fences shall be five feet tall with a fourteen foot wide gate. Fences shall be chain link or other approved material. The gate shall be locked with a Master Number One lock that is keyed as per the Hall County Engineer. Residential fences shall be located on the outside edge of the 20- foot perimeter easement. Commercial fencing should be located on the outside edge of the 20-foot perimeter easement when possible, but may be located elsewhere with the Hall County Engineering Department's approval. 
B.  Survey marker. A concrete survey marker shall be placed in the near vicinity of the stormwater management facility. The marker shall be a minimum of five inches by five inches in width and be embedded one foot into the ground. The marker shall have a "PK" nail embedded in the top. The marker must be placed above the high water elevation of the facility and within the drainage easement area. Alternate survey markers are allowed with prior approval from the Hall County Engineer. 
C.  Outlet structure and piping construction. Outlet structures and piping for residential above-ground detention facilities must be constructed of concrete to be eligible for acceptance into the Hall County, Georgia maintenance system. 
D.  Residential underground stormwater management facilities. Residential underground stormwater management facilities must be constructed of materials with a service life of greater than 50 years, and must be designed to allow for proper inspection and maintenance. Residential underground facilities will not be accepted into the Hall County, Georgia maintenance system until the subdivision has reached a point of 85 percent build-out, or greater. Until such acceptance time, the underground facilities must be bonded for 100 percent of entire cost of facility. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
ARTICLE IV. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 

8.180.400. - Performance criteria. 
The performance criteria in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia §§ 8.180.410 through 8.180.480 shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.410. - Water quality. 
All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
A.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
B.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and, 
C.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by Hall County, Georgia are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.420. - Stream channel protection. 
Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
A.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
B.  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; and 
C.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.430. - Overbank flooding protection 
Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 8.180.420 is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.440. - Extreme flooding protection 
Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24 hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.450. - Structural stormwater controls. 
All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from Hall County, Georgia before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, Hall County, Georgia may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.460. - Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. 
The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 8.180.410. The applicant may, if approved by Hall County, Georgia, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.470. - Drainage system guidelines. 
Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include, but are not limited to, culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters, shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
B.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and, 
C.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.480. - Dam design guidelines. 
Any land-disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
ARTICLE V. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS OF POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 
APPENDIX I. - HALL COUNTY PLAN REVIEW AND INSPECTION FEE SCHEDULE 

 
(Res. of 8-22-13(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 

8.180.500. - Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. 
Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of Hall County, Georgia or conducted and certified by a Professional Engineer who has been approved by Hall County, Georgia. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
A.  The date and location of the inspection; 
B.  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
C.  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and, 
D.  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.510. - Final inspection and as-built plans. 
A.  Residential systems. 
1.  Stormwater management facilities that have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans will be inspected at the time of final platting, and a punch list will be provided at that time. Prior to final plat approval, the following items must be completed: 
a.  All punch list items must be properly addressed. 
i.  The as-built plans for the project shall be submitted in appropriate electronic and hard copy form and be incorporated into the final plat. The as-built plans shall show all stormwater management facilities and associated infrastructure, field run topographic map of facilities, state plane coordinates and mean sea level elevations of all outfalls, survey markers, and outlet control structures, and final design specifications for stormwater management facilities and practices. All easements will be shown in addition to a note stating that no obstructions shall be built, constructed, or planted that will interfere with the facility or its easements. The designer shall provide certification that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. The as-built must be certified by a Professional Engineer. 
ii.  The stormwater management facility will be bonded as provided in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 16.30.360. 
iii.  All accumulations of silt will be removed so that the grade of the bottom of the pond is at the design grade. 
b.  Subsequently, the facilities will be inspected prior to release of bonds. At that time, any deficiencies in the facility will be noted in the final letter. The following items must be completed at that time, and facilities in public subdivisions will be accepted into the Hall County, Georgia maintenance system once complete: 
i.  All deficiencies noted on the final acceptance letter must be properly addressed. 
ii.  All accumulations of silt will be removed so that the grade of the bottom of the pond is at the design grade. 
iii.  The entire stormwater management facility needs to be stabilized with permanent vegetation as shown on the approved plans. 
B.  Nonresidential systems. A final inspection of nonresidential stormwater management systems will occur at the time the developer requests a certificate of occupancy inspection. At that time, any deficiencies in the facility will be noted as a punch-list item. The commercial development will not receive a certificate of occupancy until the following items are completed: 
(1)  The as-built plans for the project shall be submitted in appropriate electronic and hard copy form and shall show all stormwater management facilities and associated infrastructure, field run topographic map of facilities, state plane coordinates and mean sea level elevations of all outfalls, survey markers, and outlet control structures, and final design specifications for stormwater management facilities and practices. All easements will be shown in addition to a note stating that no obstructions shall be built, constructed, or planted that will interfere with the facility or its easements. The designer shall provide certification that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. The as-built must be certified by a professional engineer. A review fee is established in Appendix "I" Hall County Plan Review and Inspection Fee Schedule. This fee allows for an initial review of the as-built and a second review of the as-built to ensure that redlined comments are addressed, as well as an additional fee for as-builts that require third and subsequent reviews. From time to time, upon the recommendation of the director of public works and utilities of Hall County, Georgia, and approval of the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, the above Appendix "I" may be revised as deemed necessary. 
2.  All accumulations of silt need to be removed so that the grade of the bottom of the pond is at the design grade. 
3.  The entire stormwater management facility shall be stabilized with permanent vegetation as shown on the approved plans. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4; Res. of 8-22-13(2), § 2(Exh. B)) 
ARTICLE VI. - ONGOING INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES AND PRACTICES 

8.180.600. - Long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
A.  Inspection, maintenance, and repair of systems in public residential subdivisions. Upon acceptance as provided in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia subsection 8.180.510 A., Hall County, Georgia will periodically inspect public residential stormwater management facilities to determine that they are functioning properly. The maintenance and repair of the stormwater management facility shall be the responsibility of Hall County, Georgia. 
B.  Inspection, maintenance, and repair of nonresidential systems and private residential subdivisions: The Hall County Engineering Department will inspect nonresidential and private residential stormwater management facilities periodically to determine that they are functioning properly. Deficiencies will be noted to the Owner, or Homeowner's Association (HOA) in writing. It shall be the responsibility of the Owner or HOA to repair deficiencies in a timely manner. Failure on the part of the Owner or HOA to repair deficient stormwater management facilities will be a violation of this Chapter. Hall County, Georgia may determine that the condition of the facility poses a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare and warrants immediate action. If the owner of such a facility does not make repairs in a time allowed by Hall County, Georgia, then Hall County, Georgia may determine that it is necessary to make an emergency repair as allowed in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 8.180.630. The cost of such repairs will be assessed to the property owner through the special tax district. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.610. - Right-of-entry for inspection. 
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for Hall County, Georgia to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this chapter is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this chapter. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.620. - Records of maintenance activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.630. - Failure to maintain. 
If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, Hall County, Georgia, after 30 days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. Hall County, Georgia may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
ARTICLE VII. - SPECIAL TAX DISTRICTS 

8.180.700. - Special tax district for public residential stormwater management facilities. 
A.  Ratification of existing district. The governing authority of Hall County, Georgia, does hereby ratify its action creating a special taxing district for inspection, maintenance, and repair of residential stormwater management facilities in unincorporated Hall County, Georgia and incorporated areas of Hall County, Georgia in which the County is the issuing authority, as shown by the records in the office of the Hall County Engineer to which reference is hereby made for a full and complete description of the district hereinbefore created. All subdivisions permitted on or after the effective date of this chapter shall be added to the special taxing district. 
B.  Responsibility for costs. The cost of construction (if applicable), inspection, maintenance, and repair of residential stormwater management facilities in the existing taxing district, and in the areas hereinafter added to the taxing district, shall be borne by the residents, lot owners, and property owners whose lot or property lies in the boundary of a subdivision served by a stormwater management facility. 
C.  Fee. The charge assessed to each property owner in the district for inspecting, maintaining, and repairing the facility shall be as established in Appendix "I" Hall County Plan Review and Inspection Fee Schedule. From time to time, upon the recommendation of the director of public works and utilities of Hall County, Georgia, and approval of the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, the above Appendix "I" may be revised as deemed necessary. 
D.  Petition for addition to the special taxing district for stormwater management facility inspection, maintenance, and repair in subdivisions. Any lot owner being served by a stormwater management facility in Hall County, Georgia may present a request to be added to the special taxing district to the Hall County Engineer. Upon receipt of the request, the Hall County Engineer shall determine the appropriate boundaries for addition to the special taxing district for stormwater management facilities that will serve the lot owner presenting the request and neighboring lot owners. The boundary shall consist of the subdivision that is served by the stormwater management facility and adjoining land owners served by the facility that agree to be included in the special tax district. The Hall County Engineer shall then prepare a plat showing this area for addition to the special taxing district for stormwater management facilities, and a petition for the addition to the special taxing district for stormwater management facilities shall then be circulated among the lot owners in the proposed district. The completed petition must be returned to the Hall County Engineering Department, and application fees must be paid at that time. If 51 percent of the lot owners in the proposed district sign the petition in affirmation for the addition to the special taxing district for existing stormwater management facilities, the petition shall be presented to the Board of Commissioners of Hall County, Georgia. The board of commissioners shall conduct two public hearings for the purpose of determining whether or not to add the proposed area to the special district for stormwater management facilities. The public hearings shall be advertised one time in the official organ of Hall County, Georgia, giving notice of the hearings, at least 15 days before the public hearings. The Hall County Engineer will verify the signatures on the petition prior to advertising the public hearings. 
E.  Payment date, delinquencies. The due date for the payment of drainage district assessment charges herein provided for shall be the same date of each year as tax bills are due to the Hall County Tax Commissioner. Failure to pay shall subject the responsible party to the same liens and penalties provided for failure to pay other real estate taxes and will result in the delinquency of the entire account and not be deemed paid until all real estate taxes are paid in full. 
F.  Responsibilities of revenue collections department. The billing, accounting, collecting, and receiving of the moneys herein provided for are hereby declared the responsibility of the Finance and Tax Commissioner's Departments of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4; Res. of 8-22-13(2), § 3(Exh. C)) 
8.180.710. - Special tax district for nonresidential and private residential stormwater management facilities. 
A.  Ratification of existing district. The governing authority of Hall County, Georgia, does hereby ratify its action creating a special taxing district for the inspection and emergency repairs of nonresidential stormwater management facilities in unincorporated areas of Hall County, Georgia, and incorporated areas in which Hall County is the soil erosion issuing authority, as shown by the records in the office of the Hall County Engineer to which reference is hereby made for a full and complete description of the district hereinbefore created. All nonresidential projects and private subdivisions permitted on or after the effective date of this chapter shall be added to the special taxing district. 
B.  Responsibility for costs. The cost of inspection and emergency repairs completed by Hall County of nonresidential and private residential stormwater management facilities in the existing taxing district, and in the areas hereinafter added to the taxing district, shall be borne by the property owners whose lot or property lies in the boundary of said district served by a stormwater management facility. 
C.  Fees. The charge assessed to each property owner in the district for inspecting the facility shall be as established in Appendix "I" Hall County Plan Review and Inspection Fee Schedule. Additional costs will be assessed for any necessary emergency repairs performed by Hall County Georgia on the facility. In addition, from time to time, upon the recommendation of the director of public works and utilities of Hall County, Georgia, and approval of the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, the above Appendix "I" may be revised as deemed necessary. 
D.  Payment date, delinquencies. The due date for the payment of drainage district assessment charges herein provided for shall be the same date of each year as tax bills are due to the Hall County Tax Commissioner. Failure to pay shall subject the responsible party to the same liens and penalties provided for failure to pay other real estate taxes and will result in the delinquency of the entire account and not be deemed paid until all real estate taxes are paid in full. 
E.  Responsibilities of revenue collections department. The billing, accounting, collecting, and receiving of the moneys herein provided for is hereby declared the responsibility of the finance and tax commissioner's departments of Hall County, Georgia 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4; Res. of 8-22-13(2), § 3(Exh. D)) 
ARTICLE VIII. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

8.180.800. - Enforcement. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this chapter. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in this article shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.810. - Notice of violation. 
If Hall County, Georgia determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
A.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
B.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
C.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
D.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
E.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
F.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Magistrate Court of Hall County, Georgia by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
8.180.820. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, Hall County, Georgia shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, Hall County, Georgia may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
A.  Stop-work order. Hall County, Georgia may issue a stop-work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop-work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop-work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
B.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. Hall County, Georgia may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
C.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. Hall County, Georgia may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated upon such conditions as Hall County, Georgia may deem necessary to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
D.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as Hall County, Georgia shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after Hall County, Georgia has taken one or more of the actions described above, Hall County, Georgia may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
E.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, any applicant, responsible person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, Georgia, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Res. of 4-26-07, § 4) 
CHAPTER 8.190 - LOCAL PUBLIC HEALTH REGULATIONS 

8.190.010. - State-promulgated rules and regulations. 
The following rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Public Health including all subsequent amendments, revisions or modifications thereto, are expressly incorporated herein: 
A.  Onsite Sewage Management System Rules and Regulations.  (Chapter 511-3-1) 
B.  Food Service Rules and Regulations.  (Chapter 511-6-1) 
C.  Tourist Accommodation Rules and Regulations  (Chapter 511-6-2) 
D.  Public Swimming Pools, Spas, and Recreational Water Parks Rules and Regulations  (Chapter 511-3-5) 
E.  Control of Rabies Rules and Regulations  (Chapter 511-4-2) 
F.  Solid waste Rules and Regulations  (Chapter 511-3-4) 
G.  Georgia Smoke Free Air Act Rules and Regulations  (Chapter 511-3-7) 
H.  Drinking Water Supply Rules and Regulations  (Chapter 511-3-3) 
I.  Portable Sanitation Contractors  (Chapter 511-3-6) 
(Res. of 5-14-09(2), § 2(Exh. A); Res. of 7-14-16(1), § 1) 
8.190.020. - Adopted by reference—Local board of health enactments. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq., in addition to the above-referenced rules and regulations of the Georgia DPH, the following rules and regulations have been enacted by the Hall County Board of Health and are hereby adopted by the Hall County Board of Commissioners in accordance with state law, and are further hereby adopted and approved for enforcement as set forth herein: 
A.  Rules and regulations concerning operational permits and maintenance requirements for advanced treatment systems, enacted by resolution dated August 25, 2005. 
B.  Rules and regulations concerning on-site water well supplies, enacted by resolution dated November 25, 2008. 
C.  Rules and regulations concerning body art, enacted by resolution dated November 25, 2008. 
D.  Rules and regulations concerning rabies control, enacted by resolution dated July 27, 2000. 
Copies of those rules and regulations enacted by the Hall County Board of Health and having been adopted by ordinance of the board of commissioners are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, where the same are available for inspection and copying by the public during regular county operating hours. 
(Res. of 5-14-09(2), § 2(Exh. A); Res. of 7-14-16(1), § 2) 
8.190.030. - Conflict. 
Should any provision of the rules and regulations adopted in section 8.190.010 or 8.190.020 above conflict with any other provision of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, that provision which is most restrictive shall control. 
(Res. of 5-14-09(2), § 2(Exh. A)) 
8.190.040. - Rules and regulations of minimum lot sizes for on-site sewage management systems. 
In addition, the rules and regulations concerning minimum lot sizes for the orderly and safe development of property utilizing on-site sewage management systems, having been enacted by the Hall County Board of Health are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set out at length herein. The Hall County Board of Commissioners may, however, require larger minimum lot sizes for utilization of on-site sewage management systems in zoning or land use districts providing for septic service, and in the event there is a conflict between the minimum lot size(s) established by the Hall County Board of Health and that established by the Hall County Board of Commissioners, the larger lot size(s) established by the board of commissioners shall control and take precedence. 
(Res. of 5-14-09(2), § 2(Exh. A)) 
8.190.050. - Fee Schedule. 
A fee schedule for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above-referenced state-promulgated rules and regulations and local board of health enactments, including permit and inspection fees, has been established by the Hall County Board of Health, and is hereby approved and adopted by the Hall County Board of Commissioners. A copy of this fee schedule, including all subsequent amendments, revisions or modifications thereto, is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners and is available for inspection and copying by the public during regular county operating hours. 
(Res. of 5-14-09(2), § 2(Exh. A)) 
8.190.060. - Enforcement. 
In addition to any other provision of the adopted DPH rules and regulations, the enforcement and prosecution of this chapter shall be within the jurisdiction of Hall County and the Hall County Board of Health and their authorized designee(s) or agent(s), and all law enforcement personnel of Hall County. 
(Res. of 5-14-09(2), § 2(Exh. A); Res. of 7-14-16(1), § 3) 
8.190.070. - Prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any natural person or persons or any legal entity including, and not limited to, a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, firm or trust, to violate any of the above-identified rules and regulations, or fail or refuse to pay any fee established by the Hall County Board of Health, and approved and adopted by the Hall County Board of Commissioners, for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above-identified rules and regulations, including all permit and inspection fees. 
(Res. of 5-14-09(2), § 2(Exh. A)) 
8.190.080. - Violation. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Res. of 5-14-09(2), § 2(Exh. A)) 
8.190.090. - Abatement. 
In addition to the rights and remedies set forth herein, or as otherwise authorized by law, Hall County and the Hall County Board of Health retain and reserve the right to seek equitable relief, injunction, abatement, or any appropriate action or proceeding to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Failure or refusal to pay any fee approved for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above-identified rules and regulations, including all permit and inspection fees, may result in suspension and/or revocation of any permit issued by the Hall County Board of Health. 
(Res. of 5-14-09(2), § 2(Exh. A)) 
8.190.100. - Compliance. 
This chapter, and the enforcement and prosecution of this chapter by Hall County and the Hall County Board of Health, and their authorized agent(s) or designee(s), does not in any way affect, stop, prescribe, regulate, limit, or in any way control or prohibit the Georgia DHR, and its agent(s) or designee(s), from initiating or undertaking any action or proceeding to enforce compliance with its rules and regulations. 
(Res. of 5-14-09(2), § 2(Exh. A)) 
CHAPTER 8.200. - FIRE ALARMS 

 

8.200.010. - Administration and enforcement. 
Hall County Fire Services shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Res. of 6-10-10(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.200.020. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given: 
Alarm company means any corporation, partnership, business or individual, licensed by the State of Georgia, engaged in the business or the installation, maintenance, alteration, servicing, or monitoring of an alarm system or which responds to such alarm systems. 
Alarm response means any response to a premise by Hall County Fire Services as a result of an alarm signal received by Hall County 9-1-1 or Hall County Fire Services. 
Alarm signal means the activation of an alarm system resulting in a request for an alarm response regardless of cause. 
Alarm system means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, designed to signal an occurrence of, fire, smoke, heat, or water application, or any other circumstances requiring urgent attention and to which Hall County Fire Services personnel are expected to respond. 
Required system means a fire alarm system installed in an occupancy that the current Fire Code of Hall County requires said system be installed. 
Nonrequired system means a fire alarm system installed in an occupancy which the Fire Code of Hall County does not require said system to be installed. 
Combination system means an alarm system that includes both security protection and fire detection on the same system. 
Alarm user means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind who or which purchases, leases, contracts for, or otherwise obtains an alarm system, or the servicing, maintenance or monitoring of an alarm system from an alarm company. 
Automatic dialing device means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to dial a predetermined telephone number and which automatically transmits by recorded voice message or signal the existence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which firefighters are expected to respond. 
County means Hall County, Georgia. 
False alarms means any signal of fire, heat, smoke or water application, or any other circumstance when there exists no actual or threatened emergency to which Hall County Fire Services personnel are expected to respond. 
Fire alarm code means the currently enforced fire code for Hall County. It is the responsibility of all alarm companies to be aware of the currently enforced code for Hall County. 
Governing authority means the Board of Commissioners of Hall County, Georgia. 
Hall County Fire Services means Hall County Fire Department or other government department as requested by Hall County Fire Services to render aid. 
Person means any individual, group of persons, firm, partnership, association of any kind, company or corporation. 
Protected premises means the premises upon which an alarm system has been placed for the purposes of detecting a hazard. 
(Res. of 6-10-10(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.200.030. - Operation and maintenance; transmission. 
Alarm companies, alarm users or individuals transmitting alarm signals are responsible for keeping their alarm system in good working order and repair and the county shall have no obligation with respect thereto. 
(Res. of 6-10-10(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.200.040. - Intentional false alarms prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly activate an alarm system to summon Hall County Fire Services when there is no actual or threatened need for the immediate assistance of Hall County Fire Services. 
(Res. of 6-10-10(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.200.050. - Automatic dialing device restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain any automated dialing device which is programmed to transmit a prerecorded message or code signal directly to Hall County 9-1-1 or Hall County Fire Services as an alarm signal. 
(Res. of 6-10-10(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.200.060. - Required equipment. 
A.  An alarm system operated within the jurisdiction of the governing authority shall be equipped in such a manner so as to prevent false alarms due to interruptions in electrical power. 
B.  After the effective date of this chapter, all combination systems installed as a nonrequired system in single-family residences shall not include an outside sounder that is audible beyond the confines of the premise. 
C.  After the effective date of this chapter, it shall be the responsibility of the alarm company on all new alarm systems to post on the alarm panel the name and 24-hour contact information for the company responsible for servicing the alarm system as well as the contact information for the alarm company responsible for monitoring the alarm system if it is different from the servicing company. Further it shall be the responsibility of the alarm company to update this information on existing systems at any time an alarm system is serviced. 
(Res. of 6-10-10(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.200.070. - Information not to be disclosed. 
Any information supplied to Hall County 9-1-1 or Hall County Fire Services pursuant to this chapter shall be held in confidence by all employees or representatives of the governing authority with access to such information. Because all alarm registration information is considered sensitive public safety information, the same shall not be available to the public, unless otherwise required by law. 
(Res. of 6-10-10(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.200.080. - Excessive alarm responses prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any alarm user in the jurisdiction of the governing authority to allow an excessive number of alarm responses to occur at a protected premise for which the alarm user is responsible. 
B.  Alarm responses to a protected premise in excess of three times in any consecutive four-month period or five times in any consecutive 12-month period are deemed to be an excessive number and shall be a violation of this chapter. 
C.  If an alarm user shows to the satisfaction of Hall County Fire Services representative that the false alarm was not the result of the negligence or improper maintenance by the alarm user, the administrative fee sanction as specified in section 8.200.100 of this chapter may be waived. 
D.  Hall County Fire Services personnel assigned to incidents which are determined to be an alarm response shall, whenever possible, leave written notice for the alarm user which provides the following information. 
1.  Date and time of alarm response; 
2.  Hall County Fire Services contact information including phone number; and 
3.  Brief synopsis of the fire alarm ordinance. 
(Res. of 6-10-10(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.200.090. - Inspection of alarm systems. 
An alarm user with an alarm system in violation of section 8.200.080 of this chapter shall cause their alarm system to be inspected by an alarm company licensed to conduct business as an alarm company. The inspection shall entail a complete examination of the alarm system including, but not limited to, satisfactory design and installation of the equipment, proper functioning of the equipment and user education in the operation of the equipment. The alarm company shall record the details of the inspection and make such record available to the alarm user. Notification of the requirements of this section for an inspection shall be made by Hall County Fire Services in writing, within 30 days of the violation, to the registered alarm user. The completed inspection report from an alarm company shall be returned to Hall County Fire Services by the alarm user within 30 days of the initial notification of the violation by Hall County Fire Services. 
(Res. of 6-10-10(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.200.100. - Noncompliance with inspection. 
If Hall County Fire Services does not receive a written completed inspection report within thirty days of the notification as provided in section 8.200.090, an administrative service fee for noncompliance with the inspection report request as specified in the fire alarm fee schedule adopted by the governing authority shall be assessed against the alarm user. 
(Res. of 6-10-10(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— The fire alarme fee schedule as referenced in this section is not set out herein but can be found on file with the county. 
8.200.110. - Subsequent violations. 
If within 12 months of the notification as provided in section 8.200.090 of this chapter, there are more than two alarm responses to a protected premise, excessive alarm response fees shall be assessed against the user for all subsequent alarm responses as specified in the fire alarm fee schedule adopted by the governing authority. 
(Res. of 6-10-10(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— The fire alarme fee schedule as referenced in this section is not set out herein but can be found on file with the county. 
8.200.120. - Appeals. 
A.  The Hall County, Georgia Board of Commissioners shall hear the appeal upon request of any alarm company or alarm user adversely affected by any decision of the Hall County Fire Services. 
B.  Appeals to the Hall County Board of Commissioners shall be filed in writing with the Clerk of the Hall County Board of Commissioners, within three days from the date of service of written notice of a decision adversely affecting an alarm user of an alarm company. 
C.  Failure to file an appeal within such three-day period shall constitute a waiver of the right to such an appeal. 
D.  The decision of the Hall County Board of Commissioners shall be final. 
(Res. of 6-10-10(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.200.130. - Immunity. 
Nothing in this chapter is intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By notification of an alarm system, the alarm user acknowledges that the Hall County response may be influenced by factors such as: the availability of emergency units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, staffing levels and prior response history. 
(Res. of 6-10-10(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.200.140. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the magistrate or state court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Res. of 6-10-10(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE[1] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Special requirements for licensing of certain businesses, § 5.10.420; background investigation required for operators of certain businesses, § 5.10.550; prohibited businesses, § 5.10.560; adult entertainment establishments, ch. 5.20; sale of malt beverages and wine, ch. 5.30; health and safety, tit. 8; noise control, ch. 8.80. 

CHAPTER 9.10. - OPEN CONTAINERS OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN VEHICLES[2] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in recreation areas, § 2.50.140; alcoholic beverages prohibited at Corps of Engineers operated parks, § 2.50.260; sale of malt beverages and wine, ch. 5.30; vehicles and traffic, tit. 10. 

9.10.010. - Open container defined. 
As used in this chapter, "open container" means any container which is immediately capable of being consumed from, or the seal of which has been broken. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 1; Code 1991, § 9.04.010) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 
9.10.020. - Open containers in vehicles prohibited. 
It is unlawful and punishable as provided in this chapter for any person to possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage while operating a vehicle in the county or while a passenger in or on a vehicle being operated in the county. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 2; Code 1991, § 9.04.020) 
9.10.030. - Possession by operator defined. 
An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator of a vehicle if the container is not in the possession of a passenger and is not located in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk, or other locked nonpassenger area of the vehicle. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 3; Code 1991, § 9.04.030) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 
9.10.040. - Possession by passenger defined. 
An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of a passenger of a vehicle if the container is in the physical control of the passenger. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 4; Code 1991, § 9.04.040) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 
9.10.050. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  A passenger of a vehicle in which the driver is operating the vehicle pursuant to a contract to provide transportation for passengers and such driver holds a valid chauffeur's license pursuant to Georgia law or [the law of] any other state; 
B.  A passenger of a bus in which the driver holds a valid chauffeur's license pursuant to Georgia law or [the law of] any other state; 
C.  A passenger of a self-contained motor home. Self-contained motor home means every motor home vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily as a mobile dwelling, mobile office or mobile commercial space. This exemption shall not apply to a passenger of a self-contained motor home who is seated in the front of the mobile home parallel to the operator of the motor home. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 5; Code 1991, § 9.04.050) 
9.10.060. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person or operator of a vehicle or passenger violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 6; Code 1991, § 9.04.060; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Parking and vehicles in parks, §§ 2.50.160—2.50.180; hours for vehicles in parks restricted, § 2.50.210; littering from conveyance, § 8.60.110; vehicles hauling solid waste, § 8.60.160; transport of biomedical waste, § 8.70.090; open containers of alcoholic beverages in vehicles, ch. 9.10; streets, sidewalks and public places, tit. 12; off-street parking, storage and loading requirements, ch. 17.250. 

CHAPTER 10.10. - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 

 

10.10.010. - County authority to adopt. 
Regulations regulating and controlling vehicular and pedestrian traffic upon public streets, highways, avenues, public parks and private property used by the public may be hereafter adopted, or amended, or repealed by this commission by a majority vote. 
(Res. of 11-9-70, § 5(a); Code 1991, § 10.04.010) 
10.10.020. - Record of traffic regulations. 
The county shall maintain in the county commissioners' office a book, properly indexed, containing all current traffic regulations adopted by this board. 
(Res. of 11-9-70, § 5(b); Code 1991, § 10.04.020) 
10.10.030. - Future traffic regulations adopted by reference. 
Any regulation controlling traffic hereafter passed by this board is made a part of this resolution [chapter] as if fully set out herein. 
(Res. of 11-9-70, § 5(c); Code 1991, § 10.04.030) 
10.10.040. - Erection of signs. 
No traffic regulation adopted shall be effective until and unless signs giving notice of such traffic regulation are posted upon or at the entrance of the area affected. 
(Res. of 11-9-70, § 5(d); Code 1991, § 10.04.040) 
10.10.050. - Conflict with state regulations. 
No traffic regulations shall be passed by this board in conflict with the statutes of the State of Georgia, and all the statutes of the state shall be complied with in adopting any traffic regulation. 
(Res. of 11-9-70, § 5(e); Code 1991, § 10.04.050) 
10.10.060. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 11-9-70, § 5(f); Code 1991, § 10.04.060; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 10.20. - RESIDENTIAL STREETS 

 

10.20.010. - Definition. 
For purposes of this chapter, "residential street" shall be defined as any and all streets, roads, and highways located in Hall County, Georgia, which shall from time to time be designated by the board of commissioners of the county as a residential street. 
(Res. of 7-25-83, § 1; Code 1991, § 10.08.010) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, §§ 1.20.010, 1.20.040. 
10.20.020. - Ten-wheeled vehicles prohibited; exceptions. 
No person shall operate a truck and/or tractor which has a combined total of ten or more wheels on a residential street, except that such vehicles may be operated thereon for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise at a location on the street or proceeding to and from a destination on the street, and then only by entering such street at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and proceeding thereon no farther than the next intersection after the destination of the vehicle. 
(Res. of 7-25-83, § 2; Code 1991, § 10.08.020) 
10.20.030. - Posting of signs concerning ten-wheeled vehicles. 
The county engineer shall be responsible for posting signs giving notice of the provisions hereof on all designated residential streets. The signs shall state: "No Through Trucks 10 Wheels or More." 
(Res. of 7-25-83, § 3; Code 1991, § 10.08.030) 
10.20.040. - F. Gailey Road designated residential street. 
F. Gailey Road, located in the unincorporated area of the county, is designated a residential street subject to all the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 8-10-87; Code 1991, § 10.08.040) 
10.20.050. - Winfield Street designated residential street. 
Winfield Street, located in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia, is hereby designated a residential street subject to all of the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 4-28-94, § 1; Code 1991, § 10.08.041) 
10.20.060. - Bennefield Road designated residential street. 
Bennefield Road, located in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia, is hereby designated a residential street subject to all of the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 6-23-94, § 1; Code 1991, § 10.08.042) 
10.20.070. - Hancock Avenue designated residential street. 
Hancock Avenue, located in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia, is hereby designated a residential street subject to all of the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 6-23-94, § 1; Code 1991, § 10.08.043) 
10.20.080. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 7-25-83, § 4; Code 1991, § 10.08.050; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
10.20.090. - McBrayer Road designated residential street. 
McBrayer Road, located in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia, is hereby designated a residential street subject to all of the terms and provisions of this Chapter. 
(Res. of 6-26-97, § 1) 
10.20.100. - Mabry Road designated residential street. 
Mabry Road, from Centennial Drive to Old Flowery Branch Road, located in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia, is hereby designated a residential street subject to all of the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 3-12-98, § 1) 
10.20.110. - Bogan Road designated residential street. 
Bogan Road, from State Route 347 (Friendship Road) to Gwinnett County Line, located in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia, is hereby designated a residential street subject to all of the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 3-12-98, § 1) 
10.20.120. - Burton Drive designated residential street. 
Burton Drive, from State Route 52 (Lula Road) to Lula City Limits, located in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia, is hereby designated a residential street subject to all of the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 3-12-98, § 1) 
10.20.130. - Martin Road designated residential street. 
Martin Road, from State Route 13 (Atlanta Hwy.) to State Route 53 (Winder Hwy.), located in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia, is hereby designated a residential street subject to all of the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-9-98, § 1) 
10.20.140. - Will Wallace Road designated residential street. 
Will Wallace Road, from State Route 136 (Price Road) to Ledan Road Extension, located in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia, is hereby designated a residential street subject to all of the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-9-98, § 1) 
10.20.150. - Campground Road designated residential street. 
Campground Road, from Skitts Mountain Road to White County line, located in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia, is hereby designated a residential street subject to all of the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 11-24-99(1), § 1) 
10.20.160. - Six specified roads designated residential streets. 
The following six roads in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia are hereby designated as residential streets subject to all of the terms and provisions of this chapter: 
1.  Blackstock Road from the Hall County/Jackson County Line to SR 11/US 129 (Athens Highway). 
2.  Clearview Drive from Lakeland Road to Hilltop Circle. 
3.  Hilltop Circle from SR 11/US 129 (Cleveland Highway) to SR 11/US 129 (Cleveland Highway). 
4.  Webb Girth Road from Leeland Road to Moore-Mills Road. 
5.  Moore-Mills Road from Poplar Springs Church Road to Webb Girth Road. 
6.  Baker Road from SR 11/US 129 (Athens Highway) to SR 60 (Candler Highway). 
(Res. of 9-22-05, § 1) 
10.20.170. - Concord Church Road designated residential street. 
The following road in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia is hereby designated as a residential street subject to all of the terms and provisions of this Chapter: 
1.  Concord Church Road from SR 284 Shoal Creek Road to Clermont City Limits. 
(Res. of 8-10-06, § 1) 
10.20.180. - Tree specified roads designated residential streets. 
The following roads in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia are hereby designated as residential streets subject to all of the terms and provisions of this chapter: 
1.  E. Reed Road from SR 332 Poplar Springs Road to Strickland Road. 
2.  J.M. Turk Road from Martin Road to Cash Road. 
3.  Turk Road from J.M. Turk Road to Cash Road. 
(Res. of 5-24-07(1), § 1) 
10.20.190. - Three specified roads designated residential streets. 
The following roads in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia are hereby designated as residential streets subject to all of the terms and provisions of this chapter: 
1.  Sloan Mill Road from SR 332 Poplar Springs Road to SR 53 Winder Highway. 
2.  Bark Camp Drive from SR 60 Thompson Bridge Road to Bark Camp Road. 
3.  Bark Camp Road from SR 60 Thompson Bridge Road to SR 136 Price Road. 
(Res. of 9-27-07(1), § 1) 
10.20.200. - Three specified roads designated residential streets. 
The following roads in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia are hereby designated as residential streets subject to all of the terms and provisions of this Chapter: 
1.  Oliver Road from SR 53 (Winder Highway) to Union Church Road. 
2.  Persimmon Tree Road from SR 52 (Lula Road) to Belton Bridge Road. 
3.  Talmo Road from SR 332 (Belmont Highway) to Roy Parks Road. 
(Res. of 9-22-11, § 1) 
10.20.210 - Two specified roads designated residential streets. 
The following roads in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia are hereby designated as residential streets subject to all of the terms and provisions of this Chapter: 
1.  Athens Street from SR 365 (Cornelia Highway) to Lula City Limits. 
2.  Belton Bridge Road from SR 365 (Cornelia Highway) to Lula City Limits. 
(Res. of 9-12-13(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 10.30. - SPEED ZONES 

 

10.30.010. - Hawkins Road. 
A.  From Hewell Road to Joe Chandler Road, a distance of 1.18 miles, to be zoned 25 miles per hour. 
B.  All necessary signing for this speed zone is to be erected by the county. 
(Res. of 5-26-87; Code 1991, § 10.12.010) 
10.30.020. - Conner Road. 
A.  From Jim Crow Road in a westerly direction to terminus, a distance of 1.08 miles, to be zoned at 30 miles per hour. 
B.  All necessary signing for this speed zone is to be erected by the county. 
(Res. of 8-24-87; Code 1991, § 10.12.020) 
10.30.030. - Speed zones for 19 specified areas (Res. of 6-23-94). 
A.  The following 19 specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Blackberry Lane, from McEver Road to terminus, a distance of 1.18 miles, to be zoned 25 MPH. 
2.  Cobblestone, from Stone Trace to Stone Trace, a distance of 0.21 mile, to be zoned 25 MPH. 
3.  Dorsey Circle, from Dorsey Drive to Dorsey Drive, a distance of 0.50 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Dorsey Drive, from SR 369 (Browns Bridge Road) to Dorsey Circle, a distance of 0.50 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Emory Griffin Road, from SR 323 to Hall/Jackson County line, a distance of 2.18 miles, to be zoned at 50 MPH. 
6.  Forest Cove Road, from Laurel Lane to terminus, a distance of 0.30 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Grey Fox Trail, from Mountain View Road to terminus, a distance of 0.20 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
8.  Hearthstone, from Flat Creek Road to terminus, a distance of 0.18 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
9.  Holiday Heights Drive, from terminus to terminus, a distance of 0.60 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
10.  Holland Dam Road, from Spout Springs Road to Hog Mountain Road, a distance of 0.49 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
11.  Lake Forest Drive, from Woodhaven Lane to terminus, a distance of 0.32 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
12.  Laurel Lane, from Highland Road to terminus, a distance of 0.57 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
13.  Osborn Drive, from SR 13 to terminus, a distance of 0.77 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
14.  Perry Drive, from SR 283 (Mt. Vernon Road) to terminus, a distance of 0.56 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
15.  Priest Circle, from SR 11 (Athens Highway) to Wallace Road, a distance of 0.50 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
16.  Red Fox Trail, from SR 53 to terminus, a distance of 0.42 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
17.  Stone Trace, from Hearthstone to terminus, a distance of 0.60 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
18.  Whiporwill Road, from SR 323 to Joe Chandler Road, a distance of 2.60 miles, to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
19.  Woodhaven Lane, from Mountain View Road to terminus, a distance of 0.35 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this section. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 6-23-94; Code 1991, § 10.12.021) 
10.30.040. - Speed zones for 12 specified areas (Res. of 10-27-94). 
A.  The following 12 specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Anglin Drive, from SR 332 (Belmont Highway) to terminus, a distance of 0.31 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Burgundy Way, from terminus to terminus, a distance of 0.20 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Burton Drive, from SR 52 to Lula city limits, a distance of 0.47 mile, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
4.  Deer Ridge Court, from Quail Pointe Drive to terminus, a distance of 0.21 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Dogwood Lane, from Beach Haven Drive to terminus, a distance of 0.30 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Falcon Crest Drive, from Warren Road to terminus, a distance of 0.71 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Hilldale Road, from SR 53 to Mountain View Road, a distance of 0.50 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
8.  Primrose Drive, from Trellis Way to terminus, a distance of 0.15 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
9.  Quail Pointe Drive, from Cash Road to terminus, a distance of 0.36 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
10.  Tammi Lane, from Sardis Road to terminus, a distance of 0.34 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
11.  W. White Road, from Thurmond Tanner Road to Chamblee Road, a distance of 1.16 miles, to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
12.  Woodlane Road, from Southers Road to terminus, a distance of 0.50 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this section. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 10-27-94; Code 1991, § 10.12.022) 
10.30.050. - Speed zones for 23 specified areas (Res. of 3-9-95). 
A.  The following 23 specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Callie Downs Drive, from Highland Road to terminus, a distance of 0.25 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Carter Street, from SR 369 to SR 13, a distance of 0.27 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Catawba Ridge, from Muscadine Trail to terminus, a distance of 0.14 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Chicopee Street, from SR 13 to Walker Street, a distance of 0.44 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Grant Ford Road, from Cool Springs Road to terminus, a distance of 2.22 miles, to be zoned at 50 MPH. 
6.  Harmony Circle, from Mangum Mill Road to Harmony Drive, a distance of 0.20 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Harmony Drive, from Harmony Church Road to Harmony Circle, a distance of 0.40 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
8.  Hollow Creek Drive, from Deaton Road to terminus, a distance of 0.14 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
9.  Leach Circle, from Leach Road to terminus, a distance of 0.37 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
10.  Muscadine Trail, from Honeysuckle Road to terminus, a distance of 0.36 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
11.  Old Whelchel Road, from SR 115 to Pony Lake Road, a distance of 1.71 miles, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
12.  Propes Drive, from Mountain View Road to terminus, a distance of 0.71 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
13.  Quillians Drive, from Wild Smith Road to Wild Smith Road, a distance of 0.62 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
14.  Railroad Street, from Chamblee Road to Oakwood city limits, a distance of 0.49 mile, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
15.  Saddle Club Road, from Cook Springs Road to terminus, a distance of 0.72 mile, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
16.  Seneca Valley, from Muscadine Trail to terminus, a distance of 0.11 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
17.  Sequoia Circle, from Sequoia Drive to Sequoia Drive, a distance of 0.67 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
18.  Sequoia Drive, from Mountain View Road to terminus, a distance of .041 [0.41] mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
19.  Stacey Drive, from Sequoia Drive to terminus, a distance of 0.41 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
20.  Sunrise Way, from Serene Shores Drive to terminus, a distance of 0.10 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
21.  Weaver Road, from SR 211 to pavement end, a distance of 0.73 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
22.  Windy Hill, from Whiting Road to terminus, a distance of 0.28 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
23.  Windy Hill Circle, from Whiting Road to Windy Hill, a distance of 0.52 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section]. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 3-9-95; Code 1991, § 10.12.023) 
10.30.060. - Speed zones for 19 specified areas (Res. of 7-27-95). 
A.  The following 19 specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  First Street, from SR 13 (Atlanta Highway) to Cross Street, a distance of 0.21 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Ben Hill Drive, from Mountain View Road to terminus, a distance of 0.50 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Campground Drive, from SR 323 (Gillsville Highway) to Lebanon Church Road, a distance of 0.50 mile, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
4.  Country Lane, from Country View to terminus, a distance of 0.63 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Country View, from C. Rogers Road to Country Lane, a distance of 0.12 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Deaton Road, from SR 53 (Winder Highway) to terminus, a distance of 0.42 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Elderberry Lane, from Union Circle to terminus, a distance of 0.41 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
8.  Felicia Court, from terminus to terminus, a distance of 0.22 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
9.  Johnathan Way, from Country Lane to Felicia Court, a distance of 0.19 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
10.  Noah Martin Road, from SR 13/US 23 (Old Cornelia Highway) to White Hall Road, a distance of 0.87 mile, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
11.  Nohl Crest Drive, from Union Church Road to terminus, a distance of 0.31 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
12.  Nohl Crest Lane, from Nohl Crest Drive to terminus, a distance of 0.09 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
13.  Nohl Ridge Lane, from Nohl Crest Drive to terminus, a distance of 0.11 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
14.  Oakland Lane, from Pleasant Hill Road to terminus, a distance of 0.18 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
15.  Pony Lake Road, from Hall/Lumpkin County line to Hall/Lumpkin County line, a distance of 0.76 mile, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
16.  River Run Circle, from SR 11/US 129 (Cleveland Highway) to River Run Circle, a distance of 0.42 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
17.  Ryan Way, from Elderberry Lane to terminus, a distance of 0.10 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
18.  Tory Way, from Elderberry Lane to terminus, a distance of 0.14 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
19.  Wildwood Drive, from Candler Road to terminus, a distance of 0.77 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this section. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 7-27-95) 
10.30.070. - Speed zones for 13 specified areas (Res. of 1-25-96). 
A.  The following 13 specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Barrett Street, from SR 284 (Clarks Bridge Road) to terminus a distance of 0.13 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Blackjack Road, from Hog Mountain Road to Williams Road a distance of 2.93 miles, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
3.  Churchill Downs Drive, from Long Road to terminus a distance of 0.40 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Derby Drive, from Churchill Downs Drive to terminus a distance of 0.10 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Flat Creek Road, from McEver Road to terminus a distance of 2.04 miles, to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
6.  Mitchell Creek Drive, from Blackjack Road to River Hill Drive a distance of 0.24 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Oakwood Road, from McEver Road to Oakwood City Limits a distance of 0.47 mile, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
8.  River Hill Drive, from terminus to terminus a distance of 0.35 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
9.  Thunder Road, from SR 347 to Gwinnett County Line a distance of 0.52 mile, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
10.  Wade Whelchel Road, from Ben Parks Road to Hubert Stephens Road a distance of 1.03 miles, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
11.  Walnut Road and Walnut Street, from Sardis Road to Highland Park Drive a distance of 0.36 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
12.  Windgate Drive, from Friendship Road to Gwinnett County and from Windgate Drive to Gwinnett County a distance of 0.62 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
13.  Youngblood Road, from SR 53 (Winder Hwy.) to Strickland Road a distance of 0.71 mile, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section]. 
C.  Motorists who violate this section will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 1-25-96, § 1) 
10.30.080. - Speed zones for 13 specified areas (Res. of 6-27-96). 
A.  The following 13 specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Artesian Springs Drive, from Cash Road to terminus a distance of 0.2 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Bennefield Road, from S.R. 53 (Winder Hwy.) to S.R. 211 (Tanners Mill Road) a distance of 1.1 miles, to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
3.  Bushnell Court, from Red Field Way to terminus a distance of 0.215 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  East Ridge Road, from Athens Street to Old Cornelia Hwy. a distance of 1.6 miles, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
5.  Hunnington Mill Drive, from Union Circle to terminus a distance of 0.325 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Laurelwood Trail, from Gaines Ferry Road to Laurelwood Trail a distance of 0.84 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Lebanon Church Road, from S.R. 323 (Gillsville Hwy.) to S.R. 82 (Holly Springs Road) a distance of 1.18 miles, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
8.  Ponderosa Farm Road, from Strickland Road to S.R. 211 (Tanners Mill Road) a distance of 1.64 miles, to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
9.  Red Field Way, from terminus to terminus a distance of 0.295 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
10.  Sweetgum Trail, from Laurelwood Trail to Laurelwood Trail a distance of 0.24 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
11.  Trophy Court, from Hunnington Mill Drive to terminus a distance of 0.10 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
12.  Webb Girth Road, from Lee Land Road to pavement end a distance of 0.8 mile, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
13.  Woodbridge Drive, from Gaines Ferry Road to Laurelwood Trail a distance of 0.09 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section]. 
C.  Motorists who violate this section will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 6-27-96, § 1) 
10.30.090. - Speed zones for 11 specified areas (Res. of 11-14-96). 
A.  The following 11 specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Athens Street, from Lula City Limits to County Line Road a distance of 0.11 mile, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
2.  Athens Street, from SR 365 (Cornelia Highway) to Lula City Limits a distance of 0.67 mile, to be zoned at 50 MPH. 
3.  Brady Road, from SR 52 (Dahlonega Highway) to SR 283 (Mt. Vernon Road) a distance of 0.90 mile, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
4.  Cromartie Road, from Emory Griffin Road to Bryant Quarter Road a distance of 1.61 miles, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
5.  Fraser Circle, from SR 60 (Thompson Bridge Road) to Fairmont Street a distance of 0.71 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Indian Circle, from Shirley Road to Shirley Road a distance of 0.65 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Lakeland Road, from SR 11 (Cleveland Highway) to SR 284 (Clarks Bridge Road) a distance of 1.50 miles, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
8.  Moore-Mills Road, from Poplar Springs Church Road until pavement ends a distance of 0.41 mile, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
9.  Renee Circle, from Harmony Church Road to terminus a distance of 0.47 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
10.  Union Circle, from Spout Springs Road to Union Church Road a distance of 1.36 miles, to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
11.  Young Road, from Britt Whitmire Road to Odum Smallwood Road a distance of 0.97 mile, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section]. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 11-14-96, § 1) 
10.30.100. - Speed zones for 13 specified areas (Res. of 3-13-97). 
A.  The following 13 specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Black Drive, from West Ridge Road to terminus a distance of 0.30 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Boy Scout Camp Road, from Sportsman Club Road to terminus a distance of 0.49 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Cagle Road, from S.R. 365/U.S. 23 (Cornelia Hwy.) to S.R. 52 (Lula Road) a distance of 1.66 mile, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
4.  Cottage Lane, from S.R. 11/U.S. 129 to terminus a distance of 0.12 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Dudley Hill Road, from Price Road (S.R. 136) to terminus a distance of 0.84 mile, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
6.  Elita Drive, from Green Hill Circle to Green Hill Circle a distance of 0.42 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Green Hill Circle, from Gainesville City Limits to terminus a distance of 0.59 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
8.  Raintree Trail, from Stephens Road to terminus a distance of 0.37 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
9.  Rock Ridge Drive, from terminus to terminus a distance of 0.40 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
10.  Shallowford Drive, from Shallowford Road to Green Hill Circle a distance of 0.57 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
11.  Shoreland Drive, from Holiday Road to North Waterworks Road a distance of 1.57 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
12.  Truelove Road, from Harmony Church Road to Barrett Road a distance of 1.54 mile, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
13.  Williamsport Drive, from S.R. 13 (Atlanta Hwy.) to terminus a distance of 0.46 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section]. 
C.  Motorists who violate this section will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 3-13-97, § 1) 
10.30.110. - Speed zones for 20 specified areas (Res. of 9-3-97). 
A.  The following 20 specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Browning Drive, from Bolding Road to terminus a distance of 0.16 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Elizabeth Lane, from Spout Springs Road to Cash Road a distance of 1.17 mile, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
3.  Elysian Circle, from Imperial Drive to Imperial Drive a distance of 0.39 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Forest Boulevard, from Cool Springs Road to terminus a distance of 0.43 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Forest Circle, from Forest Boulevard to Forest Drive a distance of 0.25 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Forest Drive, from Forest Boulevard to terminus a distance of 0.12 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Gillespie Road, from Price Road (S.R. 136) to Graham Circle a distance of 0.41 mile, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
8.  Graham Circle, from Price Road (S.R. 136) to Gillespie Road a distance of 1.36 mile, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
9.  Greenway Road, from Whitehall Road to beginning of gravel portion a distance of 0.80 mile, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
10.  Hiawatha Drive, from Seminole Drive to Tomacheche Trail a distance of 0.70 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
11.  Highland Street, from Liberty Street to terminus a distance of 0.32 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
12.  Merritts Drive, from Holiday Road (S.R. 347) to terminus a distance of 0.25 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
13.  Myrtle Drive, from Spring Street to Highland Street a distance of 0.15 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
14.  Seminole Drive, from Thompson Bridge Road (S.R. 60) to terminus a distance of 0.21 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
15.  Silver Circle, from Imperial Drive to Imperial Drive a distance of 0.36 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
16.  Spring Street, from Jesse Jewell Parkway (S.R. 369) to Victory Street a distance of 0.28 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
17.  Tomacheche Trail, from Thompson Bridge Road (S.R. 60) to Hiawatha Drive a distance of 0.45 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
18.  Twin Springs Road, from Harmony Church Road to terminus a distance of 0.33 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
19.  Victory Street, from Jesse Jewell Parkway (S.R. 369) to Spring Street a distance of 0.21 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
20.  Will Wheeler Road, from Mount Vernon Road (S.R. 283) to Bethel Road a distance of 1.99 mile, to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
B.  The County Traffic Engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section]. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 9-3-97, § 1) 
10.30.120. - Speed zones for 26 specified areas (Res. of 1-22-98). 
A.  The following 26 specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Biscayne Boulevard, from Calvery Drive to terminus a distance of 0.20 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Biscayne Place, from Calvery Drive to Biscayne Boulevard a distance of 0.20 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Bowman Drive, from Skelton Road to terminus a distance of 0.20 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Capitola Farm Road, from Hog Mountain Road to Bragg Road a distance of 1.13 mile, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
5.  Chestnut Drive, from Winder Highway (S.R. 53) to terminus a distance of 0.40 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Cooley Drive, from Athens Street to terminus a distance of 0.30 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Hanover Drive, from Cochran Road to terminus a distance of 0.32 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
8.  Hickory Lane, from Chestnut Drive to Walnut Circle a distance of 0.11 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
9.  Leafview Drive, from Rolling Ridge to terminus a distance of 0.41 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
10.  Leafview Way, from Leafview Drive to terminus a distance of 0.13 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
11.  Mabry Road, from Mountain View Road to Old Flowery Branch Road a distance of 0.42 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
12.  Oak Harbour Drive, from Mount Vernon Road (S.R. 283) to Oak Harbour Drive a distance of 0.59 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
13.  Parks Road, from Atlanta Highway (S.R. 13) to terminus a distance of 0.43 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
14.  Pless Road, from Mud Creek Road to Habersham County Line a distance of 0.66 mile, to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
15.  Pond Fork Way, from Leafview Drive to terminus a distance of 0.12 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
16.  Red Oak Drive, from Price Road (S.R. 136) to Red Oak Drive a distance of 0.81 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
17.  Red Oak Lane, from Red Oak Drive to Red Oak Drive a distance of 0.24 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
18.  Riverchase Drive, from terminus to terminus a distance of 0.41 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
19.  Riverwood Drive, from Cleveland Highway (U.S. 129) to Tapawingo Drive a distance of 0.85 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
20.  Rolling Mist Court, from Riverchase Drive to terminus a distance of 0.15 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
21.  Rolling Ridge, from Harmony Church Road to terminus a distance of 0.22 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
22.  Spring Head Drive, from River Hill Drive to terminus a distance of 0.38 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
23.  Summit View Drive, from River Hill Drive to terminus a distance of 0.23 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
24.  Thomas Road, from Price Road (S.R. 136) to W.G. Robinson Road a distance of 0.71 mile, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
25.  Wallace Road, from Athens Highway (U.S. 129) to Baker Road a distance of 1.73 mile, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
26.  Walnut Circle, from terminus to terminus a distance of 0.44 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section]. 
C.  Motorists who violate this section will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 1-22-98, § 1) 
10.30.130. - St. Charles Avenue. 
A.  The following specified area in Hall County is to have a speed zone as follows: 
1.  St. Charles Avenue, from Browns Bridge Road (S.R. 369) to Montgomery Drive a distance of 0.54 mile, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for the specified area above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section]. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 5-28-98, § 1) 
10.30.140. - Speed zones for 26 specified areas (Res. of 9-10-98). 
A.  The following 26 specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Azelea Lane, from Floyd Road to terminus a distance of 0.35 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Barnes Drive, from Floyd Road to terminus a distance of 0.38 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Bowman Springs Trail, from Artesian Spring Drive to terminus a distance of 0.37 miles, to be zoned 25 MPH. 
4.  Carolyn Street, from Keith Bridge Road to terminus a distance of 0.38 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Claude Parks Road, from S.R. 115 to Lumpkin County line a distance of 2.98 miles, to be zoned at 50 MPH. 
6.  Dana Drive, from Old Cornelia Highway to gravel portion a distance of 0.20 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Ed Dodd Trail, from Nancy Creek Road to terminus a distance of 0.40 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
8.  F. Gailey Road, from U.S. 129 (Cleveland Hwy.) to Ransom Free Road a distance of 0.93 miles, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
9.  Gary Street, from Lake Hill Drive to terminus a distance of 0.10 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
10.  Harmony Bend, from Tranquility Drive to terminus a distance of 0.18 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
11.  Holly Hock Drive, from Union Church Road to terminus a distance of 0.26 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
12.  Houser Mill Road, from Hubert Stephens Road to Hopewell Church Road a distance of 0.99 miles, to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
13.  J.M. Turk Road, from Martin Road to end of paved section of J.M. Turk Road a distance of 1.74 miles, to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
14.  Keystone Court, from Elizabeth Lane to terminus a distance of 0.09 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
15.  Lake Hill Drive, from U.S. 129 (Cleveland Hwy.) to U.S. 129 (Cleveland Hwy.) a distance of 0.45 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
16.  Mandalay Road, from S.R. 284 (Clarks Bridge Road) to terminus a distance of 0.41 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
17.  Mill Creek Road, from Ed Dodd Trail to terminus a distance of 0.32 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
18.  Mill Stone Drive, from S.R. 60 (Thompson Bridge Rd.) to Mill Creek Road a distance of 0.17 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
19.  Miller Drive, from Old Cornelia Highway to end of pavement a distance of 0.09 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
20.  Mount Salem Circle, from Wade Orr Road to S.R. 13 (Atlanta Highway) a distance of 0.62 miles, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
21.  Randall Street, from Lake Hill Drive to terminus a distance of 0.11 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
22.  Richardson Street, from S.R. 13 (Atlanta Highway) to Airport Drive a distance of 0.27 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
23.  Serenity Street, from Tranquility Drive to terminus a distance of 0.11 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
24.  Snap Dragon Drive, from Holly Hock Drive to Daffodil Drive a distance of 0.12 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
25.  Thompson Bend, from Hardy Road to Mill Trail a distance of 0.68 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
26.  Tranquility Drive, from S.R. 53 (Winder Hwy.) to terminus a distance of 0.24 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The County Traffic Engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section]. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 9-10-98, § 1) 
10.30.150. - Speed zones for twenty nine specified areas in the county. 
A.  The following 29 specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Venture Circle, from Venture Drive to terminus a distance of 0.23 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Venture Drive, from S.R. 53 (Dawsonville Hwy.) to Venture Circle a distance of 0.57 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Baker Road, from U.S. 129 to end of pavement a distance of 0.88 miles, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
4.  1st Street, from S.R. 13 (Atlanta Hwy.) to S.R. 13 (Atlanta Hwy.) a distance of 0.21 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  "J" Avenue, from 1st Street to terminus a distance of 0.28 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Honeysuckle Road, from S.R. 11 (Cleveland Hwy.) to S.R. 284 (Clarks Bridge Rd.) a distance of 0.80 miles, to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
7.  Creekstone Drive, from S.R. 129 (Cleveland Hwy.) to terminus a distance of 0.31 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
8.  Glade Farm Road, from S.R. 52 (Lula Rd.) to S.R. 284 (Clarks Bridge Rd.) a distance of 4.06 miles, to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
9.  Cedar Creek Road, from East Hall Road to Joe Chandler Road a distance of 2.15 miles, to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
10.  Leach Road, from Chestatee Road to Willie Robinson Road a distance of 1.5 miles, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
11.  George Barns Road, from Ben Parks Road to Claude Parks Road a distance of 1.39 miles, to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
12.  W.G. Robinson Road, from Lawson Robinson Road to terminus a distance of 1.00 miles, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
13.  England Road, from East Hall Road to Joe Chandler Road a distance of 0.50 miles, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
14.  Devonshire Drive, from Wilmington Way to terminus, a distance of 0.99 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
15.  Wilmington Way, from Devonshire Drive to terminus, a distance of 0.32 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
16.  Henson Road, from Fields Road to terminus a distance of 0.84 miles, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
17.  Fields Road, from SR 52 to beginning of gravel portion a distance of 0.12 miles, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
18.  Hopewell Church Road, From SR 60 to Hubert Stephens Road a distance of 1.80 miles, to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
19.  Hopewell Road, from SR 60 to Hopewell Church Road a distance of 0.31 miles, to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
20.  H. Abercrombie Road, from Yellow Creek Road to Hall/Lumpkin County line a distance of 0.94 miles. 
21.  Rocky Ford Terrace, from Shady Oak Trail to terminus a distance of 0.21 miles. 
22.  Shady Oak Trail, from Lakeland Road to terminus a distance of 0.34 miles. 
23.  Glendale Drive, from terminus to terminus a distance of 0.62 miles. 
24.  Greggs Road, from Barrett Road to Bob Bryant Road a distance of 0.90 miles. 
25.  Muddy River Lane, from Chatuge Drive to Lake Juliette Drive a distance of 0.26 miles. 
26.  Chatuge Drive, from Bogan Road to terminus a distance of 0.27 miles. 
27.  Lake Juliette Road, from Hall/Gwinnett County line to terminus a distance of 0.194 miles. 
28.  Carters Lake Road, from Chatuge Drive to Lake Juliette Drive a distance of 0.18 miles. 
29.  Arrowhead Drive, from Lake Ranch Drive to Lake Ranch Drive a distance of 0.66 miles. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this section. 
C.  Motorists who violate this section will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 11-24-99(2)) 
10.30.160. - Speed zones for 12 specified areas in the county. 
A.  The following 12 specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Bayview Drive, from New Bethany Road to Bayside Court a distance of 0.46 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Wild Turkey Way, from Shirley Road to terminus a distance of 0.48 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Crooked Creek Road, from Shirley Road to terminus a distance of 0.52 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Tapawingo Drive, from Cleveland Highway to terminus a distance of 0.50 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Wildwood Trail, from Paradise Point Road to Wildwood Trail a distance of 0.43 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Bayside Court, from Lakeshore to terminus a distance of 0.28 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Allison Road, from Sardis Road to Looper Lake Road a distance of 0.64 miles, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
8.  Clearbrook Drive, from terminus to terminus a distance of 0.46 miles, to be zones at 25 MPH. 
9.  Giddon Martin Road, from Ledan Extension to terminus a distance of 1.1 miles, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
10.  Lee Street, from Newton Street to Spring Road a distance of 0.25 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
11.  Puckett Road, from S.R. 347 (Friendship Road) to the Gwinnett County line a distance of 0.28 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
12.  Rilla Road, from S.R. 283 (Mount Vernon Road) to terminus a distance of 0.70 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 8-24-00, § 1) 
Editor's note— A resolution dated August 24, 2000 enacted provisions designated as a new § 10.30.60. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included herein as § 10.30.160. 
10.30.170. - Reserved. 
10.30.180. - Speed zones for two specified areas in Hall County. 
A.  The following two specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Deville Lane. From Eldorado Drive to terminus a distance of 0.28 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Stringer Road. From S.R. 254 (Old Cleveland Road) to S.R. 284 (Shoal Creek Road) a distance of 1.40 miles, to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 11-22-00(2), § 1) 
10.30.190. - Speed zones for 12 specified areas in Hall County. 
A.  The following 12 specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Valley Creek Drive, from S.R. 53 (Winder Highway) to terminus a distance of miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Dean Street, from West Ridge Road to Gainesville City Limits a distance of 0.42 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Brookfield Drive, from Browing Road to terminus a distance of 0.20 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Crescent Drive, from Old Cornelia Highway to terminus a distance of 0.37 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Ashland Drive, from Elizabeth Lane to terminus a distance of 0.35 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Lake Ranch Court, from S.R. 53 to terminus a distance of 0.50 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Chestnut Creek Lane, from Amherst Way to terminus a distance of 0.40 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
8.  Amherst Way, from terminus to terminus a distance of 0.39 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
9.  Marblehead Drive, from Portsmouth Drive to terminus a distance of 0.38 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
10.  Portsmouth Drive, from Wade Orr Road to terminus a distance of 0.42 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
11.  Evergreen Forest Court, from Amber Cove Way to terminus a distance of 0.26 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
12.  Bryant Quarter Road, from S.R. 52 to S.R. 82 a distance of 4.91 miles to be zoned at 50 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 1-10-02, § 1) 
10.30.200. - Speed zones for 13 specified areas in Hall County. 
A.  The following 13 specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Clearwater Springs Drive, from White Rock Drive to terminus a distance of 0.27 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  White Rock Drive, from Thompsons Mill Road to terminus a distance of 0.49 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Bridgewater Drive, from Bridgewater Circle to terminus a distance of 0.49 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Basin Drive, from Thompson Mill Road to terminus a distance of 0.36 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Smallwood Road, from S.R. 11/U.S. 129 to terminus a distance of 1.08 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Oak Grove Road, from S.R. 11/U.S. 129 to Smallwood Road a distance of 0.21 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Hasty Acres Road, from Whitehall Road to terminus a distance of 0.34 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
8.  River Elan Drive, from McEver Lake Road to terminus a distance of 0.453 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
9.  Evian Way, from Riviere Point to terminus a distance of 0.447 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
10.  Riviere Point, from terminus to terminus a distance of 0.303 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
11.  Smith Mill Road, from Grant Ford Road to end of pavement a distance of 0.71 miles to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
12.  Saddlehorse Drive, from Wade Orr Road to Bluegrass Lane a distance of 0.81 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
13.  Spring Valley Drive, from Barkers Bend Drive to terminus a distance of 0.37 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 7-11-02, § 1) 
Editor's note— Res. of Aug. 8, 2002, added provisions designated as 10.30.200. Inasmuch as there already existed provisions so designated, former § 10.30.200 has been renumbered as § 10.30.210 at the discretion of the editor. 
10.30.210. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
Note— See the editor's note at § 10.30.200. 
10.30.220. - Speed zones for ten specified areas in Hall County. 
A.  The following ten specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Arbor Chase Road from Poplar Springs Road to terminus, a distance of 0.45 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Gilstrap Mill Road from Mount Vernon Road to Lumpkin County Line a distance of 1.90 miles, to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
3.  Woodglenn Drive from Pine Vale Road to terminus a distance of 0.46 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Bateau Drive from McEver Road to terminus a distance of 0.27 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Grant Road from Bark Camp Road to Elrod Road a distance of 0.84 miles to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
6.  North Star Drive from Magnetic Point to terminus a distance of 0.38 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Compass Drive from Wade Orr Road to terminus a distance of 0.66 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
8.  River Oaks Drive from River Road to terminus a distance of 0.24 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
9.  Arlington Court from Montclair Circle to terminus a distance of 0.10 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
10.  Montclair Circle from Aspen Hill Drive to Aspen Hill Drive a distance of 0.86 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 8-28-03, § 1) 
10.30.230. - Speed zones for nine specified areas in Hall County. 
A.  The following specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Marlette Road, from Leeland Road to terminus a distance of 0.30 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Oak Creek Drive, from Sardis Road to terminus a distance of 0.63 miles, to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Shelter Cove, from Chestatee Road to Chestatee Road a distance of 0.21 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Rose Petal Street, from Gaines Mill Road to Terminus a distance of 0.77 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Green Leaf Lane, from Terminus to Terminus a distance of 0.31 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Thorn Bush Drive, from Rose Petal Street to Green Leaf Lane a distance of 0.37 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Barber Road, from Calvary Church Road to Gibbs Drive a distance of 0.50 miles to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
8.  Duckett Mill Road, from S.R. 53/Dawsonville Highway to 800 feet south of Banks Mountain Drive a distance of 1.41 miles to be zoned at 50 MPH. 
9.  Duckett Mill Road, from 800 feet south of Banks Mountain Drive to end of Right-of-Way a distance of 0.53 miles to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 2-26-04, § 1) 
10.30.240. - Speed zones for 13 specified areas in Hall County. 
A.  The following specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Buice Circle, from Mountain View Road to Drew Valley Street a distance of 0.21 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  East Bolding Road, from Bolding Road to terminus a distance of 0.40 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Fuller Road, from Talmo Road to end of pavement a distance of 1.45 miles to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
4.  Griffin Lane, from Deaton Road to Valley Creek Drive a distance of 0.23 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Manchester Lane, from Stratford Drive to terminus a distance of 0.32 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Old Flowery Branch Road, from SR 53 (Mundy Mill Road) to McEver Road a distance of 0.55 miles to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
7.  Old Flowery Branch Road, from Mountain View Road to SR 53 (Mundy Mill Road) a distance of 0.30 miles to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
8.  Rockingham Way, from Manchester Lane to terminus a distance of 0.43 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
9.  Stratford Drive, from Nix Bridge Road to Wellington Avenue a distance of 0.22 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
10.  Trellis Way, from Bennefield Road to terminus a distance of 0.24 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
11.  Weaver Road, from SR 332 (Poplar Springs Road) to SR 211 (Tanners Mill Road) a distance of 1.62 miles to be zoned at 30 MPH. 
12.  Wellington Avenue, from Stratford Drive to terminus a distance of 0.91 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
13.  Westchester Place, from Rockingham Way to terminus a distance of 0.21 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 8-12-04, § 1) 
10.30.250. - Speed zones for seven specified areas in Hall County. 
A.  The following specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Strickland Boulevard, from Strickland Road to terminus a distance of 0.22 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Litany Court, from Spout Springs Road to terminus a distance of 0.84 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Parker Road, from SR11/US 129 (Cleveland Highway) to Dunlap Mill Road a distance of 0.03 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Glen Ridge, from Barrett Road to terminus a distance of 0.34 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Valley Glen, from Glen Ridge to Glen Ridge a distance of 0.38 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Dunlap Mill Road, from Thompson Mill Road to Little River Park Road a distance of 0.53 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Lotheridge Road, from White Sulphur Road to end of pavement a distance of 0.50 miles to be zoned at 30 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 2-10-05, § 1) 
10.30.260. - Speed zones for nine specified areas in Hall County. 
A.  The following specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Chestnut Hill Road, from Gaines Ferry Road to end of maintenance a distance of 0.88 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Friendship Farm Drive, from Friendship Farm Road to terminus a distance of 0.69 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Maplewood Lane, from Timbercrest Drive to terminus, a distance of 0.25 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Timbercrest Drive, from Flat Creek Road to terminus a distance of 0.20 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Sardis Drive, from Sardis Road to terminus a distance of 0.50 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Gailey Drive, from SR 11/US 129 to SR 284 a distance of 0.74 miles to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
7.  Campbell Road, from Coker Road to SR 82 a distance of 1.55 miles to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
8.  White Sulphur Road, from SR 365 to Gainesville City Limits, a distance of 1.05 miles to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
9.  Airport Drive, from Myrtle Street to Erskin Street a distance of 0.24 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 5-26-05, § 1) 
10.30.270. - Speed zones for seven specified areas in Hall County. 
A.  The following specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Bass Circle, from Shadburn Ferry Road to terminus a distance of 0.66 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Willowbrook Trail, from Lake Run Drive to terminus a distance of 0.12 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Lake Run Drive, from McEver Road to terminus a distance of 0.25 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Meadow View Lane, from Overby Road to terminus a distance of 0.22 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Chesapeake Trace Lane, from Legacy Walk Drive to terminus a distance of 0.189 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Legacy Walk Drive, from Valley Creek Drive to terminus a distance of 0.140 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Lodgehaven Drive, from Duckett Mill Road to terminus a distance of 0.35 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 9-8-05, § 1) 
10.30.280. - Speed zones for 17 specified areas in Hall County. 
A.  The following specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Buffington Road, from Emory Griffin Road to Bryant Quarter Road a distance of 2.24 miles to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
2.  Holcomb Circle, from Winder Highway (SR 53) to terminus a distance of 0.150 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Mangum Road, from Athens Highway (US 129/SR 11) to Bob Bryant Road a distance of 0.70 miles to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
4.  Walnut Grove Way, from Price Road (SR 136) to terminus a distance of 0.57 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Deer Springs Way, from Deerlope Court to Deer Springs Way a distance of 0.48 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Deerlope Court, from Mercy Court to terminus a distance of 0.24 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Mercy Court, from Walnut Grove Way to terminus a distance of 0.12 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
8.  Monarch Drive, from Elrod Road to terminus a distance of 0.74 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
9.  Checkered Spot Drive, from Monarch Drive to terminus a distance of 0.14 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
10.  Speckled Wood Lane, from Monarch Drive to Checkered Spot Drive a distance of 0.39 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
11.  Timbercreek Trail, from Thompson Bridge Road (SR 60) to terminus a distance of 0.54 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
12.  John Reynolds Road, from Browning Place to terminus a distance of 0.860 miles to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
13.  North Browning Bridge Road, from Clarks Bridge Road (SR 284) to Don Carter State Park entrance, a distance of 1.86 miles, to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
14.  Stancil Road, from Clarks Bridge Road (SR 284) to terminus a distance of 0.60 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
15.  Browning Place (Section 1), from North Browning Bridge Road to John Reynolds Road a distance of 0.170 miles to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
16.  Stringer Avenue, from Atlanta Highway (SR 13) to Mountain Crest Drive a distance of 0.28 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
17.  Oak Harbour Circle, from Oak Harbour Drive to Oak Harbour Drive a distance of 0.35 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 1-12-06, § 1; Res. of 9-12-13(2), § 1) 
10.30.290. - Speed zones for 11 specified areas in Hall County. 
A.  The following specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Ashford Way, from Lyman Way to terminus a distance of 0.61 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Lyman Way, from Poplar Springs Road (SR 332) to terminus a distance of 0.33 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Mill Rose Trace, from Terrace Lake Point to terminus a distance of 0.20 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Silverthorn Drive, from McEver Road to terminus a distance of 0.14 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Terrace Lake Point, from Silverthorn Drive to terminus a distance of 0.34 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Balus Drive, from Whites Mill Road to terminus a distance of 0.30 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Green Crest Drive, from Gainesville City Limits to terminus a distance of 0.59 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
8.  Bradley Lane, from Cleveland Highway (US 129/SR 11) to Cleveland Highway (US 129/SR 11) a distance of 0.21 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
9.  Tall Hickory Trail, from terminus to terminus a distance of 0.81 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
10.  Willow Oak Drive, from Thompson Bridge Road (SR 60) to Tall Hickory Trail a distance of 0.60 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
11.  Bradford Street Extension, from West Ridge Road to Gainesville City Limits a distance of 0.32 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 5-25-06, § 1) 
10.30.300. - Speed zones for nine specified areas in Hall County. 
A.  The following specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Community Lane, from Grand Reunion Drive to terminus a distance of 0.102 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Grand Reunion Drive, from Reunion Way to Reunion Way a distance of 1.030 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Holiday Road (south section), from SR 13 Atlanta Highway to Thunder Road a distance of 0.610 miles to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
4.  Oakdale Drive, from Silverwood Drive to Glendale Drive a distance of 0.210 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Peacock Lane, from Grand Reunion Drive to terminus a distance of 0.554 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Porch Swing Place, from Community Lane to terminus a distance of 0.130 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Reunion Way, from Thompsons Mill Road/SR 347 to Grand Reunion Drive a distance of 0.295 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
8.  Silverwood Drive, from Candler Road (SR 60) to terminus a distance of 0.680 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
9.  Sugarmill Drive, from Union Circle to terminus a distance of 0.580 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 7-27-06, § 1) 
10.30.310. - Speed zones for eight specified areas in Hall County. 
A.  The following specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Commander Drive from Leeland Road to terminus a distance of 0.14 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Dove Point Lane from Spout Springs Road to Grand Reunion Drive a distance of .33 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Elizabeth Lane from Spout Springs Road to Cash Road a distance of 1.17 miles to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
4.  Spout Springs Road from Hog Mountain Road to Braselton City Limits a distance of 6.65 miles to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
5.  Saddle Club Road from Cool Springs Road to terminus a distance of 1.54 miles to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
6.  Britt Gailey Road from Hub Head Road to White County Line a distance of 1.09 miles to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
7.  Hub Head Road from Cleveland Highway to Campground Road a distance of 1.20 miles to be zoned at 45 MPH. 
8.  Newton Drive from Hopewell Church Road to terminus a distance of 0.740 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 12-14-06(3), § 1) 
10.30.320. - Speed zones for eleven specified areas in Hall County. 
A.  The following specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Todd Road from Tanners Mill Road (SR 211) to terminus a distance of 0.36 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Waterfall Way from terminus to terminus a distance of .44 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Bentwood Drive from McEver Road to terminus a distance of 0.25 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Price Drive from Price Road (SR 136) to terminus a distance of 0.17 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Broken Arrow Path from terminus to terminus a distance of 0.48 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6  Eubanks Creek Drive from Shoal Creek Road (SR 284) to terminus a distance of 0.328 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Helton Road from Jim Hood Road to Jess Helton Road a distance of 0.80 miles to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
8.  Rufus Bryant Road from Thompson Bridge Road (SR 60) to Stowers Road a distance of 1.66 miles to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
9.  Walking Stick Lane from Highland Drive to Broken Arrow Path a distance of 0.45 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
10.  Dixie Drive from Brown's Bridge Road (SR 369) to Cronic Drive a distance of 0.75 miles to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
11.  Spring Road from Gainesville City Limits to McEver Road (SR 53) a distance of 1.25 miles to be zoned at 30 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 4-12-07(1), § 1) 
10.30.330. - Speed zones for nine specified areas in Hall County. 
A.  The following specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Falls View Drive from terminus to terminus a distance of 0.208 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Ivy Green Drive from Lakeshore Road to Falls View Drive a distance of 0.085 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Royal Way from Wood Avenue to Ventura Drive a distance of 0.120 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Ventura Drive from Cronic Drive to Villa Clara Way a distance of 0.181 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Villa Clara Way from Ventura Drive to terminus a distance of 0.262 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Amber Dawn Way from Lee Ann Drive to terminus a distance of 0.358 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Chase Drive from terminus to terminus a distance of 0.288 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
8.  Lee Ann Drive from Southchase Drive to terminus a distance of 0.497 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
9.  Southchase Drive from Roy Parks Road to terminus a distance of 0.786 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 8-23-07, § 1) 
10.30.340. - Speed zones for twenty-one specified areas in Hall County. 
A.  The following specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Bearing Drive from Compass Drive to terminus a distance of 0.28 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
2.  Brookton Lane from Cane Crossing Drive to Cedar Hill Drive a distance of 0.14 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Cedar Hill Drive from terminus to terminus a distance of 0.33 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Cane Crossing Drive from Poplar Springs Road (SR 332) to terminus a distance of 0.25 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Hopewell Lane from Poplar Springs Road (SR 332) to terminus a distance of 0.70 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
6.  Ironwood Drive from Hopewell Lane to Berry Hill Drive a distance of 0.44 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
7.  Magnetic Point from Horizon Drive to terminus a distance of 0.24 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
8.  Plum Creek Drive from terminus to terminus a distance of 0.29 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
9.  Quailwood Drive from Martin Road to terminus a distance of 0.69 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
10.  Beachwood Drive from Barkers Bend Drive to Poplar Place a distance of 0.26 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
11.  Dogwood Trail from Beachwood Drive to Dogwood Trail a distance of 0.33 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
12.  Chimney House Lane from Pine View Drive to terminus a distance of 0.21 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
13.  Fair Grove Drive from terminus to terminus a distance of 0.15 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
14.  Forest Brook Crossing from Thousand Oaks Drive to Thousand Oaks Drive a distance of 0.63 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
15.  James Ed Road from Shope Road to terminus a distance of 0.46 miles to be zoned at 30 MPH. 
16.  Pine View Drive from Harmony Church Road to terminus a distance of 0.23 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
17.  Shope Road from Cleveland Highway (SR 11-US 129) to terminus a distance of 0.67 miles to be zoned at 30 MPH. 
18.  Thousand Oaks Drive from Harmony Church Road to Coker Road a distance of 0.95 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
19.  Triple Creek Bend from Forest Brook Crossing to Thousand Oaks Drive a distance of 0.93 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
20.  Winterset Lane from Pine View Drive to Fair Grove Drive a distance of 0.11 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
21.  West Dennis Drive from Gaines Mill Road to Gaines Mill Road a distance of 0.32 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 9-27-07(2), § 1) 
10.30.350. - Speed zones for five specified areas in Hall County. 
A.  The following specified areas in Hall County are to have speed zones as follows: 
1.  Antioch Campground Road from Sardis Road to East Lake Drive a distance of 1.21 miles to be zoned at 40 MPH. 
2.  Enfield Drive from Old Princeton Ridge to cul-de-sac a distance of 0.52 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
3.  Holly Forest Drive from Sherman Allen Road to terminus a distance of 0.24 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
4.  Old Princeton Ridge from Sardis Road to Warwick Drive a distance of 0.62 miles to be zoned at 25 MPH. 
5.  Tanners Mill Circle from Sherman Allen Road to Tanners Mill Road (SR 211) a distance of 0.630 miles to be zoned at 35 MPH. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for those specified areas above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 9-11-08(2), § 1) 
10.30.360. - Martin Road. 
A.  Martin Road from SR13 (Atlanta Highway) to JM Turk Road (approximately 0.4 miles in length) to be zoned at 35 mph; and from JM Turk Road to SR53 (Winder Highway) [approximately 1.5 miles in length] to be zoned at 40 mph. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate speed zone signs for the specified area above set out in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 3-22-18(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 10.40. - STOP INTERSECTIONS 

 

10.40.010. - Kenimer Road and Ransom Free Road. 
A.  The intersection of Kenimer Road and Ransom Free Road shall be a four-way stop with traffic from each direction coming to a complete stop before proceeding through the intersection. 
B.  The county engineer shall direct and place additional stop signs at the intersection in order to accomplish the purpose of this section. 
C.  Motorists who violate this section will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 8-11-86, §§ 1—3; Code 1991, § 10.16.010) 
10.40.020. - Nancy Creek Road and Turtle Back Road/Ed Dodd Trail. 
A.  The intersection of Nancy Creek Road and Turtle Back Road/Ed Dodd Trail shall be a four-way stop with traffic from each direction coming to a complete stop before proceeding through the intersection. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place additional stop signs at said intersection in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section]. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 8-11-94; Code 1991, § 10.16.011) 
10.40.030. - McEver Road and Gaines Ferry Road. 
A.  The intersection of McEver Road and Gaines Ferry Road shall be a signalized intersection with traffic being controlled by said signal. 
B.  The traffic engineering division of the Hall County Public Works Department shall install, operate and maintain the traffic signal at said intersection in order to accomplish the purposes of this section. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 9-22-94; Code 1991, § 10.16.012) 
10.40.040. - McEver Road and Stephens Road. 
A.  The intersection of McEver Road and Stephens Road shall be a signalized intersection with traffic being controlled by said signal. 
B.  The traffic engineering division of the Hall County Public Works Department shall install, operate and maintain the traffic signal at said intersection in order to accomplish the purposes of this section. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 9-22-94; Code 1991, § 10.16.013) 
10.40.050—10.40.190. - Reserved. 
10.40.200. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 10.50. - BRIDGES 

 

10.50.010. - Jumping off bridges prohibited. 
No person shall voluntarily jump off, dive off, leap off, fall off, swing off, flip off or in any manner leave the structure of any public bridge within the county, except in a manner otherwise expressly allowed by law. 
(Res. of 8-13-85, § 1; Code 1991, § 10.20.010) 
Cross reference— Health and safety, tit. 8. 
10.50.020. - Enforcement. 
The county marshal of the county and any duly authorized law enforcement officer shall have the duty to arrest and cite any violator of this chapter. 
(Res. of 8-13-85, § 2; Code 1991, § 10.20.020) 
10.50.030. - Judicial disposition. 
The magistrate's court of the county shall have jurisdiction over all alleged violations of this chapter. The prosecuting officer shall give proper citation to all alleged violators of this chapter to appear before and have disposition of the alleged violation before the magistrate's court of the county in the manner provided by law. 
(Res. of 8-13-85, § 3; Code 1991, § 10.20.030) 
10.50.040. - Exceptions. 
No violation of this resolution [chapter] will be held to have occurred when a person involuntarily leaves the structure of a public bridge in the county, or leaves the structure in order to protect the health, safety or welfare of that person or anyone else. 
(Res. of 8-13-85, § 5; Code 1991, § 10.20.040) 
10.50.050. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 8-13-85, § 4; Code 1991, § 10.20.050; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 10.60. - PARKING ON COUNTY PROPERTY[2] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— County parking deck, ch. 10.90. 

10.60.010. - Prohibited parking. 
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or directions of a law enforcement officer or official traffic control device, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
A.  On a sidewalk; 
B.  Within an intersection; 
C.  On a designated crosswalk; 
D.  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking; 
E.  In any designated parking space for a time period in excess of the time period posted on the official sign marking the parking space, which time period may not be restricted to less than 15 minutes; 
F.  In any designated parking space when the person is not transacting business in the county courthouse or its annex or serving as a juror or witness in the courthouse; 
G.  In any parking space which is designated by an official sign for the use of county officials, employees or jurors, unless they qualify as a designated party for the space. 
(Res. of 2-27-78, § 1; Code 1991, § 10.24.010) 
10.60.020. - Enforcement. 
The sheriff of the county and his deputies, and such other persons as shall be designated by the board of commissioners of the county, shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 2-27-78, § 2; Code 1991, § 10.24.020) 
10.60.030. - Towing of vehicles. 
Any vehicle that is left unattended and in violation of the provisions of section 10.60.010 of this resolution [chapter] may be removed to the area maintained by the sheriff of the county for abandoned vehicles or such other area as may be designated by the board of commissioners of the county. The owner of such vehicles or such other person or persons as shall lawfully reclaim such vehicles shall pay to the county the cost of removing the vehicle and a storage fee of $3.00 per day for each day the vehicle was stored by the county, before the vehicle may be reclaimed. 
(Res. of 2-27-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 10.24.030) 
10.60.040. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 2-27-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 10.24.040; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 10.70. - PARKING ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 

 

10.70.010. - Prohibited parking. 
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or directions of a law enforcement officer or official traffic control device, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in or along any public road right-of-way which has been designated by the board of commissioners of the county as a no parking area pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 4-28-86, § 1; Code 1991, § 10.28.010) 
10.70.020. - Enforcement. 
The sheriff of the county and his deputies, the county marshals, and such other persons as shall be designated by the board of commissioners of the county shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 4-28-86, § 2; Code 1991, § 10.28.020) 
10.70.030. - Towing of vehicles. 
Any vehicle that is left unattended and in violation of the provisions of section 10.70.010 of this chapter may be removed to the area maintained by the sheriff of the county for abandoned vehicles or such other area as may be designated by the board of commissioners of the county. The owner of such vehicle or such other person or persons as shall lawfully reclaim the vehicle shall pay to the county the cost of removing the vehicle and a storage fee of $3.00 per day for each day the vehicle was stored by the county, before the vehicle may be reclaimed. 
(Res. of 4-28-86, § 3; Code 1991, § 10.28.030) 
10.70.040. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 4-28-86, § 4; Code 1991, § 10.28.040; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 10.80. - NO PARKING AREAS 

 

10.80.010. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 10.80.010, which pertained to a Tower Street extension, has been deleted pursuant to abandonment of the extension by resolution on Sept. 14, 1995. The section, formerly § 10.32.010 of the 1991 Code, derived from a resolution of August 4, 1987. 
10.80.020. - Snelling Mill Road. 
A.  The right-of-way of Snelling Mill Road beginning 0.54 mile from Gaines Ferry Road and extending 0.03 mile to the terminus is a no parking area. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate traffic signs on Snelling Mill Road in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section] advising that the specified area above set out is a no parking area. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 6-23-94; Code 1991, § 10.32.011) 
10.80.030. - Newton Street. 
A.  The right-of-way of Newton Street beginning at Spring Road and extending approximately 0.26 mile to its terminus is a no parking area. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate traffic signs on Newton Street in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section] advising that the specified area above set out is a no parking area. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 10-12-94; Code 1991, § 10.32.012) 
10.80.040. - Capri Terrace. 
A.  The right-of-way of Capri Terrace beginning at Cronic Drive and extending approximately 0.15 mile to its terminus is a no parking area. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate traffic signs on Capri Terrace in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section] advising that the specified area above set out is a no parking area. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 7-27-92; Code 1991, § 10.32.013) 
10.80.050. - A Avenue (Chicopee Village). 
A.  The right-of-way of A Avenue (Chicopee Village) beginning at First Street and extending approximately 0.16 mile to First Street is a no parking area for trucks with six wheels or more. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate traffic signs on A Avenue (Chicopee Village) in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section] advising that the specified area above set out is a no parking area. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 4-27-95; Code 1991, § 10.32.014) 
10.80.060. - West Ridge Road. 
A.  The right-of-way of West Ridge Road beginning at the grade railway crossing and extending east approximately 0.15 mile is a no parking area. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate traffic signs on West Ridge Road in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section] advising that the specified area above set out is a no parking area. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 6-8-95; Code 1991, § 10.32.015) 
10.80.070. - Friendship Road at Blue Circle Aggregates (Quarry). 
A.  The right-of-way of Friendship Road beginning at Blue Circle Aggregates (Quarry) driveway and extending approximately 250 feet southeasterly and 250 feet northwesterly (500-foot zone) is a no parking area. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate traffic signs on Friendship Road in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section] advising that the specified area above set out is a no parking area. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 10-16-95, § 1(10.32.16)) 
10.80.080. - Reserved. 
10.80.090. - Rilla Road. 
A.  The right-of-way of Rilla Road beginning at the entrance to North Hall Middle School (approximately 1100 feet from S.R. 283) and extending approximately 500 feet west of the entrance to North Hall Middle School is a no parking area. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate traffic signs on the subject roadways in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section] advising that the specified area above set out is a no parking area. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 9-12-96, § 1) 
10.80.100. - Jim Hood Road. 
(a)  The right-of-way of Jim Hood Road beginning at T. Martin Road and extending approximately 500 feet northwest is a no parking area. 
(b)  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate traffic signs on the subject roadway in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section] advising that the specified area above set out is a no parking area. 
(c)  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 6-26-97, § 1) 
10.80.110. - T. Martin Road. 
(a)  The right-of-way of T. Martin Road beginning at Jim Hood Road and extending approximately 500 feet north is a no parking area. 
(b)  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate traffic signs on the subject roadway in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section] advising that the specified area above set out is a no parking area. 
(c)  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 6-26-97, § 1) 
10.80.120. - Stephens Road. 
A.  The right-of-way of Stephens Road beginning at Pipsissewa Drive and extending approximately 500 feet north and south of said intersection is a no parking area. 
B.  The County Traffic Engineer shall direct and place appropriate traffic signs on the subject roadway in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section] advising that the specified area above set out is a no parking area. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 9-25-97, § 1) 
10.80.130. - Jim Crow Road. 
A.  The right-of-way of Jim Crow Road beginning at the entrance of the Old Federal Day Use Park and extending approximately 400 feet south on Jim Crow Road is a no parking area. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate traffic signs on the subject roadway in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution [section] advising that the specified area above set out is a no parking area. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution [section] will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 7-9-98, § 1) 
10.80.140. - Hall Street. 
A.  The right-of-way of Hall Street beginning at Atlanta Highway and extending approximately 0.20 mile to its intersection with Stringer Avenue is a no parking area. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate traffic signs on the subject roadway in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution advising that the specified area above set out is a no parking area. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 8-10-00, § 1) 
10.80.150. - Chestnut Ridge Road. 
A.  The right-of-way of Chestnut Ridge Road beginning at Chestnut Ridge Park and extending approximately 1,400 feet (0.26 mile) along Chestnut Ridge Road is a no parking area. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate traffic signs on the subject roadway in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution advising that the specified area above set out is a no parking area. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 10-12-00, § 1) 
10.80.160. - Lake Ranch Court. 
A.  The right-of-way of the western side of Lake Ranch Court beginning at S.R. 53 (Dawsonville Highway) and extending approximately 250 feet along Lake Ranch Court to its intersection with Papp Drive is a no parking area. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate traffic signs on the subject roadway in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution advising that the specified area above set out is a no parking area. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 6-28-01, § 1) 
10.80.170. - Oakwood Road. 
A.  The right-of-way of Oakwood Road beginning at S.R. 53 (Mundy Mill Road) and extending approximately 1,000 feet southwest to its intersection with Briarwood Drive/Mundy Mill Drive is a no parking area. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate traffic signs on the subject roadway in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution advising that the specified area above set out is a no parking area. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 10-11-01, § 1) 
10.80.180. - Martin Drive. 
A.  The right-of-way of Martin Drive beginning at East Ridge Road and extending approximately 0.09 miles to its intersection with Patterson Drive is a no parking area. 
B.  The county traffic engineer shall direct and place appropriate traffic signs on the subject roadway in order to accomplish the purpose of this resolution advising that the specified area above set out is a no parking area. 
C.  Motorists who violate this resolution will be subject to the same penalties as exist for violations of other county resolutions. 
(Res. of 5-24-07(2), § 1) 
10.80.190. - Reserved. 
10.80.200. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 10.90. - COUNTY PARKING DECK[3] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Parking on county property, ch. 10.60. 

10.90.010. - Prohibited parking. 
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with directions of a law enforcement officer or official traffic control device, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
A.  In any aisle or driveway outside marked parking spaces; 
B.  Within an intersection connecting parking levels; 
C.  On a designated crosswalk; 
D.  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking; 
E.  In any parking space which is designated by an official sign for the use of county government officials, employees, jurors, or U.S. government employees unless they qualify as a designated party for the space. 
(Res. of 8-28-89, § 1; Code 1991, § 10.36.010) 
10.90.020. - Towing of vehicles. 
Any vehicle that is left unattended or in violation of the provisions of section 10.90.010 of this chapter may be removed to the area maintained by the sheriff of the county for abandoned vehicles, or such other area as may be designated by the board of commissioners of the county. The owner of such vehicle or such other person or persons as shall lawfully reclaim the vehicle shall pay to the county the cost of removing the vehicle and a storage of $3.00 per day for each day the vehicle was stored by the county before the vehicle may be reclaimed. 
(Res. of 8-28-89, § 2; Code 1991, § 10.36.020) 
10.90.030. - Enforcement. 
The sheriff of the county and his deputies, the county marshals and such other persons as shall be designated by the board of commissioners of the county shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Res. of 8-28-89, § 4; Code 1991, § 10.36.030) 
10.90.040. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 8-28-89, § 3; Code 1991, § 10.36.040; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES[1] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 2.50; vehicles and traffic, tit. 10; subdivisions, tit. 16; design of streets in subdivisions, ch. 16.60; street construction requirements for subdivisions, ch. 16.70; zoning, tit. 17; parkway landscaping in corridor development overlay district, § 17.230.190 et seq.; building setback requirements, ch. 17.240; development standards for property having access to divided four-lane highway, § 17.240.160; signs, ch. 17.270. 

CHAPTER 12.10. - HOUSE NUMBERING SYSTEM[2] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and construction, tit. 15. 

12.10.010. - Title. 
This chapter shall be further referred to as the "Structure Numbering Resolution." 
(Res. of 3-11-85, art. I; Code 1991, § 12.02.010) 
12.10.020. - Designation of street names and numbers. 
Streets now being maintained by the Hall County Board of Commissioners and other public agencies within unincorporated Hall County shall in the future be named and numbered as now designated on the official map and official index of the board of commissioners as amended by each implementing resolution. Every other street within unincorporated Hall County shown on the official index shall hereafter be referred to as designated on the official index for structure numbering purposes. 
(Res. of 3-11-85, art. II; Code 1991, § 12.02.020) 
12.10.030. - Designation of structure numbers. 
Structure numbers for dwelling units, places of business, industrial locations and all other structures and uses requiring same shall be assigned by: 
A.  The department of special services in conjunction with the United States Postal Service during the implementation stage of the system. 
B.  The planning and zoning department following the implementation phase of the system in each area of the unincorporated area of the county. 
C.  The planning and zoning department shall keep a record of all numbers assigned under this chapter. Such records may be maintained in data processing storage systems if so desired. 
(Res. of 3-11-85, art. III; Code 1991, § 12.02.030) 
12.10.040. - Posting of designated structure numbers. 
A.  The owner or occupant or person in charge of any dwelling unit, structure or use to which a number has been assigned shall be notified in writing by the implementing agency of the number assigned to the same. 
B.  Within 60 days after receipt of such written notification, the owner, occupant or person in charge of any dwelling unit, structure or use to which a number has been assigned shall cause the same to be posted in either one or two locations depending upon the following conditions: 
1.  If the mailbox is located on the same side of the street and adjacent to the driveway or curb cut, the number shall be affixed to the mailbox in letters two inches in height or larger and of a color contrasting with the color of the mailbox. This section does not preclude an individual from also numbering the front entrance of the structure if so desired. 
2.  If the mailbox is not on the same side of the street and adjacent to the driveway or curb cut, the number shall be posted at two locations: 
(a)  On the mailbox as prescribed by the U.S. Postal Service regulations; 
(b)  Either on the structure front if visible from the street or on an above-ground sign attached to a post or other object at the driveway or curb cut. The numbers shall be two inches in height or larger and of a color contrasting with the color of the background. This section does not preclude an individual from also numbering the front entrance of his structure if so desired. 
3.  In the case that a building is served by two or more driveways or curb cuts, the number shall be assigned and posted to the front entrance of driveway. 
4.  It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or person in charge of the dwelling unit, structure or use, upon affixing the new number, to remove any different number which might be mistaken for or confused with the number assigned to the structure. 
5.  In such cases where the assigned number cannot be posted as required above, the number shall be posted as prescribed by the department of planning and zoning after consultation with the owner. 
(Res. of 3-11-85, art. IV; Code 1991, § 12.02.040) 
12.10.050. - Types of numbers. 
Two types of numbers are used under this chapter: 
A.  A primary number to be assigned to each street frontage of each parcel of land, whether or not the parcel is occupied. The primary number is required to be posted only if the parcel is occupied by a dwelling unit, structure or active use and the owner, occupant or person in charge is notified under section 12.10.040 of this chapter. Other primary numbers are reserved for future development of the numbered parcels and will be assigned at the time of development. 
B.  Secondary numbers may be used when a number of units, structures and uses co-exist on the same parcel of land. Examples of parcels requiring secondary numbers include apartment projects, condominium projects, mobile home parks, office parks, planned unit developments, recreational vehicle parks, recreational areas, shopping centers and other uses where the use of secondary numbers would clarify the location of a unit for use for public safety purposes. To provide secondary numbers, the administering department shall work with the owner, manager or person in charge of the project to determine a logical numbering system under the following guidelines: 
1.  Existing numbered units and uses shall retain the present set of addresses with only the primary number being changed if the primary number is not in sequence with the overall system. 
2.  Buildings on a single parcel with more than one and less than five units may be given either letter (preferred) or number designations as requested by the owner. 
3.  A single building on a single parcel of land and with five or more units may be given numerical designations such as Suite 5, Apartment 5, etc., if so desired. 
4.  Multiple buildings on the same parcel of land may be given secondary numbers consisting of number designations if the buildings are accessed from a main entrance to the project. Generally the number designations should increase in a clockwise direction from the main entrance. 
5.  Mobile home parks, recreational vehicle parks and similar uses shall be given letter designations for lots or sections and number designation for individual lots or sites. 
(Res. of 3-11-85, art. V; Code 1991, § 12.02.050) 
12.10.060. - Implementation in stages of numbering system. 
A.  Because of the large and complex nature of Hall County and the existing numbering system now in place in some portions of unincorporated Hall County, this chapter shall be implemented in stages covering small sections of the entire area by the adoption of implementation resolutions for each section of the county. 
B.  It shall be the policy of the board of commissioners not to change existing numbered addresses if the existing system follows a logical and expandable order. 
(Res. of 3-11-85, art. VI; Code 1991, § 12.02.060) 
12.10.070. - Excluded structures. 
A.  The intent of this section is to exclude from this chapter those structures that do not present a significant danger to human life if destroyed by fire or other events. 
B.  The following structures shall be excluded from the provisions: 
1.  Agricultural buildings not requiring a separate mailing address such as a barn, poultry house, outbuilding or equipment storage buildings. Buildings used as dwelling units, offices or the nominal work station of an employee shall not be exempt. 
2.  Storage and accessory buildings for the use of the occupant of another building on the property. Buildings used as dwelling units, offices, or the nominal work station of an employee, or requiring a separate mailing address, shall not be exempt. 
(Res. of 3-11-85, art. VII; Code 1991, § 12.02.070) 
12.10.080. - New structures and lots. 
A.  Structure numbers will be assigned to each new lot, tract or building site on the original drawings of a final subdivision plat, mobile home park, planned unit development or other plan requiring the approval of the Hall County Planning Commission by the planning and zoning department. 
B.  No building, electrical, plumbing or mechanical permit for any new or remodeled or repaired structure will be issued by the building official of Hall County, Georgia, following the implementation of this resolution [chapter] in the affected area of Hall County until the owner, developer or builder has procured from the department of planning and zoning the official structure number or numbers. Final approval for a certificate of occupancy of any principal building erected or repaired, or use requiring said number, shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with the standards of this chapter. 
(Res. of 3-11-85, art. VIII; Code 1991, § 12.02.080) 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, tit. 16. 
12.10.090. - Valid structure number required before provision of utility services. 
A.  Following the implementation of this resolution [chapter] in any area of Hall County, all utility services regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission or any utility cooperative service organization shall withhold service from any building until the owner or other requesting party has furnished the utility with a valid structure number. 
B.  It shall be the responsibility of the Hall County Department of Special Services to notify each affected utility service of each implementation area by issuing maps and lists of official numbers assigned each structure or use. 
(Res. of 3-11-85, art. IX; Code 1991, § 12.02.090) 
Cross reference— Public services, tit. 13. 
12.10.100. - Valid structure number required before provision of certain county services. 
Every department and official under the jurisdiction of the Hall County Board of Commissioners shall not render any non-emergency service until the occupant, owner or requesting individual has provided the department with a valid structure number. Non-emergency service includes any service provided by the board of commissioners except fire, rescue, law enforcement or emergency medical service. 
(Res. of 3-11-85, art. X; Code 1991, § 12.02.100) 
Cross reference— Administration, tit. 2. 
12.10.110. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. Each and every day that such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Res. of 3-11-85, art. XI; Code 1991, § 12.02.110; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
12.10.120. - Effective date. 
Sixty days after the adoption of an implementation resolution for each area of unincorporated Hall County, this chapter shall take effect and be in full force and effect in that area of the county. 
(Res. of 3-11-85, art. XII; Code 1991, § 12.02.120) 
CHAPTER 12.20. - COUNTY ROAD SYSTEM[3] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Minimum rights-of-way, ch. 12.30; approved street access required for all lots, § 16.30.060; design of streets in subdivisions, ch. 16.60; street construction requirements for subdivisions, ch. 16.70. 

12.20.010. - Established; official road map. 
The county will recognize and maintain as part of the county road maintenance system (hereinafter "system") those roads or streets within the county which are shown on the official road map of the county dated November 10, 1975, as revised from time to time, and those roads or streets which have been accepted into the system by action of the county board of commissioners, since the latest revisions of the map. A road which is accepted into the system shall be known as a publicly maintained road. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 1; Code 1991, § 12.04.010) 
12.20.020. - Road acceptance standards. 
The commission or its designee shall established standards for acceptance for various classes of roads for acceptance of roads into the system. These standards shall be known as the county road maintenance system acceptance standards (hereinafter "standards"). Except as provided in section 12.20.030.B, all persons applying for acceptance of a road into the system must establish compliance with the provisions of the standards. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 2; Code 1991, § 12.04.020) 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, tit. 16. 
12.20.030. - Contents of application for road acceptance. 
Owners of property which abuts a road adjacent to a publicly maintained road may petition the commission for acceptance of the road into the system by making application to the planning commission. 
A.  In all cases, the application shall contain the following: 
1.  The name, address, telephone number and signature of each owner adjacent to the road which is proposed for acceptance; 
2.  Proof of express dedication of the road to public use evidenced by a right-of-way deed, properly executed, witnessed and notarized in accordance with state law and acceptable for recording, conveying to the county the minimum necessary right-of-way required for the class of road involved according to then existing standards, or proof of implied dedication as evidenced by permitted open, continuous and notorious use by the public, or both; 
3.  Proof of express acceptance by the commission of such dedication evidenced by entry on the minutes of the commission or proof of implied acceptance of such dedication by acts of the county constituting maintenance, improvement, or control over the road; 
4.  Proof that the road is a road dedicated to the public and open to vehicular traffic, and is not a private road, a developer's raid [road] or a driveway; 
5.  Proof that there is an average of one house per 500 linear feet of road; and 
6.  Proof that the road serves a public purpose. 
B.  As to roads which were previously publicly maintained roads, the application shall also contain: 
1.  Proof that the road was previously a publicly maintained road, maintained by the county, which burden of proof shall be on the applicants; 
2.  A proposal for the payment of $1.00 per linear foot of roadway on each side of the right-of-way to the county to defray the cost of upgrading the road to conditions necessary to allow for maintenance, if such upgrading is necessary. 
C.  As to roads which have never been part of the system, or as to which the applicants cannot meet the burden of proof required in subsection B of this section, the application shall also contain proof that the road meets minimum standards for acceptance into the system for that class road, as provided by then existing standards. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 3; Code 1991, § 12.04.030) 
12.20.040. - Hearing on application for road acceptance. 
Upon submission of a properly completed application, the planning commission shall consider the application at the next practicable regular meeting and make a recommendation of the acceptance or rejection to the commission. The commission shall then, at a regularly scheduled public meeting, consider the application and hear comments from interested parties and shall accept or reject the road. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 4; Code 1991, § 12.04.040) 
12.20.050. - Procedure for road abandonment. 
If the commission concludes that a road dedicated to public use and maintained by the county has ceased to be used to the extent that it no longer provides a substantial benefit to the public, it may institute procedures and provide for required notice to abandon the road and dispose of the property upon which said road is located in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 32, chapter 7. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 6; Code 1991, § 12.04.050) 
12.20.060. - Creation of special taxing district for road improvements. 
Pursuant to the 1993 Georgia Constitution, Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VI, a special district may be created for the purpose of providing street and road construction, maintenance, repair and/or improvement. 
A.  Creation of special taxing district. A special district may be created by resolution of the Hall County Commission within the unincorporated land district of Hall County, Georgia, which special district shall be composed of all of that land abutting the previously maintained public right-of-way proposed to be improved. The implementing resolution of the board of commissioners will contain a description to adequately describe the special taxing district. 
A.  Burden of proof. Proof that the road or street proposed to be improved was a previously maintained public way shall be on the applicants or petitioners. 
B.  Assessment provisions. The owner of each parcel of land in such special district shall be assessed a road improvement fee. Assessments for each affected property parcel shall be made in a fair and reasonable manner with assessments being directly tied to the purpose of providing adjacent road and street improvements. Such assessments shall become a lien against each parcel of real estate in such special district when assessed in the same manner as all other real estate tax assessments. 
C.  Payment of assessments. The assessments provided for in paragraph B of this section shall be included in the land owner's real estate tax assessment and shall be payable in the same manner as other real estate taxes on said parcel. 
D.  Delinquency. Failure to pay any assessment provided for in this section shall subject the responsible party to the same liens and penalties provided for failure to pay other real estate taxes on said parcel and will result in the delinquency of the entire account of said parcel. Such assessment will not be deemed paid until all real estate taxes for such parcel, including the special assessment, are paid in full. 
E.  Revenue from assessments. The proceeds of the assessments provided for herein shall be used exclusively to defray the cost of providing road and street improvements for such special district. 
F.  Petition requirements. As a prerequisite to the consideration of the creation of a special taxing district as provided herein for street and road construction maintenance, repair and/or improvement, 100 percent of the landowners of the property adjacent to the previously maintained public right-of-way to be improved must petition in the affirmative the board of commissioners of Hall County asking for the creation of a special taxing district for road and street improvement. 
(Res. of 10-8-98, § 1) 
CHAPTER 12.30. - MINIMUM RIGHTS-OF-WAY[4] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— County road system, ch. 12.20; design of streets in subdivisions, ch. 16.60. 

12.30.010. - Minimum standards for state streets, through streets and nondesignated streets. 
A.  All roads, streets and highways in the county road system built or maintained through state aid or which are designated as through streets (any road or street which connects two major traffic arteries) shall have a minimum right-of-way of 60 feet. 
B.  All other roads, streets and highways in the county road system shall have a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, §§ 1, 2; Code 1991, § 12.08.010) 
12.30.020. - Exemptions. 
Whenever the commissioners, upon competent engineering advice, determine that a previously existing and platted road, street or highway, which has been proposed for acceptance into the county road system, and which has less than the required minimum 50-foot right-of-way, cannot be brought within the 50-foot minimum right-of-way standard in a practical and cost effective manner, then the commissioners may approve the acceptance of the road, so long as it meets all other acceptance criteria and a professional engineer certifies the road may safely be constructed in such a manner, at its previously platted right-of-way. In no event shall this exception apply to a state aid road or through street. 
(Res. of 4-25-88, § 3; Code 1991, § 12.08.020) 
CHAPTER 12.40. - DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION[5] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and construction, tit. 15; access requirements for subdivision lots, § 16.50.040; street construction requirements for subdivisions, ch. 16.70; zoning regulations, tit. 17; off-street parking, storage and loading requirements, ch. 17.250. 

12.40.010. - Intent. 
The safe operating of motor vehicles, and the need to minimize potential nuisance factors resulting from conflicts between commercial or industrial traffic utilizing streets designed for residential traffic, are issues which directly relate to the public health, safety, and welfare of residents in the county. The appropriate design and location of driveways can significantly lessen the adverse effects related to these issues. The establishment of reasonable design standards and administrative procedures included herein shall aid in protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the county. 
(Res. of 9-14-81, § 1; Code 1991, § 12.12.010) 
12.40.020. - Purpose of design standards. 
The purpose of this chapter is: 
A.  To insure that vehicles leave or join the roadway traffic at a proper angle and in conformity with the rules of the road. 
B.  To reduce hazard to vehicles by reducing areas of conflict and points of conflict between vehicles. 
C.  To increase the capacity of roads and intersections by reducing areas of conflict between vehicles. 
D.  To provide sufficient space for the installation of traffic control devices, utilities and crosswalks. 
E.  To reduce hazard to pedestrians by reducing areas of possible conflict between pedestrians and vehicles, and to define such areas. 
F.  To provide reasonable assurance against the hazardous and indiscriminate use of highway right-of-way through encroachment. 
G.  To provide a maximum practical sight distance, especially at intersections. 
H.  To provide uniform and impartial consideration in all cases where access is required by abutting property owners. 
I.  To reduce the possibility of conflicts between commercial/industrial traffic generators and residential areas. 
(Res. of 9-14-81, § 2; Code 1991, § 12.12.020) 
12.40.030. - Definitions. 
A.  The following definitions apply to the standards set forth in these regulations and figures included as examples of driveway types: 
Buffer areas means the border area along the frontage between the traveled way and the right-of-way line and within the frontage boundary lines; areas (1), (2), (3), (4) in figures 1 and 2 of section 12.40.230. 
Buffer island means the area between the frontage right-of-way line and a line parallel to and a minimum of a four-foot distance from the right-of-way line extended away from the right-of-way line; area (5) in figures 1 and 2 in section 12.40.230. 
Common access driveway means the primary means of access to a public street, shared by and connecting three but no more than five parcels, tracts, lots, building sites or structures. 
Corner clearance (C) means, at an intersecting street or highway, the dimension measured along the edge of the traveled way between the frontage boundary line opposite the intersection of the two right-of-way lines and the tangent projection of the nearest edge of the driveway; see figure 3, section 12.40.230. 
Distance between double driveways (D) means the distance measured along the right-of-way line between the tangent projection of the inside edges of two adjacent driveways to the same frontage; D in figure 2 of section 12.40.230. 
Driveway angle (Y) means the angle of 90 degrees or less between the driveway centerline and the edge of the traveled way; see figures 1 and 2 of section 12.40.230. 
Driveway width (W) means the narrowest width of the driveway measured parallel with the edge of the traveled way; see figures 1 and 2 of section 12.40.230. 
Edge clearance (E) means the distance measured along the edge of the traveled way, between the frontage boundary line and the tangent projection of the nearest edge of the driveway; see figures 1 and 2 of section 12.40.230. 
Frontage means the length along the highway right-of-way line of a single property tract of roadside development area between the edges of the property; the distance between (1) and (2) in figures 1 and 2 of section 12.40.230. 
Frontage boundary line (abbreviated as FB line) means a line perpendicular to the highway centerline, at each end of the frontage lines, extending from the right-of-way to the edge of the through-traffic lane; line (1)—(4) or (2)—(3) in figures 1 and 2 of section 12.40.230. 
Inside radius (U) means the inside or smaller curve radius on the edge of the driveway, used when Y is substantially less than 90 degrees; see figures 2 and 3 of section 12.40.230. 
Outside radius (R) means the outside or larger curve radius on the edge of the driveway; see figures 1, 2 and 3 of section 12.40.230. 
B.  For simplicity, the above definitions are stated in terms of single radius curves of the edge of driveways or intersecting highways. Where compound curves or tapers are used, an equivalent single radius curve may be used as a control guide. 
(Res. of 9-14-81, § 6(A); Res. of 6-8-87, § 1; Code 1991, § 12.12.030) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 
12.40.040. - Application for permit. 
Application for a permit to construct or alter a driveway or curb cut occurring on or abutting a county road right-of-way shall be made to the building official of the county under the following circumstances: 
A.  When such driveway(s) or curb cut(s) are incidental to the development of a new structure or the development of previously undeveloped property, the driveway permit shall constitute a part of the building permit. 
B.  When such driveway or curb cut construction constitutes a separate action apart from any other construction on the same site, a driveway permit shall be secured from the building official. 
C.  When property abutting a county road right-of-way changes from one use to another and driveways and/or curb cuts have previously been extended across or to a county road right-of-way, or when the type of use or the volume of use of an existing and/or previously approved driveway is substantially changed, application for review shall be submitted and a driveway permit secured from the building official. The occupancy permit may be withheld until such driveway improvements have been approved. 
(Res. of 9-14-81, § 3; Code 1991, § 12.12.040) 
12.40.050. - Issuance or denial of permit; appeals. 
Upon reviewing an application for a driveway permit in any of the aforementioned circumstances, the building official shall take one of the following courses of action: 
A.  Issue the permit if the standards correspond with the requirements as outlined in the regulations. 
B.  Submit the application to the public works director and/or the planning director for their review, such review not to exceed five working days. The public works director and/or the planning director shall: 
1.  Recommend approval of the permit to the building official; 
2.  Recommend disapproval of the permit unless certain modifications are made which they shall delineate in writing to the building official. 
C.  Issue the permit if the applicant agrees to follow the recommendations of the public works director/planning director. 
D.  Deny the permit application. 
E.  If the driveway permit is denied by the building official, the applicant can appeal the building official's decision to the planning commission, who shall hear testimony from the applicant. The planning commission may either approve or deny the application. 
(Res. of 9-14-81, § 4; Code 1991, § 12.12.050) 
12.40.060. - General design standards. 
The location, design and construction of the driveway shall be in accordance with the following standards. These standards are in no case to be modified unless specifically authorized by the building official: 
A.  A driveway shall be located and restricted as to width as necessary driveway and its appurtenances are contained within the frontage along the highway of the property served. At public highway intersections a driveway shall not provide direct ingress or egress to or from the public highway intersection area and shall not encroach on or occupy areas of the roadway or right-of-way deemed necessary for effective traffic control or for highway signs or signals. A driveway shall be so located and constructed that vehicles approaching or using it will have adequate sight distance in both directions along the highway. 
B.  The number of driveways permitted serving a single property frontage shall be a maximum of two unless more are deemed necessary by the Public Works Director for reasonable service to the property without undue impairment of safety, convenience, and utility of the highway. 
C.  If the property has frontage on more than one street, and a driveway permit is requested, the building official may request a recommendation from the public works director, planning director, or planning commission as to the potential adverse effects which may result. If it is determined that it would cause a nuisance to the surrounding area, or a traffic hazard, or unduly congest traffic, then the permit may be denied. 
D.  The island area on the right-of-way between successive driveways or adjoining a driveway and between the highway shoulder and right-of-way line shall remain unimproved for vehicular travel or parking. Such areas shall be considered as restricted and may be filled in or graded down only as hereinafter provided in subsection H. of this section. 
E.  The surface of the driveway connecting with rural type highway sections shall slope down and away from the highway shoulder a sufficient amount and distance to preclude ordinary surface water drainage from the driveway area flooding onto the highway roadbed. 
F.  The driveway shall not obstruct or impair drainage in side ditches or roadside areas. Driveway culverts, where necessary, shall be adequate for surface water drainage along the roadway and in no case less than the equivalent of 15-inch diameter pipe. The distance between culverts under successive driveways shall be not less than ten feet except as such restricted area is permitted to be filled in under the provisions of subsection H. of this section. All driveway culverts shall be constructed of the following materials and meet Georgia Department of Transportation (D.O.T.) specifications: 
1.  Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP), D.O.T. approved Class III or better. 
2.  Corrugated metal pipe, D.O.T. approved, type II aluminized steel. This material is prohibited in live stream applications. 
3.  High density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe, D.O.T. approved, dual walled. 
G.  Driveways connecting to "L" back curb and gutter must be constructed by removing the curb and gutter and pouring a valley gutter. When curb and gutter is removed for constructing a driveway, the new connections shall be of equivalent acceptable material and curb returns shall be provided or restored in a neat, workmanlike manner. The driveway or valley gutter surface shall connect with the highway pavement and sidewalks, if any, in a neat workmanlike manner. In no case shall the driveway construction impair the flow of water in the gutter. Figures 7 and 8 depict the proper details for constructing a valley gutter. 
H.  Driveways connecting to rolled curb and gutter may be constructed by either pouring the driveway directly up to the back of the curb or by removing the curb and gutter and pouring a valley gutter. When curb and gutter is removed for constructing a driveway, the new connections shall be of equivalent acceptable material and curb returns shall be provided or restored in a neat, workmanlike manner. The driveway or valley gutter surface shall connect with the highway pavement and sidewalks, if any, in a neat workmanlike manner. In no case shall the driveway construction impair the flow of water in the gutter. Figures 7 and 8 depict the proper details for constructing a valley gutter. 
I.  Any activities that impair the flow of water in a curb and gutter is prohibited. These prohibited activities include, but are not limited to: The filling in of curb and gutter with concrete or asphalt, or the removal of curb and gutter without providing an acceptable valley gutter as described in [subsections] G. and H. above. 
J.  The restricted area between successive driveways may be filled in or graded down only when the following requirements are fully complied with: 
1.  The filling or grading down shall be to grades approved by the public works director; and, except where drainage is by means of curb and gutter, water drainage of the area shall be directed away from the highway roadbed in a suitable manner. 
2.  Culvert extension under the restricted area shall be of like size and equivalent acceptable material of the driveway culvert, and intermediate manholes adequate for clean-out purposes may be required where the total culvert length exceeds 100 feet. 
3.  Where no side ditch separates the restricted area from the roadbed, permanent provision may be required to separate the areas from the highway roadbed, to prevent its use for driveway or parking purposes, by construction of a border, curb, rail or posts deemed adequate by the public works director. 
(Res. of 2-23-12, § 1(Exh. A); Res. of 9-26-13(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— Res. of 2-23-12, § 1(Exh. A), repealed former § 12.40.060, and enacted a new § 12.40.060 as set out herein. Former § 12.40.060 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Res. of 9-14-81, § 5; Code 1991, § 12.12.060 and Res. of 11-22-00(1), § 1. 
12.40.070. - Specific design standards. 
The following specific design standards in sections 12.40.080 through 12.40.160 shall apply to driveways requiring permits as set forth in these regulations. The items are driveway width, angle of entry and exit, return radius of curb, maximum percent of frontage for driveway use, distance to side property lines, island areas, intersection clearance, parking and storage areas and driveway grade. 
(Res. of 9-14-81, 6(B); Code 1991, § 12.12.070) 
12.40.080. - Driveway widths. 
Measured parallel to the roadway[, driveway widths shall be as follows]: 

 
(Res. of 9-14-81, § 6(B)(1); Code 1991, § 12.12.080) 
12.40.090. - Angle of entry and exit. 
Driveway angles [shall be as follows]: 
A.  Residential, 60 to 90 degrees, or parallel to property line; 
B.  Apartments, 70 to 90 degrees for two-way driveways or 45 to 90 degrees for one-way streets; 
C.  Commercial, 70 to 90 degrees for two-way driveways or 45 to 90 degrees for one-way on divided roadway or 60 to 90 degrees for one-way ramp on non-divided roadway; 
D.  Industrial, 90 degrees, or as close as practicable, for two-way, or 45 degrees, one-way access on one-way street; 
E.  Rural, land access only, 60 to 90 degrees. 
(Res. of 9-14-81, § 6(B)(2); Code 1991, § 12.12.090) 
12.40.100. - Return radius of curb. 
[Return radius of curbs shall be as follows:] 

 
(Res. of 9-14-81, § 6(B)(3); Code 1991, § 12.12.100) 
12.40.110. - Maximum percentage of frontage for driveway use. 
A.  Each single driveway shall have a maximum width of 30 percent of the property frontage. Where two or more driveways are permitted, no more than 60 percent of property frontage shall be used as driveways. 
B.  No approval for a curb cut will be given where it is apparent that the intent is not to provide access but to provide parking only. A driveway approach must provide access to something definite on private property such as a parking area considerably greater in extent than the width of the driveway, or provide access to a driveway, or to a door at least eight feet wide intended for the entrance of vehicles, etc. (not applicable for residential driveways). 
(Res. of 9-14-81, § 6(B)(4); Code 1991, § 12.12.110) 
12.40.120. - Distance to side property lines. 
A.  The area within five feet of a frontage boundary line shall be a restricted area on which no driveway may be developed on public right-of-way (E). 
B.  A minimum of 1½ feet of pavement edge or curb shall be left undisturbed adjacent to each frontage boundary line to serve as an island area. This distance shall be measured between the FB line and the point of tangency of the driveway radius and the edge of the pavement measured along the edge of the pavement. 
C.  Subsection A. or B. of this section shall apply, whichever is more restrictive. 
D.  These requirements may be waived when a single driveway is approved to serve two adjacent lots. 
(Res. of 9-14-81, § 6(B)(5); Code 1991, § 12.12.120) 
12.40.130. - Island areas. 
A.  Minimum island dimensions. 
1.  Distance between double driveways (D), ten feet minimum at narrowest point; 
2.  Minimum island depth, four feet where parking abuts street right-of-way line. 
B.  Treatment of island or buffer area. In the development of private property and the construction of driveways thereto, it may be necessary to regrade the buffer area by cutting or filling. Such work shall be done in a manner to insure adequate sight distance for traffic operations, proper drainage, suitable slopes for maintenance operations, and good appearance. The buffer area outside the driveways shall be treated to prevent use by vehicles. This may be accomplished by grading, or use of curbs, rails, guide posts, low walls, low shrubs, etc., in a manner which will not impair clear sight across the area. 
C.  Visibility clearance. No landscaping, fences, terraces, or other natural or artificial features adjacent to any street shall be of a nature impairing visibility from or of approaching vehicular traffic where such visibility is important to safety, nor shall such features in any way create potential hazards to pedestrians. In particular, at vehicular entrances and exits, no off-street parking, landscaping, or other material impediment to visibility between the height of three feet and ten feet, measured from the roadway level, shall be permitted within triangular areas defined by lines connecting points described as follows: 
1.  Nonresidential use. Beginning at a point where the midline of the entrance or exit intersects the public right-of-way, thence to a point of 35 feet along the right-of-way in the direction of approaching traffic, thence to a point of 25 feet toward the interior of the lot along the midline of the entrance or exit, and thence to a point of beginning. (See figure 12.40.130 A [12.40.230 5A].) 
2.  Multifamily residential use. Beginning at a point where the midline of the entrance or exit intersects the public right-of-way, thence to a point of ten feet along the right-of-way in the direction of approaching traffic, thence to a point of ten feet toward the interior of the lot along the midline of the entrance or exit, and thence to the point of beginning. (See figure 12.40.130 B [12.40.230 5B].) 
(Res. of 9-14-81, § 6(B)(6); Code 1991, § 12.12.130) 
12.40.140. - Intersection clearance. 
The length, width and shape of corner island areas will vary for different locations. The angle of intersection, angle of driveways, width of the right-of-way on both approaches, channelization radii, and other conditions will influence the location of driveways at intersections. The location and angle of an approach in relation to the highway intersection shall be such that a vehicle leaving the service facility may be merged in the lane of traffic moving in the desired direction before crossing the intersection, and that a vehicle entering the facility from the intersection may do so in an orderly and safe manner with a minimum of interference to through traffic. 
The following conditions may be applicable in most instances: 
A.  No driveway shall be allowed to encroach upon pavement edge radii. 
B.  The following minimum distances from the intersection right-of-way line (C) shall apply where there is no conflict with the foregoing conditions: 
1.  Traffic volume A.D.T. of 1,500 or less, 20 feet; 
2.  Traffic volume A.D.T. over 1,500 but less than 10,000, 35 feet; 
3.  Traffic volume A.D.T. over 10,000 but less than 15,000, 50 feet; 
4.  Traffic volume A.D.T. over 15,000, 65 feet. 
The public works director shall have the authority to increase these distances if in his opinion such action is necessary for the protection of traffic. The public works director may also modify these requirements if justifiable on the basis of site conditions. 
(Res. of 9-14-81, § 6(B)(7); Code 1991, § 12.12.140) 
12.40.150. - Parking and storage areas. 
A.  Each roadside business establishment, when providing off-street parking or storage space, shall provide such parking or storage space off the right-of-way to prevent the storage of vehicles on the driveway or the backing up of traffic on the travel way. This is particularly needed for businesses where a number of vehicles will be leaving and entering at the same time. 
B.  Particular attention will be paid to drive-in facilities such as banks, minute car washes, drive-in restaurants, drive-in bill paying facilities, and other service facilities where motorists are served while in their vehicles, to insure that queues of vehicles will not extend out onto the public streets. 
(Res. of 9-14-81, § 6(B)(8); Code 1991, § 12.12.150) 
12.40.160. - Driveway grade. 
A.  Residential driveways: The maximum grade which shall be permitted is 17 percent. 
B.  Apartment, commercial and industrial driveways: The maximum grade which shall be permitted is eight percent. 
C.  Grades within the right-of-way shall be controlled by existing shoulder slope or existing and future sidewalk elevations. 
D.  When driveways are intended for special use vehicles, the underside clearance and/or break over angle of the subject vehicle shall dictate the maximum driveway. 
(Res. of 9-14-81, § 6(B)(9); Code 1991, § 12.12.160) 
12.40.170. - Common access driveways; general provisions. 
The following specific design standards shall apply to common access driveways requiring permits as set forth in these regulations. Even though a common access drive may provide access to parcels or lots, each resultant parcel, tract or lot must still meet the minimum public street frontage requirements for the zoning district in which it is located unless otherwise exempted as a lot of record. Parcels, tracts, lots, or building sites for which building permits are requested or upon which there is a proposed subdivision of land that will not have separate and individual driveway access to a public street within the limits of the property itself, but is proposed to be served by a common access driveway, shall install such a driveway in conformance to the following standards in sections 12.40.180 through 12.40.220. 
(Res. of 6-8-87, § 2; Code 1991, § 12.12.170) 
12.40.180. - Common access driveways; submission of plans. 
Any [person seeking an] (a) building permit or occupancy permit requested for lots of record, or (b) proposed subdivision of land, whereby three but not more than five parcels or lots are to be served by a common access driveway, shall, at the time of the permit application or proposed subdivision of property, submit all necessary plans as required by the county engineer indicating the proposed location and construction specifications for the proposed common access driveway. 
(Res. of 6-8-87, § 2; Code 1991, § 12.12.180) 
12.40.190. - Common access driveways; construction prior to plat approval or issuance of occupancy permit. 
New common access driveways shall be constructed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for lots of record or prior to the approval and recording of a final plat for the proposed subdivision of land. 
(Res. of 6-8-87, § 2; Code 1991, § 12.12.190) 
12.40.200. - Common access driveways; plats and required statements. 
Plats indicating the location of common access driveway easements and lots to be served shall be recorded with the clerk of superior court of the county. The plats shall include: 
A.  A statement to the effect that the driveway easement shown on the plat is not to be dedicated as a public road and not to be maintained by the county, but shall be privately maintained; and 
B.  A statement signed by the surveyor, a registered engineer or a registered landscape architect that the driveway has been constructed in accordance with the minimum standards of the county. 
(Res. of 6-8-87, § 2; Code 1991, § 12.12.200) 
12.40.210. - Common access driveways; previously existing driveways. 
Any existing easements or common driveways which have been recorded prior to the effective date of this amendment [chapter] may continue to serve existing lots which were also recorded prior to the effective date of the resolution codified in this chapter. Any new driveways which would propose access to three or more undeveloped lots of record must conform with the standards for a common access driveway in accordance with this amendment. 
(Res. of 6-8-87, § 2; Code 1991, § 12.12.210) 
12.40.220. - Common access driveways; minimum standards. 
Construction of common access driveways shall conform to the following minimum standards. Please see Figure 6 for a cross-section detail: 
A.  Easement width, 30 feet, 30 feet radius easement in cul-de-sac; 
B.  Roadbed width 20 feet; 
C.  Shoulder width, two feet; 
D.  Base width, 18 feet; 
E.  Pavement width, 16 feet; 
F.  Minimum radius at cul-de-sac transition and intersections, 20 feet; 
G.  Pavement type: 
1.  Plant mix, one inch thick over graded aggregate four inches thick (except within the public right-of-way, which shall be six inches thick); 
2.  Concrete, four inches thick (except within the public right-of-way, which shall be six inches thick); 
H.  If a common access driveway terminates in a dead end, the termination shall be either a cul-de-sac with a paved radius of 25 feet, or another termination method that allows for vehicles to turn around safely and is acceptable to Hall County Engineering; 
I.  If a common access driveway is a cul-de-sac, the maximum length of the cul-de-sac shall be 1,000 feet; 
J.  Individual driveways joining the common driveway must be placed entirely on the property that they serve; 
K.  Individual driveways joining the common driveway may only serve one lot; 
L.  Ditches: Front slope, maximum 2:1 ratio; rear slope, maximum 2:1 ratio; 1 ½ foot minimum depth; 
M.  Maximum finished driveway grade, 17 percent; driveway grades up to 20 percent may be approved by the county engineer in extreme conditions; 
N.  Pavement crown, ¼-inch per foot; 
O.  All slopes and shoulders to be grassed; 
P.  Minimum crossdrain pipe size, 18 inches; 
Q.  The driveway must intersect the public road at an angle of 65 degrees or greater; 
R.  The driveway must enter the public road at least 65 feet from any intersection of another common access driveway as measured from centerline to centerline. The driveway must enter the public road at least 65 feet from another public road intersection as measured from the centerline of the common access driveway to the closest point of right-of-way intersection; 
S.  Intersection sight distance shall be as specified in the sight distance table in section 16.60.090 of this Code. 
(Res. of 6-8-87, § 2; Code 1991, § 12.12.220; Res. of 11-22-00(1), § 2) 
12.40.230. - Example figures. 
The following figures may be used in conjunction with the standards and definitions set forth in this chapter as examples of typical driveway types: 
 Figure 1. Single Driveway—Diagrammatic for Illustrating Definitions 

 Figure 2. Double Driveway—Diagrammatic 

 Figure 3. Driveways for Corner Installations—Diagrammatic 

 Figure 4. Driveways to a Corner Commercial Establishment 

 Figure 5A. Visibility Clearance (Non-Residential) 

 Figure 5B. Visibility Clearance (Residential) 

 FIGURE 6. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENT COMMON ACCESS DRIVEWAY 

 FIGURE 7. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENT VALLEY GUTTER, RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY 
(Res. of 6-8-87; Code 1991, § 12.12.230; Res. No. 11-22-00(1), §§ 3—5) 
12.40.240. - General conditions of approval; rights of county. 
The following conditions shall apply to all approvals for driveway construction on public right-of-way: 
A.  The applicant shall represent all parties with a property interest in the proposed driveway and shall certify that any driveway or approach constructed by him is for the bona fide purpose of securing access to his property and not for the purpose of parking or servicing vehicles, or for advertising, storage, or merchandising of goods on the county right-of-way. 
B.  The applicant shall furnish all materials, do all work, and pay all costs in connection with the construction and maintenance of the driveway and its appurtenances on the right-of-way unless the county agrees otherwise. The applicant shall arrange for and bear the entire cost of moving poles, trees, signs, hydrants, catch basins, and other existing installations which may interfere with the proposed driveway. Materials used and type and character of work shall be suitable and appropriate for its intended purpose, and the type of construction shall be as designated by and subject to approval of the public works director. The time-table for installation shall be approved by the building official and/or public works director. The applicant shall make the installation without jeopardy to or interference with vehicular traffic using the highway or pedestrian traffic using the adjacent sidewalk. Street surfaces, shoulders, ditches and vegetation disturbed shall be restored to equivalent or original condition by the applicant. 
C.  No revisions or additions shall be made to the driveway or its appurtenances on the right-of-way without the written permission of the building official. 
D.  The county reserves the right to make such changes, additions, repairs and relocations within statutory limits to the driveway or its appurtenances on the right-of-way as may at any time be considered necessary to permit the relocation, reconstruction, widening and maintaining of the highway or to provide proper protection to life and property [on] or adjacent to the street. The county shall make all reasonable attempts to comply with all provisions of this resolution [chapter]. 
E.  The applicant, his successors or assignees agree to hold harmless the county and its duly appointed agents and employees against any action for personal injury or property damage sustained by reason of the exercise of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
F.  Whenever an existing road is improved by reconstruction or maintenance work, existing entrances to the road may be altered by the county to conform to the spirit and intent of the policy and standards set forth in this chapter. 
G.  Whenever the public works director determines that inadequate or indiscriminate access or long stretches of paved or unpaved accesses result in an undue hazard to the motoring public on the thoroughfare, existing entrances may be required to be altered or reduced in extent to conform with the spirit and intent of this policy and upon approval of the governing authority. 
(Res. of 9-14-81, § 8; Code 1991, § 12.12.240) 
12.40.250. - Conflict with other laws. 
Should any requirement or design standard conflict in any manner with any other law, rule or regulation of any local, state or federal governmental body or administrative agency, then the stricter law, rule, or regulation shall be applied. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that, where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of property or premises than is imposed or required by other resolutions, rules or regulations, or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Res. of 9-14-81, § 10; Code 1991, § 12.12.250) 
12.40.260. - Severability; penalty; additional remedies. 
A.  Validity. Should any article, clause or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part hereof being declared severable. 
B.  Remedies. In case any driveway is (or is proposed to be) constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, or maintained, or any driveway is (or is proposed to be) used, in violation of any provision of this chapter, the building official, county attorney, or [other appropriate official may, in addition to] other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use [or] to correct or abate such violation. Where a violation of these regulations exists, the county building official may, in addition to other remedies, notify all public utilities and county service departments of such violation and request that service be withheld therefrom until such time as there is no longer a violation of these regulations. 
C.  Penalties for violations. Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. Each and every day that such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Res. of 9-14-81, § 10; Code 1991, § 12.12.260; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 12.50. - UTILITY FRANCHISES AND EASEMENTS[6] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Business licenses and regulations, tit. 5; public services, tit. 13; construction standards for water and wastewater systems, ch. 13.20; buildings and construction, tit. 15; subdivisions, tit. 16; utility easements in subdivisions, §§ 16.60.210—16.60.230; easement required along certain streets, § 16.60.280; water and sewer system requirements in subdivisions, ch. 16.80. 

12.50.010. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Private utility or public [private] utilities means those individuals, corporations, associations, cooperatives, and political subdivisions of the state which are not in the business of furnishing utilities to the general public but who furnish utilities solely to themselves. 
Public utility or public utilities means those individuals, partnerships, corporations, associations, cooperatives and political subdivisions of the state which are in the business of furnishing utilities to the general public. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 2; Code 1991, § 12.16.010) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 
12.50.020. - Public utilities; use of right-of-way. 
All public utilities in the business of furnishing utilities to the general public are granted the nonexclusive right to construct and install and maintain utility facilities on, in or above the public road rights-of-way in the county without the incorporated limits of municipalities except for the following: federal aid primary routes, numbered state routes, secondary off-system projects and Georgia Highway Authority projects (formerly Rural Roads Authority projects); provided the construction and installation of such facilities meet the requirements for construction and installation contained in the current edition of Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards issued by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation and under the terms and conditions hereinafter stated. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 3; Code 1991, § 12.16.020) 
12.50.030. - Public utilities; application for installation permit. 
Before installing any utility facilities, excluding service connections which will not involve the cutting of any paved surface, a public utility shall be required to apply for and obtain written permission from the county. There shall be a $10.00 fee for the issuance of a permit by the county. The application shall be sent to the county in writing addressed to the attention of the county engineer, and must contain the following: 
A.  Name and address of the applicant; 
B.  Name and address of the contractor, if any; 
C.  Name of the road and general location of the same; 
D.  A schematic drawing of the construction plans of the utility facility; 
E.  A plat or map showing the location of the utility facility in relation to the existing roadway, pavement, or curve [curb]; 
F.  The date on which construction or installation is scheduled to begin; and 
G.  A check in the amount of $10.00 made payable to Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 1; Code 1991, § 12.16.030) 
12.50.040. - Public utilities; issuance of installation permit. 
An application by a public utility shall be processed as follows: 
A.  If an application is approved by the county engineer and not changed by the county administrator, a permit shall be issued and delivered to the applicant. 
B.  Immediately after review of the application by the administrator, the applicant shall be notified whether or not the application has been approved. If the application has been disapproved, the applicant shall have the right to confer with the administrator. After the conference, the administrator may change the disapproval of the application. 
C.  If the administrator does not change the disapproval, the applicant shall have the right to appeal before the board of commissioners to be heard on the application. 
D.  The board of commissioners shall have the discretion and right to instruct the county administrator to issue a permit to the applicant irrespective of any provision in this resolution [chapter] if the board thinks it is in the best interest of the county and the citizens of the county. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 5; Code 1991, § 12.16.040) 
12.50.050. - Public utilities; deviations from construction requirements. 
All public utilities installing and constructing utility facilities, including underground service connections, which cannot comply with requirements for construction and installation of section 12.50.020 and wish to deviate from the requirements of section 12.50.020 must obtain a written permit from the county authorizing such deviations. There shall be a $10.00 fee for the issuance of the permit by the county. Applications for permits shall be submitted in the same manner and shall require the same information as is set forth in section 12.50.030, except that the deviation or deviations shall be set forth separately together with a statement of the reason for such deviation or deviations. 
(Res. of 10-9-89, § 2; Code 1991, § 12.16.050) 
12.50.060. - Public utilities; emergency exemptions from construction requirements. 
In the event any emergency situation arises which may affect the welfare and safety of the citizens of the county and where unexpected conditions or obstructions such as rock, a utility line, or unexpected soil conditions occur during installation which, in the opinion of the county engineer, necessitate a deviation or deviations from the requirements for construction and installation of section 12.50.020, the prior notice and permit requirements of sections 12.50.030 and 12.50.040 shall be waived. In such cases, however, the filings required under these sections shall be made as soon as possible. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 7; Code 1991, § 12.16.060) 
12.50.070. - Public utilities; construction standards. 
A.  The following requirements shall be complied with in the construction of public utility lines and service lines: 
1.  All lines underneath the ground shall be buried to a depth of at least three feet and must be a minimum of two feet from any other utility line; 
2.  Whenever any underground line crosses a paved, curbed or guttered roadway the line shall be tunneled under each; 
3.  All lines above the ground shall be a minimum of 16 feet above ground level; 
4.  All lines or parts thereof fixed at or above ground level shall be a minimum of ten feet from the paved or unpaved road surface or behind the ditch line, whichever is greater; 
5.  All excavations shall be filled, compacted and smoothed immediately; 
6.  All debris and waste shall be removed immediately and deposited in a landfill; 
7.  All ground areas shall be grassed immediately following work; and 
8.  Water systems in existence as of June 25, 1984, may be extended and serviced by the existing water system provided the same rules and/or regulations in effect at the time the water system was installed are followed. The plans for each such extension to assure compliance with the rules and regulations must be approved by the county engineer. In the event no rules and/or regulations were in existence at the time the water system was installed, then the county engineer must approve all plans for an extension covered under this section for such existing water system. Each water system allowed an extension under this section is limited to a one-time extension of the platted subdivision the water system serves or a maximum 750-foot extension, whichever extension is less in terms of total feet added to the existing water system. 
B.  The county engineer with concurrence of the county administrator may vary construction standards in this chapter for sound engineering reasons following an on-site inspection. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 8; Res. of 6-12-89, § 1; Code 1991, § 12.16.070) 
12.50.080. - Approval of proposed water lines and sewer lines. 
In the event that a public and/or private utility proposes to install a water line which is six inches or more in diameter or a sewer line other than an individual service line, the utility must submit two copies of a plan showing the proposed installation to the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners will, in turn, submit one copy of the plan to the county planning commission for review and recommendation. The county planning commission shall make their written report to the board of commissioners within 30 days or shall be deemed to have recommended approval of such plans. The board of commissioners will then decide to approve or deny issuance of such permit. The county engineer shall not issue a permit for a utility line which is required by this section to be reviewed by the planning commission and board of commissioners until the approval of the board of commissioners is obtained. 
(Res. of 6-25-84; Code 1991, § 12.16.080) 
Cross reference— Construction standards for water and wastewater systems, ch. 13.20; water and sewer system requirements for subdivisions, ch. 16.80. 
12.50.090. - Private utilities; use of right-of-way. 
A private utility may be granted the nonexclusive right to construct and install and maintain utility facilities on, in or above the public road rights-of-way in the county without the incorporated limits of municipalities except for the following: federal-aid primary routes, numbered state routes, secondary off-system projects and Georgia Highway Authority projects (formerly Rural Roads Authority projects); provided the construction and installation of such facilities meet the requirements for construction and installations contained in the current edition of Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards issued by the state department of transportation and under the terms and conditions hereinafter stated. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 9; Code 1991, § 12.16.090) 
12.50.100. - Private utilities; application for installation permit. 
Before installing any utility facilities, a private utility shall be required to apply for and obtain written permission from the board of commissioners of the county. The application shall be sent to the county in writing addressed to the county engineer, who shall review the application and present it to the board of commissioners. The application must include the following: 
A.  Name and address of the applicant; 
B.  Name and address of the contractor, if any; 
C.  Name of the road and general location of the same; 
D.  A schematic drawing of the construction plans of the utility facility must be attached; 
E.  A plat or map showing the location of the utility facility in relation to the existing roadway, pavement, or curb must be attached; and 
F.  Date construction or installation is scheduled to begin. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 10; Code 1991, § 12.16.100) 
12.50.110. - Private utilities; time limit for completing construction. 
A permit issued to a private utility shall expire and be null and void unless the construction or installation permitted thereby is completed within 90 days of the issuance of the permit. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 11; Code 1991, § 12.16.110) 
12.50.120. - Private utilities; deviations from construction requirements. 
All private utilities installing and constructing utility facilities, including underground service connections, which cannot comply with the requirements for construction and installation of section 12.50.090 and wish to deviate from the requirements of section 12.50.090 must obtain a written permit from the county authorizing such deviations. Applications for permits shall be submitted in the same manner and shall require the same information as is set forth in section 12.50.100, except that the deviation or deviations shall be set forth separately together with a statement of the reason for such deviation or deviations. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 12; Code 1991, § 12.16.120) 
12.50.130. - Private utilities; emergency exemptions from construction requirements. 
In the event any emergency situation arises which may affect the welfare and safety of the citizens of the county where unexpected conditions or obstructions such as rock, a utility line, or unexpected soil conditions occur during installation which, in the opinion of the county engineer, necessitate a deviation or deviations from the requirements for construction and installation of section 12.50.090, the prior notice and permit requirements of sections 12.50.100 and 12.50.120 shall be waived. In such cases, however, the filings required under these sections shall be made as soon as possible. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 13; Code 1991, § 12.16.130) 
12.50.140. - Private utilities; construction standards. 
A.  The following requirements shall be complied with in the construction of private utility lines and service lines: 
1.  All lines underneath the ground shall be buried to a depth of at least three feet and must be a minimum of two feet from any other utility line; 
2.  All private utility facilities must be constructed a minimum of six feet from the pavement edge and outside the existing ditch line back slope except at such point where a private utility facility must cross a right-of-way in order to reach the property of the private utility; 
3.  Whenever any underground line crosses a paved, curbed or guttered roadway the line shall be tunneled under each; 
4.  All lines above the ground shall be a minimum of 16 feet above ground level; 
5.  All lines or parts thereof fixed at or above ground level shall be a minimum of ten feet from the paved or unpaved road surface or behind the ditch line, whichever is greater; 
6.  All excavations shall be filled, compacted and smoothed immediately; 
7.  All debris and waste shall be removed immediately and deposited in a landfill; 
8.  All ground areas shall be grassed immediately following work; and 
9.  Each approved installation will be inspected for location prior to construction and for correct depth before the line is backfilled. A final inspection will be made to insure that all construction debris has been removed and all soil erosion controls are in place prior to authorizing the private utility to utilize the facility. 
B.  The county engineer, with concurrence of the county administrator, may vary the construction standards in this resolution [chapter] for sound engineering reasons following an on-site inspection. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 14; Code 1991, § 12.16.140) 
12.50.150. - Private utilities; construction and maintenance bond. 
A private utility shall be required to post a bond payable to the county or pay a sum of money into an escrow account so as to assure the proper construction, installation, and maintenance of any private utility facility permitted pursuant to this chapter. The amount and terms of the bond or escrow account shall be determined by the board of commissioners at the time the permit is approved, and the permit shall not issue until the applicant submits proof of the bond or escrow account. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 15; Code 1991, § 12.16.150) 
12.50.160. - Right of county to require repair or relocation of utilities. 
The county reserves the right to require a public and/or private utility, at the sole expense of the public and/or private utility, to remove, relocate or repair any utility facility located in, on, or above any public road right-of-way if, in the opinion of the board of commissioners, the facility constitutes interference with the safe use of the right-of-way by the traveling public, or will interfere with road construction or improvement. Should the public and/or private utility fail to remove, relocate or repair its facilities, upon due notice from the county, the public and/or private utility shall be liable for any extraordinary costs or damages incurred by the county as a result thereof. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 16; Code 1991, § 12.16.160) 
12.50.170. - Indemnification of county. 
The public and/or private utility shall indemnify and hold harmless the county and all officers, employees, or agents of the county against any and all claims, damages, demands, actions, causes of action, costs and expenses, of whatever nature, which may result from any injury to or the death of any persons or from the loss of, or damage to, property of any kind or nature, when such injury, death, loss or damage arises out of the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, removal or relocation of facilities pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 17(a); Code 1991, § 12.16.170) 
12.50.180. - Liability for damages to utility facilities. 
The county, its engineers, officers or employees shall not be held responsible or liable for injury or damage that may occur to facilities covered by a permit issued under this chapter, or to any connection or connections thereto, by reasons of road maintenance and construction activities or road contractors' or public and/or private utilities' operations. The county's contractor shall not be held liable for any damage that may occur to utility facilities if the public and/or private utility has been notified of a construction conflict and given reasonable time to mark or relocate its facilities and has failed to do so. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 17(b); Code 1991, § 12.16.180) 
12.50.190. - Maintenance of signalling and safety devices. 
During the initial installation or construction of facilities authorized by a permit issued under this chapter, or during any future repair, removal or relocation thereof or any miscellaneous operations, the applicant shall, at all times, maintain flagmen, signs, lights, flares, barricades, and other safety devices as may be necessary to properly protect traffic upon the road and to warn and safeguard the public against injury or damage. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 17(c); Code 1991, § 12.16.190) 
12.50.200. - Verification of right-of-way limits. 
It is the responsibility of the public and/or private utility to verify the limits of public right-of-way for location of the utility facilities authorized by a permit issued under this chapter. Approval of the permit does not constitute approval of design or construction details for the proposed facilities. The public and/or private utility is responsible for compliance with all applicable governmental codes and regulations. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 17(d); Code 1991, § 12.16.200) 
12.50.210. - Rights of abutting property owners. 
Permits issued under this chapter shall not affect any inherent or retained right or privilege of any abutting property owner, nor will the county be responsible for any claim which may develop between the public and/or private utility and any property owner concerning use of the right-of-way. The public and/or private utility is responsible for maintaining reasonable access to private driveways during installation of its facilities and for restoration of driveways to the owner's satisfaction. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 17(e); Code 1991, § 12.16.210) 
12.50.220. - Limitations on rights granted by permit. 
The issuance of a permit under this chapter is a license for a permissive use only and shall not be construed so as to give the grantee any permanent right or exclusive easement. A permit issued under this chapter shall only authorize that installation specifically shown in the application, and the installation shall be in strict compliance with the plans submitted with the application, unless the county engineer has granted an exception. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 18; Code 1991, § 12.16.220) 
12.50.230. - Violations; penalty; authority to stop work. 
If any provision of this chapter is violated the county may cause all work to be stopped, removal of the underground utility line, and the roadway to be repaired to its original condition. Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 19; Code 1991, § 12.16.230; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
12.50.240. - Additional remedies. 
In the event any provision of this chapter has been violated or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, the county may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to correct or abate such violation. 
(Res. of 6-25-84, § 20; Code 1991, § 12.16.240) 
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES[1] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and safety, tit. 8; solid waste, ch. 8.60; valid structure number required before provision of utility services, § 12.10.090; utility franchises and easements, ch. 12.50; buildings and construction, tit. 15; subdivisions, tit. 16; standards for mobile home and travel trailer parks, ch. 17.310; approval of utility substations, § 17.350.160. 

CHAPTER 13.10 - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[2] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exhs. A, B), deleted the former Ch. 13.10, §§ 13.10.010—13.10.090, and enacted a new Ch. 13.10 as set out herein. The former Ch. 13.10 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

ARTICLE I. - PUBLIC SEWERS 

13.10.1000. - Purpose and policy. 
This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the wastewater collection and publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for Hall County and enables the county to comply with all applicable state and federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et. seq.) (hereinafter referred to as "the Act"), and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403) for said wastewater collection and POTW. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with the operation of the POTW; 
(3)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; 
(4)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the POTW; 
(5)  To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations; 
(6)  To enable the control authority to comply with its NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject; and 
(7)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW. 
This article shall apply to all users of the POTW. This article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires industrial user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1010. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the public works and utilities director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to, or duties imposed upon the public works and utilities director may be delegated by the public works and utilities director to his designee. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1020. - Areas to be served. 
The areas to be served with sewer by the county shall be areas as defined in "The Hall County Service Delivery Strategy", adopted 2004, as amended, and noted on the service area maps as follows: 
1.  The area served by the county specifically; 
2.  The area where the county has agreed to provide sewer pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement between the county and a local municipality; or 
3.  The area where the county has agreed to provide sewer pursuant to a sewer service agreement between the county and the developer whose development is required to have sewer service. 
4.  That area of the Hall County/Municipality Service District [is] reserved for service by the county alone. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1030. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge or spillage means a release of wastewater, occurring or arising by chance or unexpectedly, to the sewerage system or to a natural or manmade outlet. 
Acidity means the quantitative capacity of aqueous solutions to react with hydroxyl ions, as measured by titration with a standard solution of a base to a specified end point. 
Advanced waste treatment means wastewater treatment beyond the secondary or biological stage that includes removal of nutrients such as phosphorus and nitrogen and a high percentage of suspended solids. 
Aeration means to circulate oxygen through a substance, as in wastewater treatment, where it aids in purification. 
Aeration tank means a tank which serves as a chamber for injecting air into water. 
Aerobic means life or processes that depend on the presence of oxygen. 
Algae means plants which grow in sunlit waters and which are a food for fish and small aquatic animals and put oxygen in the water. 
Alkalinity means the capacity of water to neutralize acids as determined by the water's content of carbonates, bicarbonates, hydroxides and occasionally borates, silicates and phosphates. 
Approval authority means the State of Georgia, Department of Natural Resources, environmental protection division. The approval authority is responsible for approval and oversight of control authority pretreatment programs, including an evaluation of the effectiveness of local enforcement. 
Approved state program means a state or interstate permit program which meets the requirements of Section 402(b) of the Act and which has been submitted to and approved by EPA under its NPDES permit regulations and under Section 402(c) of the Act. 
Authorized representative of a user means any one of the following: 
1.  If the user is a corporation, authorized representative shall mean: 
A.  A responsible corporate officer, which includes a president, secretary, treasurer or vice-president of the corporation in charge of principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions. 
B.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
2.  If the industrial user is a partnership, or sole proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
3.  If the industrial user is a federal, state or local governmental facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her designee. 
4.  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in paragraphs 1., 2., or 3. of this definition if: 
A.  The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in paragraphs 1., 2., or 3. of this definition; 
B.  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
C.  The written authorization is submitted to Hall County. 
5.  If an authorization under paragraph 4. of this definition is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of paragraph 4. of this definition must be submitted to Hall County prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
Bacteria means single-celled microorganisms that lack chlorophyll. Some cause diseases, others aid in pollution control by breaking down organic matter in air and water. 
Bacterial analysis means the examination of water and wastewater to determine the presence, number and identification of bacteria. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Biodegradable means any substance that decomposes quickly through the action of microorganisms. 
Biological oxidation means the method whereby bacteria and microorganisms feed on and decompose complex organic materials. This process is used in self-purification of water bodies and activated sludge wastewater treatment. 
Biological wastewater treatment means forms of wastewater treatment in which bacterial or biochemical action is intensified to stabilize, oxidize and nitrify the unstable organic matter present. 
Board of health means the Hall County Board of Health or an authorized agent or representative. 
Buffer means any of certain combinations of chemicals used to stabilize the pH values or alkalinities of solutions. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes, other than stormwater, inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the face of the building wall. 
Building official means the building official of Hall County or his authorized agent or representative. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
By-pass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
Categorical industry means a category of significant industrial users which by nature of its process meets the requirements identified in categorical standards. 
Categorical standards means the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or pretreatment standards as referenced in the Clean Water Act and outlined in 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471. 
CFR means the Code of Federal Regulations. 
Cfs means cubic feet per second, a measure of the amount of water passing a given point. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means a measure of the oxygen required to oxidize organic and oxidizable inorganic compounds in water. 
Chlorinator means a device for adding chlorine gas to sewage to kill infectious germs. 
City means the City of Gainesville, represented by its elected officials or their authorized agents or employees. 
Coliform organism means an organism found in the intestinal tract of humans and animals, its presence in water indicates pollution and potentially dangerous bacterial contamination. 
Combined sewer means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water. 
Commercial facilities means a facility constructed and intended to produce commercial, domestic, or industrial wastewaters, including facilities intended to collect, transport, and treat stormwater runoff. 
Commercial user means all users of the POTW other than residential users (including, but not limited to business, industry and organizations) producing a wastewater discharge that may be subject to federal, state, or local wastewater regulations. 
Commercial waste discharge permit is a wastewater discharge permit issued to commercial facilities by a local governing authority. 
Commercial wastes means: 
(1)  Nontoxic, nonhazardous liquid wastewater from commercial facilities; 
(2)  Grease interceptor contents generated by a commercial food operation or institutional food preparation facility, including without limitation, fats, grease, and food scraps; or 
(3)  Any oil waste residue produced from vehicle maintenance or washing that discharge to an oil-water separator or sand trap. 
Compatible pollutant means BOD, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, and such additional pollutants as are now, or may be in the future, specified and controlled in the control authority's NPDES permit for its wastewater treatment works where such works have been designed and used to reduce or remove such pollutants. 
Complete waste treatment system means a complete waste treatment system consisting of all the treatment works necessary to meet the requirements of Title III of the Act, involved in: 
1.  The transport of wastewaters from individual homes or buildings to a plant or facility where treatment of the wastewater is accomplished; 
2.  The treatment of the wastewater(s) to remove pollutants; and 
3.  The ultimate disposal, including recycling or reuse, of the treated wastewater(s) and residues which result from the treatment process. 
One completed waste treatment system would normally include one treatment plant or facility, but also may include two or more connected or integrated treatment plants or facilities. 
Compliance schedule means a schedule of required activities (also called milestones) necessary for a user to achieve compliance with all pretreatment program requirements. 
Composite sample means a combination of individual samples of water or wastewater taken at selected intervals to minimize the effect of the variability of the individual samples. Composite samples may be flow or time proportional. 
Constituents means the combination of particles, chemicals or conditions which exist in the nondomestic wastewater. 
Contaminated nonprocess wastewater means any water which may, during manufacturing or processing, come into incidental contact with any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product or waste product by means of: 
1.  Rainfall runoff; 
2.  Accidental spills; 
3.  Accidental leaks caused by the failure of process equipment, which are repaired within the shortest reasonable time not to exceed 24 hours after discovery; 
4.  Discharges from safety showers and related personal safety equipment; or 
5.  Boiler blowdown or cooling water which contains any pollutant other than heat. 
Contribute means the addition, discharge or introduction of any substance into the POTW as hereinafter defined. 
Control authority means the Hall County Board of Commissioners or its duly authorized representative or agent. 
Conventional pollutants means pollutants described as biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), pH, fecal coliform bacteria, oil and grease (O&G), total phosphorus (P), total kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) and such additional pollutants as are now or may in the future be specified and controlled in the control authority's NPDES permit for its wastewater treatment works where said works have been designed and used to reduce or remove such pollutants. 
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
County means Hall County, Georgia, represented by its elected officials or their authorized agents or employees. 
County commission means the Hall County Board of Commissioners or its authorized agent or representative. 
County engineer means the staff professional engineer responsible for managing the engineering division of Hall County and providing engineering services to the county. 
Daily discharge means the amount of a pollutant present in a facility's effluent as measured during a calendar day or any 24-hour period which reasonably represents the calendar day for the purposes of sampling. 
Detergent means: 
1.  Any of a group of synthetic, organic, liquid or water soluble cleaning agents that are activated by hard water and have wetting and emulsifying properties but, unlike soap, are not prepared from fats and oils; and 
2.  A substance that reduces the surface tension of water, including foaming agents and surfactants. 
Direct discharge means the discharge of a pollutant or the discharge of pollutants to a natural or manmade outlet. 
Director means the director of public works and utilities department of Hall County, including the wastewater facilities, treatment works and water pollution control operations, his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Discharge when used without qualification means the "discharge of a pollutant". 
Discharge of a pollutant and discharge of pollutants means: 
1.  Any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to state waters from any point source; or 
2.  Any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the waters of the contiguous zone or the ocean from any point source, other than a vessel or other floating craft, when being used as a means of transportation. 
This definition includes discharges into state waters from: 
1.  Surface runoff which is collected or channeled by man; discharges through pipes, sewers or other conveyances owned by a state, municipality or other person that do not lead to wastewater facilities; and 
2.  Discharges through pipes, sewers or other conveyances, leading into privately owned wastewater facilities. 
This term does not include an addition of pollutants by any "indirect discharger." 
Dissolved oxygen (DO) means a measure of the amount of oxygen available for biochemical activity in a given amount of water. Adequate levels of DO are needed to support aquatic life. Low dissolved oxygen concentrations can result from inadequate waste treatment. 
Domestic waste means any superfluous solid, liquid, or gaseous material derived principally from the use of sanitary conveniences of residences (including apartments and hotels), office buildings, industrial plants, institutions, or commercial establishments. 
Domestic wastewater means sewage produced by residential or commercial users that is not considered process wastewater or contaminated nonprocess wastewater providing parameters not in excess of the following: BOD 250 mg/L; TSS 250 mg/L; fats, oil and grease 100 mg/L; total phosphorus 7 mg/L; TKN 40 mg/L; arsenic 0.4 mg/L; cadmium 0.447 mg/L; chromium 2.54 mg/L; copper 0.376 mg/L; cyanide 0.05 mg/L; lead 0.01 mg/L; mercury 0.00025 mg/L; molybdenum 5.578 mg/L; nickel 2.710 mg/L; selenium 0.020 mg/L; silver 10.794 mg/L; and zinc 1.85 mg/L. 
Effluent means waste material, such as smoke, liquid industrial refuse or sewage, discharged into the sewer system or environment; generally referring to water pollution. 
Effluent limitation means any restriction established by a state or the EPA on quantities, rates and concentrations of chemical, physical, biological and other constituents that are discharged from point sources into navigable waters or waters of the contiguous zone. 
Emulsified grease means grease in a colloidal state such that it remains dispersed throughout the liquid and will not separate by gravity until the colloidal agent is inactivated. 
Environment means the sum of all external conditions affecting the life, development and survival of organisms. 
EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as designation for the regional administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
EPD means the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources, environmental protection division or its duly authorized representative. 
Fats, oils, and greases (F.O.G.) means that material which may be extracted from the acidified sample as prescribed in 40 CFR, Part 136 and others. Such materials include fats, oils, waxes and related compounds of animal, vegetable or mineral origin. 
Fecal coliform bacteria means a group of organisms found in the intestinal tracts of people and animals. Their presence in water indicates pollution and possible dangerous bacterial contamination. 
Fees means a schedule of charges imposed to recover treatment costs (not punitive in nature). 
Floatable grease means grease in such a state that it is insoluble in the liquid waste and will separate from the liquid by gravity in properly designed grease separation facilities. 
Floc means a clump of solids formed in sewage by biological or chemical action, in order to enhance the settleability of the pollutant solids. 
Flow proportional composite collection techniques means sample collection formed by mixing discrete sample of a constant sample volume with time interval between samples proportional to stream flow. 
Food processing industry means a permitted user other than residential units engaged in the production of food or food products, and having a wastestream similar to domestic wastewater in respect to nonconventional pollutants. Where analyses of wastewater or historical data indicate the presence of nonconventional pollutants, the director may impose nonconventional limits on food processing industry. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
Good faith effort or progress means prompt and vigorous pollution control measures undertaken by the discharger which shows that extraordinary efforts (not a "business-as-usual" approach) have been made to achieve compliance. 
gpm means gallons per minute, a measurement of water flow. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
Grease means fats, oils and grease (F.O.G.). 
Harm means a user's discharge which contains constituent(s) that inflict(s) injury or loss, hurt or damage to the POTW, its personnel or the environment. 
Hazardous substance means any substance designated under 40 CFR, Part 116 pursuant to Section 311 of the Act. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste that has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulation promulgated by the board of natural resources, Chapter 391-3-11. 
Heavy metals means metallic elements like mercury, chromium, cadmium, arsenic and lead with high molecular weights. Even at low concentrations they can damage living things and tend to bioaccumulate in the food chain. 
Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks utilized to store, treat or transport waste. 
Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not a "compatible pollutant" as defined in this section. 
Industrial means industrial user. 
Indirect discharge means the discharge or introduction of nondomestic wastewater from any source regulated under Section 307(b) or (c) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
Industrial discharge permit means a document issued by the control authority to industrial and significant industrial users of the POTW designed to meet the objectives as stated in Section 13.10.1000 of this chapter. 
Industrial user (IU) means any commercial user of a publicly owned treatment works which discharges up to the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day of process wastewater and/or contaminated nonprocess wastewater and is issued a wastewater discharge permit, such that in the opinion of the director may have a significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from the treatment works. 
Industrial wastewater means nondomestic wastewater. 
Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the POTW's treatment processes, operations or sewer system which may contribute to a violation of any requirement of its NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act, or any criteria guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solids Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Water Act (Act), the Toxic Substances Control Act or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
Influent means the wastewaters arriving at the control authority's wastewater treatment plants for treatment. 
Local governing authority or LGA means the governing authority of the county or its designee. 
Medical waste means wastes including, but not limited to, isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
Metered water means the amount of all sources of water, including wells, consumed by the sewer customer. 
MGD means millions of gallons per day. MGD is a unit of measurement of water flow. 
mg/L means milligrams per liter and shall mean ratio by weight—Interchanged with ppm. 
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) or (c) of the Act which applies to nondomestic users. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) means the program for issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the discharge of pollutants from point sources into navigable waters pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
Neutralization means the reaction of acid or alkali with the opposite reagent until the concentrations of hydrogen and hydroxyl ions in the solution are approximately equal. 
New source means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
1.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other structure is located; 
2.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
3.  The production of wastewater generating processes of the building structure, facility or installations are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification, rather than a new source, if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria as described above, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. Construction of a new source as defined herein has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
1.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
A.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
B.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment. 
2.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. 
3.  Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation in this definition. 
Nitrification means the conversion of nitrogenous matter into nitrates by bacteria. 
Nondomestic user means commercial user. 
Nondomestic wastewater means wastewater from commercial users as distinct from domestic wastewater, including process wastewater and contaminated nonprocess wastewater. 
Nonfood processing industry means a permitted user engaged in the production of goods and materials other than food or food products, having a wastestream subject to no conventional pollutant limits as determined by the director. 
Nongovernmental means any user of the treatment works identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, as amended, published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, except those public agencies classified in Division J. Public Law 92-500, and its amendments, and the regulations promulgated thereunder, shall take precedence in the event of conflicting interpretations. 
Nonpermitted user means a commercial user of a POTW which discharges up to the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day of process wastewater or contaminated nonprocess wastewater, and in the opinion of the director may not have a significant impact on that treatment works, or upon the quality of effluent from the treatment works. The guidelines are contained in section 13.10.1000 of this chapter. 
Nonpoint source means a source of pollution which is not a point source, such as farm or forest land runoff or urban stormwater runoff. 
Nonsettleable solids means wastewater matter that will stay in suspension for an extended period of time. 
NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
Nutrients means elements or compounds essential to growth and development of living things, including carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, potassium and phosphorus. 
Other pollutants means those pollutants found in water or wastewater except as identified as conventional pollutants including, but not limited to, metals, volatile organics and pesticides that wastewater treatment plants have not been designed to treat. Incompatible pollutants are other pollutants. 
Outlet means any outlet, natural or manmade, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
Pass-through means a discharge which exits the POTW into state waters in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
Permitted user means a commercial user having a wastewater discharge from industrial process, trade, institution or business as distinct from domestic sewage. These are regulated under federal, state or local discharge limits and are permitted as such on the basis that the user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard. A permitted user is either: 1) an industrial user; or 2) a significant industrial user as defined herein. 
Person or owner shall mean any individual; sole proprietor; firm; company; joint stock company; association; society; corporation; group; partnership; co-partnership; trust; estate; governmental or legal entity; or their authorized representatives, agents or assigns as defined earlier under "authorized representative of a user." The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by context. For enforcement remedies as outlined in sections 13.10.1600 through 13.10.1640, the president of a company, corporation, firm, association, society or group will be responsible for any violations. If there is no president, then the individual in charge of the day-to-day operations of the company, corporation, firm, association, society or group will be responsible for any violations. A sole proprietor or individual shall be responsible for violations of sole proprietorships or individually owned users, respectively. All partners of a partnership shall be responsible for violations of the partnership. The county may use its discretion for punishment if an authorized representative meeting the earlier definition's requirements has been designated. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. A stabilized pH will be considered as a pH which does not change beyond the specified limits when the waste is subject to aeration. pH shall be determined by standard methods as outlined in 40 CFR, Part 136. 
Phosphorus means an essential food element that can contribute to the eutrophication of water bodies. Total phosphorus is also included in this definition. 
Point source means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel, or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff. 
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)), heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. It does not mean: 
1.  Sewage from vessels; or 
2.  Water, gas or other material that is injected into a well to facilitate production of oil or gas, or water derived in association with oil or gas production and disposed of in a well, if the well is used either to facilitate production or for disposal purposes is approved by authority of the state in which the well is located and if the state determines that the injection or disposal will not result in the degradation of ground or surface water resources. 
Pollution means the presence of matter or energy whose nature, location or quantity produces undesired environmental effects. 
POTW means publicly owned treatment works. 
POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
ppm means parts per million; a unit of measurement for minute concentrations. 
Pretreatment means the application of physical, chemical and biological processes to reduce the amount of pollutants in or alter the nature of the pollutant properties in wastewater prior to discharging such wastewater into the publicly owned wastewater system, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
Pretreatment requirement means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on a commercial user. 
Pretreatment standard (or National Categorical Pretreatment Standard ) means any regulation established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in accordance with Sections 307(b) and 307(c) of the Clean Water Act (Act) (33 USC 1347) which contains pollutant discharge limits which apply to a specific category of industrial users. This term includes prohibited discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR, Part 403.5. 
Priority pollutant means any contaminant in water which is identified as being toxic, carcinogenic, mutagenic, teratogenic or is chemically similar to compounds identified as such by the EPA. The list includes 129 compounds and such other compounds as may be added from time to time. 
Process wastewater means any water which, during manufacturing, processing, or commercial use comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product or waste product and is discharged either directly or indirectly into the sewerage system. 
Prohibited substances means those waters, wastes or wastewaters which are not allowed into the control authority's sewerage system as described in sections 13.10.1200 through 13.10.1260 of this chapter. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1.27 centimeters in any dimension. 
Publicly owned treatment works (or POTW ) means a wastewater treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (PL 92-500) which is owned, in this case, by the control authority. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to such treatment works as well as any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. The term shall also mean the control authority which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Raw sewage means untreated wastewater. 
Residential user means a housing customer who discharges wastewater not in excess of the parameters defined for domestic wastewater. 
Reportable noncompliance means criteria for identifying when a control authority should be reported in the NPDES quarterly noncompliance report for failure to implement its approved pretreatment program. 
Sample means a representative portion of a wastewater discharge. The analytical results may be used by the control authority for compliance monitoring, surcharges, or other actions as necessary. See composite sample and grab sample. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Self-monitoring means sampling and analysis of wastewater performed by the permitted user. 
Settleable solids means wastewater matter which either settles to the bottom or floats to the top of a quiescent clarifier. 
Severe property damage means: 
1.  Substantial physical damage to property; 
2.  Damage to a sewerage system which causes it to become inoperable; or 
3.  Substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. 
Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
Sewage (or wastewater ) means a combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, including human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit designed for carrying wastewater. 
Sewerage system means any system for the treatment or disposal of pollutants, including treatment works, pipe lines or conduits, pumping stations and force mains, and all other constructions, devices, and appliances appurtenant thereto, used for conducting pollutants to the point of ultimate disposal. 
Show cause order means an administrative order directing a noncompliant user to appear before the control authority, explain its noncompliance and show cause why more severe enforcement actions against the user should not go forward. 
Significant industrial user means: 
1.  Any commercial user that: 
A.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling or boiler blowdown wastewater); 
B.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; 
C.  Contains in its waste a priority pollutant in amounts as defined in standards issued under Section 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act; 
D.  Is designated as such by Hall County on the basis that the user has a reasonable potential to significantly interfere with, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, the treatment works or the quality of its effluent; or has a reasonable potential to violate any pretreatment standard or requirement; or 
F.  Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Federal Act. 
Significant noncompliance means a violation which meets one or more of the following criteria: 
1.  Is a part of a pattern of noncompliance beginning with a noncompliant sample and extending from the date of collection of that sample forward for a period of six months: 
A.  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits 66 percent or more of measurements exceed maximum limits. 
B.  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations 33 percent or more of measurements that exceed maximum limit by factors below: 
(1)  Conventional pollutants by a factor of 1.4; or 
(2)  Nonconventional pollutants by a factor of 1.2. 
2.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
3.  Any violation of effluent limit that the control authority believes has caused interference, slug, pass-through or endangered health; 
4.  Any discharge that has caused imminent endangerment to human health or environment and has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
5.  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
6.  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; or 
7.  Is considered by the control authority to adversely affect the operation or implementation of the control authority's pretreatment program. 
Significant violation means significant noncompliance. Users in significant violation shall be listed in the county's most circulated newspaper or legal organ. 
Significant violator means any commercial user, industrial user, significant industrial user or their designee which meets at least one of the qualifications of significant violation. 
Single-family dwelling means a dwelling unit occupied by a single family. 
Sludge means any solid or semi-solid waste generated from a municipal, commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, air pollution control facility or on-site wastewater treatment exclusive of the treated effluent from a wastewater treatment plant. 
Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which meets any of the following criteria: 
1.  Has a pH less than three or greater than eleven; 
2.  Contains two and one-half times the maximum daily concentration of pollutants as specified in this article or additional pollutants that may be specified in an industrial pretreatment permit; or 
3.  Is discharged at a rate two and one-half times the flows during normal operations that may be listed in an industrial pretreatment permit, unless a maximum instantaneous discharge is established in the user's permit. 
Due to the nature of a slug discharge, grab samples may be used for the purpose of compliance sampling for any pollutant parameters. 
Spill means a release of wastewater, occurring or arising by chance or unexpectedly, to the sewerage system or to a natural or manmade outlet. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) means the classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987. 
Standard methods means those sampling and analysis procedures established by and in accordance with EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended or the "Standard Methods of the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation. In cases where procedures vary, the EPA methodologies shall supersede. 
State waters includes any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Storm drain (or storm sewer ) means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted rain water from any source. 
Surcharge means a financial charge imposed on the user when a contaminant exceeds the normal domestic waste as defined in Section 13.10.1750A. of this chapter for that parameter. Surcharges are designed to recapture the economic benefit of noncompliance and deter future violation. 
Suspended solids (SS) means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," latest edition, as published by the American Public Health Association and others, and referred to as filterable residue. 
Termination of service means the discontinuation of either: 
1.  Water service by a formal notice of termination to the user; or the turning off of water; or removal of the water meter of a noncompliant user; or 
2.  Sewer service by a formal notice of termination to the user; or physical blockage of the sewer connection; or other actions as may be necessary to prevent the discharge of wastewater to the sewer from a noncompliant user. 
The Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977, and as may be amended from time to time (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.). 
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) means the combination of ammonia and organic nitrogen. 
Total phosphorus (TP) means an essential food element that can contribute to the eutrophication of water bodies. 
Total solids means the sum of dissolved and undissolved constituents in water or wastewater, usually expressed as milligrams per liter. 
Total suspended solids (TSS) (or suspended solids (SS) ) means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering prescribed and is determined as prescribed in 40 CFR 136. 
Total toxic pollutants (TTO) means 65 classes of pollutants included in the Clean Water Act (Act) of 1977, and under Section 307 of the Act, such other pollutants as the administrator of EPA or director determines to be harmful to organisms when discharged into waters. 
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided and produces no adverse environmental impact. 
Upset means unintentional and temporary noncompliance by a facility or a process within a facility. 
USC means United States Code. 
User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the introduction of wastewater in the control authority's POTWs and has beneficial use of the sewerage system. 
User charge means a charge levied on users of a treatment works for the user's proportionate share of the cost of the operation and maintenance (including replacement) and debt service of such works. 
Violation means an exceedance by any amount of any maximum daily concentration or categorical limit or rule or regulation in this article. 
Waste means unwanted materials left over from manufacturing processes or refuse from places of human or animal habitation. 
Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants or institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water or stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater discharge permit means a document issued by the control authority to commer cial, industrial and significant industrial users of the POTW designed to meet the objectives as stated in section 13.10.1000 of this chapter. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes (including recycling and reclamation) required to collect, carry away or treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
Water pollution means the introduction in any surface or underground water of any organic or inorganic matter or deleterious substances in such quantities, proportions or accumulations which are injurious to human, plant, animal, fish and other aquatic life or property, or which unreasonably interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or the conduct of business. 
Water pollution control agencies of jurisdiction means the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) operating under authority of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, and the Georgia environmental protection division operating under the authority of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, as amended, each of which agencies is empowered to adopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary to carry out the intent of these respective laws. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1040. - Construction near sewers. 
Unless approved by the director, no person shall construct any sewer or reuse pipe or conduit for water, reuse water or sewage in any street within four feet on each side of the centerline of any sewer. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1100. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS GENERALLY. 

13.10.1110. - Owners required to connect. 
Provided a parcel of property abuts on any county property, street, alley, easement or right-of-way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer within 500 feet of the property line: 
1.  The owner(s) for which a building permit is issued after the effective date of this chapter for a new structure which is to have wastewater disposed therein, is hereby required at the owner(s) expense to connect directly with the proper public sewer for the disposition of all wastewater unless otherwise authorized by the county, in accordance with the provisions of this article, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by Hall County for said structure. 
2.  For all structures for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, required connection to and use for disposition of all wastewater via the public sewer may be delayed until such time as the on-site sewage management system fails to work properly and it requires replacement. 
3.  Unless approved by the director, all replaced on-site sewage management systems shall be either removed or cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material within ten days of connection to the public sewer. 
Approval by the building official and by the Hall County Health Department is required for any such connection to the public sewer. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A); Res. of 6-28-18, § 1 (Exh. A)) 
13.10.1120. - Discharge of certain materials and wastes. 
A.  Generally, wastewater acceptable for treatment is sewage with: 
1.  BOD of 250 milligrams per liter or less; 
2.  Suspended solids of 250 milligrams per liter or less; 
3.  Fat, oil, grease of 100 milligrams per liter or less; 
4.  Total phosphorus of seven milligrams per liter or less; 
5.  Total Kjeldahl nitrogen of 40 milligrams per liter or less; and 
B.  Any wastewater accepted with effluent contaminants in excess of the limits of paragraph A. of this section shall be charged a surcharge to be computed as described in sections 13.10.1700 through 13.10.1800. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1130. - Authority to enforce and resolve disputes. 
A.  The public works and utilities director and other duly authorized personnel shall have the authority to enforce all provisions of this article, including necessary enforcement actions. 
B.  The public works and utilities director shall serve as the final authority regarding disputes over sewer utility service bills, except where otherwise noted herein. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1140. - Authority to enter property to inspect and sample. 
A.  The director, the director of EPD, the regional administrator of EPA, and their authorized representatives, agents, or employees bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties subject to this article at any time without prior notice for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing and copying any records required to be kept in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
B.  The director or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers, waterways or facilities for waste treatment. These individuals shall have access to all areas which are potentially relevant to the wastewater discharge, including chemical storage areas. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1150. - Authority to use negotiated easement. 
The director or his designee bearing proper credentials and identifications shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the control authority holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1160. - Control authority indemnification. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the control authority for any expense, loss, damage, fine, penalty or fee occasioned the control authority by reason of such violation or violations, including, but not limited to, any fee, penalty or fine assessed against the control authority by any state or federal agency as a result of such violation or violations. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1200. - INCOMPATIBLE USES OF PUBLIC SEWERS. 

13.10.1210. - Unpolluted waters not to be discharged to sewers. 
A.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
B.  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the county engineer or director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the director and the state EPD, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. Discharge to a natural outlet is subject to the conditions of an NPDES permit to be issued to the discharger by the Georgia environmental protection division. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1220. - Discharge of prohibited substances. 
A.  General prohibitions. A user may not introduce into a POTW any pollutant(s) which cause pass through or interference. These general prohibitions and the specific prohibitions in Paragraph B. of this section apply to each user introducing pollutants into a POTW whether or not the user is subject to any other national, state, or local pretreatment requirements. 
B.  Specific prohibitions. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters, wastes, or wastewaters to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas, which may create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewerage treatment process or system; constitute a hazard to humans or animals; bypass through or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. This restriction includes, but is not limited to, discharges by any user of the collection and treatment system such that specific pollutants at the influent to the sewage treatment plant do not exceed concentrations specified below. The user discharge concentration limits, listed below, shall be the limits required on industrial discharge permits. Such limits may therefore be used as a guide in pretreatment facility design and operation. In the event that the plant influent level is exceeded or a disruption of the sewage treatment plant process occurs due to an excessive level of one or more controlled substances, the director may alter the user discharge concentration sufficiently to protect the plant and its receiving stream. Such modification shall apply to all users. In the event of toxicity being found in a POTW, the director may, at his discretion, require industrial users to participate in a toxicity reduction evaluation in accordance with the provisions of the control authority POTW's NPDES permits. The maximum concentration values are as specified in the table, but the table is not limited to only these pollutants. Concentrations apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the sewerage system. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. 
Maximum Daily Concentrations Permitted Users of Flat Creek WRF (mg/L) 

 
(3)  Solids or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewerage system such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails, ground paper products, paper dishes, cups, egg shells, fibers, lint, rubber, latex, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(4)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW. 
(5)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in any amount. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than six or greater than nine and one-half or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the sewage works. 
(8)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A); Res. of 4-23-15(1), § 1) 
13.10.1230. - Discharge of certain other materials, wastes and practices. 
A.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the director that such wastes will harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, reduce sludge quality or will otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the director shall be guided by Public Law 92-500 and the Clean Water Act, their amendments, and the regulations promulgated thereunder and will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or in such quantity that the temperature at the treatment works influent exceeds 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fat, oil, or grease of animal, vegetable, or mineral origin, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 125 mg/L or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (zero and 65 degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-quarter horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the building official. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established as necessary for the POTW to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(5)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(6)  Materials which exert or cause: 
(a)  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers' earth, lime slurries and lime residue) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate); 
(b)  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable solutions); 
(c)  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant overload on the sewage treatment works or significantly increase the operating cost thereof; and 
(d)  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein. 
(7)  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the control authority's NPDES permit. Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten percent from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life. 
(8)  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW. 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the POTW effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(10)  In addition to the materials previously listed, any other materials or rates of discharge which may be defined by state or federal agencies of jurisdiction as being incompatible with existing or proposed sewage works, treatment facilities or treatment processes. 
(11)  Any wastes or sewage that contains more than ten milligrams/liter by weight of hydrogen sulfide, sulfites, sulfur dioxide or oxides of nitrogen. 
(12)  No person shall discharge, convey, permit, or allow to be discharged or conveyed to a public sewer any wastewater containing pollutants of such character or quantity that will: 
(a)  Not be susceptible to treatment by the treatment system; 
(b)  Interfere with the process efficiency of the treatment system or reduce the sludge quality; 
(c)  Constitute a hazard to human or animal life, or to the stream, or watercourse receiving the treatment plant effluent; 
(d)  Violate any federal, state, or local standard or pretreatment requirement as those terms are defined in 40 CFR 403.3(j), 403.3(k) applicable to the specific industrial users; or 
(e)  Cause the treatment plant to violate its NPDES permit or applicable receiving water standards of the state, local, or federal government. 
B.  No statement in this article or in this section is intended or may be construed to prohibit the appropriate agency from adding, deleting or changing specific requirements or from making specific requirements more restrictive where wastes are determined to be harmful or destructive to the facilities of the sewerage system, or to create a public nuisance, or to cause the discharge from any treatment facility operated by the control authority to violate effluent or stream quality standards imposed, or as may be imposed, by the Georgia environmental protection division or the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1240. - Protection from damage; dumping of certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited. 
A.  Protection from damage. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewerage system. 
B.  Dumping of certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewer prohibited. No person, firm or corporation shall place, dump, dispose of, or cause to be placed, dumped or disposed of in a natural outlet or sanitary sewerage system or cause said discharge to be conveyed directly to the sanitary sewerage system or otherwise of the county, any contents or matter of or from any septic tank, wastewater water holding tank, grease trap, or other container serving the purpose of a septic tank, wastewater holding tank or grease trap, which contents or matter is made up wholly or partly by the sanitary sewer, kitchen or toilet waste from any residential source, or commercial or industrial waste from business processes of any commercial or industrial facility. 
C.  Forfeiture of vehicles. Any motor vehicle, trailer, and all other articles and contrivances utilized in the hauling, transporting, dumping, placing, or disposition of any contents or matter in any public sewer in violation of paragraph B. of this section are declared to be contraband and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation, and forfeiture according to the terms, provisions, conditions, and procedures set out in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2(c), as far as such terms and procedures can be made to apply. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1250. - Violation of article provisions. 
Any person permitting or causing the emptying of any waste prohibited by this article into the sewer system of the control authority shall be guilty of violating this article, and shall be punished in accordance with this article. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1260. - Action required by director. 
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in sections 13.10.1200 through 13.10.1260 of this chapter, which in the judgment of the director may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage system, processes, equipment, sludge quality or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or the environment or constitute a public nuisance, the director may: 
A.  Reject the wastes; 
B.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
C.  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; 
D.  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing fees or sewer charges or such charges as may be set from time to time by the board of commissioners under the provisions of sections 13.10.1700 through 13.10.1800 of this chapter; and 
E.  Take such other appropriate action as may be found necessary to meet POTW pretreatment program requirements established in or pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(f) and other provisions of this article. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1300. - INDUSTRIAL USERS. 

13.10.1310. - Pretreatment facilities requirements. 
Permitted users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in sections 13.10.1200 through 13.10.1260 of this chapter within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or the director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the control authority shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans and drawings showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the county for review, and shall be acceptable to the director before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the county under the provisions of this article. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1320. - Use by poultry processing plants. 
A.  No person engaged in the processing of poultry within the area served by the control authority's sewerage system shall discharge any poultry processing wastewater into the control authority's sewerage system without such wastewaters having been screened to remove suspended solids such as, but not limited to, feather, grit and offal, as hereinafter provided. 
B.  Provision shall be made for the disposal of solids removed by the screening devices. Solids so removed shall not be placed in the control authority's sewer system. 
C.  Before the installation and operation of any screening device, two complete sets of plans and specifications of the proposed work shall be submitted to the director for his review and approval. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1330. - Use by textile plants. 
A.  No person engaged in the processing of textile products or fibers shall empty any sewage or waste from such textile processing plant into the sewer system of the control authority without: 
(1)  Screening said waste through a screen sufficiently fine to remove such fibers from the effluent; 
(2)  Equalizing the flow of its waste into the control authority sewer system to a point, whereby the rate of flow into the sewer shall not be greater than the rate of flow of potable water into the plant; and 
(3)  Securing the prior approval of the director before introducing dyes into the sewer system. 
B.  The following materials are incompatible to the operation of the control authority's treatment plant and shall not be permitted to be introduced into the control authority's sewer system: 
(1)  Nonbiochemical degradable fibers; 
(2)  Latex or latex compounds; and 
(3)  Rubber or rubber compounds. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1340. - Pretreatment design parameters. 
Unless a special agreement as provided for in this article exists, pretreatment as mentioned in section 13.10.1220 shall mean the following: 
A.  Removal of all prohibited materials and correction of all unacceptable conditions mentioned in Section 13.10.1220 of this chapter. Pretreatment systems or units shall be designed such that the following pollutants are not exceeded based upon representative samples of the discharge to the control authority's sewers, taken on days of normal plant operation, with tests being performed as detailed in 40 CFR 136, including, but not limited to, "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", latest approved edition, published by the American Public Health Association and others: 

 
B.  The user discharge concentration limits listed in section 13.10.1220B.(2) shall be the limits required on wastewater discharge permits. Such limits may therefore be used as a guide in pretreatment facility design and operation. If the user exceeds these limits or is found in violation of this article, the user is in a state of violation. In the event that the POTW influent level is exceeded or a disruption of the sewage treatment plant process occurs due to an excessive level of one or more of these user discharge concentration limits, the board of commissioners may alter the user discharge concentration limits sufficiently to protect the plant and its receiving stream. Such modifications shall apply to all users. In the event of toxicity being found in a POTW, the director may at his discretion require industrial users to participate in a toxicity reduction evaluation in accordance with the provisions of the control authority POTW's NPDES permits. 
C.  Control over quantities and rates of discharge referred to in section 13.10.1220B.(2) as applied to major contributors means that the daily plant discharges shall be spread as uniformly as possible over the entire 24-hour period. In no case shall the discharge in one continuous eight-hour period exceed 50 percent of the total 24-hour discharge. 
D.  The pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, and the design for installation of plants and equipment for the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, shall be subject to the review and approval of the director and the building official and shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. Any subsequent alterations or additions to such pretreatment or flow control facilities shall not be made without due notice to, and prior approval of, the director. 
E.  All users shall comply with the pretreatment standards as set forth in 40 CFR, Part 403. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1350. - Fat, oil, grease, and sand interceptors required and maintained. 
A.  No food processing industry, commercial facility, maintenance or service facility such as a service station, auto repair shop, car wash, metal working establishment, etc., shall discharge into the sanitary sewer system without a wastewater discharge permit issued by the county. Application for such permit must be made on a form furnished by the county. The permit is valid for up to five years and is nontransferable. 
B.  F.O.G./sand separator required. All new maintenance and service facilities, restaurants, institutional kitchens, or other food service establishments defined as commercial users of the system, shall provide approved F.O.G. and settleable solids removal equipment or facilities sufficient to meet the limitations set forth in this article. The number and size(s) of the system(s) shall be determined by the county. Existing commercial users will be assessed on an individual basis, and will require approval by the county. 
(1)  The separator(s) shall exclude sanitary wastewater and be located outside of any building and accessible for proper maintenance and inspection. 
(2)  The separator(s) must be located in an area that will allow for the dumpster pad to be connected. 
(3)  In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the separator(s) shall be installed with traffic bearing covers. 
(4)  The separator must be a minimum of 1,500 gallons and have three baffles, and three inspection openings provided, one over the influent pipe, another over the center baffle, and another over the discharge pipe for inspection purposes. 
(5)  The equipment or facilities shall be installed and maintained by the originator. 
(6)  All food service industries defined as commercial facilities shall be required to have a separate water meter and back-flow device, unless a specific variance is granted by the director. 
(7)  Alternative treatment methods. The use of any alternative method of treatment is prohibited without written approval by the county. Alternative treatment systems, such as mechanical grease recovery devices, shall only be used only after evaluation and authorization by the county. 
(8)  The use of chemicals, enzymes and bacteria is prohibited, unless specifically authorized in writing by the county, and only after site specific monitoring and data collection has been performed. The use of any additives shall not be considered as an alternative to an adequate treatment system or in lieu of regular maintenance, as prescribed in this article. 
(9)  All F.O.G. or sand separators shall be maintained at the originator's expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents of the separator. The county has established the following minimum pumping schedule and may increase or decrease the pumping frequency based on the originator's compliance with this article: 

 
* The director may in writing or verbally increase or decrease a user's grease trap pumping frequency on a case-by-case basis based on actual observation of material buildup in the grease trap. 
C.  Pumping requires the complete removal of the entire contents of the trap with no reintroduction of any portion of the waste into the trap. The county may seek additional enforcement action under O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2. 
D.  A grease trap waste hauler must obtain a grease trap waste disposal manifest prior to removal or transporting waste for disposal. It is the grease trap owner's responsibility to ensure the hauler possesses said manifest prior to pumping. Otherwise, the owner is in noncompliance with this article and shall be subject to all applicable fines and penalties included herein. 
E.  Owners to maintain pretreatment and flow-equalizing facilities. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1360. - Wastewater discharge permit. 
All industrial users, including significant industrial users, feed mills, vehicle maintenance facilities, service stations, and commercial facilities, including food preparation facilities proposing to connect to, or discharge into any part of the wastewater treatment system must first obtain a wastewater discharge permit. All existing significant industrial users and other industrial users connected to, or discharging to, any part of the county system must also obtain a wastewater discharge permit. Prior to issuing a discharge permit, a draft permit will be sent to the user (certified mail return receipt requested) which will show the conditions and discharge limitations. The user will be allowed 15 days to show cause why in the user's opinion the conditions of such permit should not be required. 
A.  Permit application. All significant industrial users and other industrial users shall discharge wastewater only in accordance with the conditions of their wastewater discharge permit. All applications must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the user. "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." Users seeking a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the director an application on the form prescribed by the director. The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the director may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
B.  Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other regulations, user charges and fees established by the county. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests, resampling requirements and reporting schedule; 
(4)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
(5)  Requirements for retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge; 
(6)  Requirement of penalties for falsifying information; 
(7)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(8)  Requirement for written standard operating procedures for all pretreatment facilities; 
(9)  Requirements for notification to the county of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
(10)  Requirements for the installation of facilities or procedures to prevent and control accidental discharge or spills at the user's premises; 
(11)  Requirement for notification of any bypasses around treatment systems; 
(12)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges; 
(13)  Requirement of a written spill prevention/contingency plan; 
(14)  Requirements for notification of any ordinance violations; 
(15)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a public sewer; 
(16)  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(17)  Compliance schedules; 
(18)  Statement of duration; 
(19)  Statement of nontransferability; and 
(20)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the county to ensure compliance with this article. 
C.  Duration of permits. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed three years. A permit may be issued for a period of less than three years, or may be stated to expire on a specific date. If the user is not notified by the director 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit, the permit shall automatically be extended for one month. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and change by the director during the life of the permit, as limitations or requirements are modified and changed as outlined in Paragraph E. of this section. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance and shall be subject to the appeal provisions contained in Paragraph E. of this section. A user becoming subject to national categorical pretreatment standards shall apply for a new permit on the effective date of said standards. 
D.  Transfer of a permit. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned, transferred, or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation. In the event of any change in control or ownership of facilities from which the authorized discharges emanate, the industrial user shall notify the succeeding owner or controller of the existence of the wastewater discharge permit by letter, a copy of which shall be forwarded to the Hall County Public Works and Utilities Director. Upon such notification, the director will require a new permit application to be submitted and issue a permit in accordance with the terms of this article. 
E.  Authority to modify, suspend, or revoke permits. The director may modify, suspend or revoke a permit issued pursuant to this article in whole or in part during its term for failure or refusal of the permittee to carry out the requirements of this article, wastewater discharge permit, compliance order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits may be modified for good cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Incorporation of any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(b)  Addressing significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(c)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(d)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the control authority's POTW, control authority personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(e)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(f)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(g)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(h)  Correction of typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(i)  Transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following reasons: 
(a)  Failure to notify the county of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(b)  Failure to provide prior notification to the county of changed condition pursuant to section 13.10.1450; 
(c)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(d)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(e)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(f)  Refusing to allow the county timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(g)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(h)  Failure to pay fines; 
(i)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(j)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(k)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(l)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility; and 
(m)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit of this article. 
If within ten days following receipt of notice of such proposed modifications, suspension or revocation from the director, there is no objection by the permittee in writing, said action becomes final. If the permittee files with the director an objection in writing within the specified ten-day period, such permittee shall be granted a conference with the director to discuss the proposed modifications, suspension, or revocation and to attempt to reach some agreement upon them. In the event that agreement is not reached, the director shall notify the permittee in writing that he proposes that the modifications, suspension, or revocation become final within three days if the permittee does not object in writing. If the permittee does not object in writing, the proposed modifications, suspension or revocation shall become final. If the permittee does object in writing by filing an objection with the director and the Hall County Board of Commissioners, the permittee shall be granted a hearing before the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall decide whether the proposed modifications, suspension or revocation of the director shall become final. The director may immediately suspend or revoke a permit issued pursuant to this section, in whole or in part, without the notice provisions set forth in the preceding paragraph, provided the director concludes that the permittee has violated the provisions of this article and that the continued violation would constitute a hazard to human or animal life, or the environment or to the stream or watercourse receiving the treatment plant effluent, or would not be susceptible to treatment by the POTW, or which otherwise may create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance. Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon nonuse, cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit. A terminated permit under any of the provisions set forth in this article shall mean the user shall not discharge process wastewater into the control authority's sewerage system. 
F.  Wastewater survey. Any commercial user may be required to complete a wastewater survey questionnaire as requested by the director. 
G.  Slug control plan. On a biennial basis, the county conducts a survey to determine the need for industrial users to develop a program to control slug discharges. A slug discharge is any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. If the county decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b), with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days; 
(4)  If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1370. - Suitable location required for sampling and other purposes. 
A.  When required by the director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying nondomestic wastewater shall install a suitable control manhole, vault or other structure in the building sewer in which the county may install such meters, sampling facilities and other appurtenances as necessary to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastewater. 
B.  Such structure as indicated, in subsection A. shall: 
(1)  Be safely located and accessible; 
(2)  Be protected against vandalism; 
(3)  Provide an accessible water source; 
(4)  Use, when possible, a cover or lid which is easily removed and is of reduced weight; 
(5)  Be supplied with suitable electrical current for the metering and sampling equipment to be installed; 
(6)  Provide suitable lighting; 
(7)  Provide adequate enclosure; 
(8)  Have unrestricted accessibility to the county and its appointed personnel; and 
(9)  Be constructed in accordance with standard details approved and provided by the director. 
C.  The structure shall be installed by the owner at their expense, and shall be maintained and kept free from any build-up or debris to be safe and accessible at all times. 
D.  In addition, the sample station shall be located to provide for easy access by county personnel and must be located where it can be reached directly from the public right-of-way. When such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the director may allow an exception to be granted on a case-by-case basis. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1380. - Industrial wastewater monitoring and reporting. 
A.  Certification statement. All permitted user reports must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the permitted user: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief is true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for known violations." 
B.  Discharge reports: 
(1)  Baseline monitoring reports application. Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a categorical determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a(4)), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to, or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in 40 CFR 403.12(b(1-5)). New industrial users and new sources (as defined in 40 CFR 403.3(k)) shall also submit such reports to the director as required under 40 CFR 403.12(b(1-5)). New sources shall also be required to include in this report information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall give estimates of the information requested in 40 CFR 403.12(b(4-5)). 
The report shall contain the information listed in subparagraphs (1) through (7) of 40 CFR 403.12(b): 
(a)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner; 
(b)  Environmental permits. A list of environmental control permits held by or for the facility; 
(c)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from regulated processes; 
(d)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e); 
(e)  Measurement of pollutants: 
i.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process; 
ii.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and mass, where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be sampled and analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 13.10.1390 of this chapter; 
(f)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements; and 
(g)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment or O & M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
This requirement includes a baseline monitoring report (BMR) to be submitted to the county at least 90 days prior to discharge of any pollutants to the POTW. 
(2)  Periodic monitoring reports. All permitted industry shall submit a discharge report as provided in 40 CFR 403.12(g and h). The report shall be submitted on at least a biannual basis during the months of June and December or more frequently as directed by the county. These reports shall be based on sampling and analyses performed in the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with Paragraph C. of this section. If a permitted user subject to the reporting requirements of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the county, using the procedures prescribed in Paragraph D.(2) of this section, the results of the monitoring shall be included in the report. 
Any permitted user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall, at least, submit to the director during the months of June and December a discharge report indicating the nature, concentration and flow of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows, which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported in 40 CFR 403, (or amendments thereto which may be promulgated from time to time). Collection and testing of wastewater samples used for compliance monitoring must be in accordance with this article. 
At the discretion of the director and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the director may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. Such reports shall be submitted more frequently if required in the pretreatment standard, pretreatment requirements, or required as part of the enforcement response program, or deemed necessary by the director. 
(3)  All permitted users shall promptly notify the director by phone with a subsequent written report in advance if possible, of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge (change in chemical constituents or liquid materials), including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12 (p) and Paragraph B.(5) of this section, which are or may be discharged and which potentially may interfere with the operation of the public treatment system. This notification is also required in instances of potential problems, i.e., slug loads. 
(4)  In all events, the reports required under this Section, shall meet the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12, (b—g). 
(5)  The permitted user shall notify the county, the EPA regional waste management division director, and the state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR, Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR, Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: 
(a)  An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; 
(b)  An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month; and 
(c)  An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. 
All permitted users shall provide the notification no later than 180 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under this paragraph needs to be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under 40 CFR 403.12(j) and paragraph B.(6) of this section. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b, d, and e), and paragraph B.(2), (5) and (6) of this section. 
Discharges are exempt from the above requirements of paragraph B.(5) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). 
Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. 
Subsequent months during which the permitted user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification unless specifically required by the director. 
In case of any new regulation under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the county, the EPA regional waste management division director and the state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
In the case of any notification made under paragraph B.(6) of this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(6)  Categorical pretreatment standard compliance. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater in the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the county a report containing the following information: 
(a)  The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the county from each of the following: 
i.  Regulated process streams; and 
ii.  Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
The director may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations. 
(b)  The user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass, where required) by the standard of the county for regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations outlined in this section. 
(c)  A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the permitted user and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by Hall County in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. 
(7)  The reports required under this section shall carry the signature of an authorized representative certifying data accuracy and pretreatment standard compliance or appropriate operation and maintenance measures to ensure future compliance. 
(8)  Permitted users shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records and information required to be retained under this article. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning compliance with this article, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. For each measurement or sample collected and analyzed for compliance purposes, a record of the following information shall be maintained: 
(a)  The exact place, date, time, and person who performed the sampling; 
(b)  The exact place, date, time, and person who performed the required analyses; 
(c)  The analytical techniques or methods used; 
(d)  All bench data derived for the purpose of calculating test results; and 
(e)  The results of all required analyses. 
C.  Records and monitoring. 
(1)  All permitted users who discharge or propose to discharge wastewaters to the wastewater treatment system shall maintain such records of production and related factors, effluent flows and pollutant amounts or concentrations as are necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this article, wastewater discharge permit and any applicable state, local or federal pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)  Such records shall be made available upon request by the director after reasonable notice. All such records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or Georgia environmental protection division upon demand. A summary of such data indicating the permitted user's compliance with this article shall be prepared as requested and submitted to the director after reasonable notice. 
(3)  The owner or operator of any premises or facility discharging industrial wastewater into the system shall install, at its own cost and expense, suitable monitoring equipment to facilitate the accurate observation, sampling, and measurement of wastes as required by the director. Such equipment shall be maintained in proper working order and kept safe and accessible at all times. 
(4)  The monitoring equipment shall be located and maintained on the user's premises outside of the building. When such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the board of commissioners may allow such facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area. 
(5)  When more than one user can discharge into a common sewer, the director may require installation of separate monitoring equipment for each user. When there is a significant difference in wastewater constituents and characteristics produced by different operations of a single user, the director may require that separate monitoring facilities be installed for each separate discharge. 
(6)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the director's requirements and all applicable construction standards and specifications. 
D.  Inspection, sampling and analysis. 
(1)  Compliance determination. Compliance determinations with respect to code prohibitions and limitations may be made on the basis of either instantaneous grab samples or composite samples of wastewater, unless specified in an industrial discharge permit. Composite samples may be taken over a 24-hour period, or over a longer or shorter time span, as determined necessary by the director to meet the needs of specific circumstances, and may require records of flow monitoring and measurement when deemed necessary by the director. When evaluating the compliance status of an industrial user or a significant industrial user, the POTW uses all samples which were obtained through appropriate sampling techniques and analyzed in accordance with the procedures established in 40 CFR, Part 136. When the county splits a sample with a user, the county uses the results from each of the split samples providing the sample has been properly collected, preserved and analyzed, as referenced in paragraph D.(5) of this section. When such a split sample produces two different analytical results, an average of the results from the split samples is determined and use of the resulting average number determines the compliance status of the industrial user. If one or both of the analytical split sample results is determined to be invalid, the county recalculates the compliance status of the user, using all valid results. 
(2)  Analysis of industrial wastewaters. Laboratory analysis of industrial wastewater samples shall be performed in accordance with section 13.10.1390 of this chapter. In the case where a concentration limit contained in a wastewater discharge permit is lower than lab detection limits, the lowest reportable detection limit shall be in accordance with lab detection limits as specified by EPD in accordance with 40 C.F.R. 136. 
(3)  Sampling frequency. Sampling of industrial wastewater for the purpose of compliance determination with respect to code prohibitions and limitations will be done at such intervals as the director may designate. Each permitted user will sample at least two times each year as described in 40 CFR 403. Additional sampling may be required by the director. The county may require a permitted user to conduct a 129-priority pollutant scan at least once every three years or at the time there is a process change that, in the opinion of the director, would warrant such a scan. The county will conduct at least one unannounced sampling of industrial wastewaters for compliance purposes from each permitted user. 
(4)  Resampling frequency. If sampling performed by a permitted user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the county within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis of the pollutant(s) in violation and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the county within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except the user is not required to resample if: 
(a)  The county performs sampling of the user at least once per month; or 
(b)  The county performs sampling of the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(5)  Laboratory accreditation. All analysis submitted to the county for the purpose of compliance determination and other purposes as the director deems necessary, shall be performed by a laboratory having been accredited by a recognized third-party laboratory accreditation organization if no federal or state accreditation program is available. If a laboratory is not accredited, then the laboratory must demonstrate to the county's satisfaction that quality assurance and quality control measures are at least as stringent as those used by the county's laboratory. 
E.  Facility operation. The user shall at all times maintain in good working order and operate as efficiently as possible all treatment or control facilities, including inspection and sampling of systems installed or used by the user to achieve compliance with all terms and conditions of this article. When required by the director, the user shall provide for adequate documentation of pretreatment controls, such as a standard operating procedures manual and quality control programs. 
F.  Confidentiality. The director shall provide appropriate confidentiality in handling and monitoring all collected information so as to avoid the disclosure, accidentally or purposefully, of trade secrets deemed vital to each industrial discharger under surveillance by this program. Public access to such information shall be limited as provided in 40 CFR 403.14. 
G.  Ordinance supersession. Upon the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard for a particular industrial subcategory, the national standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The director shall notify all affected significant industrial users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1390. - Method to be used for sampling and testing. 
A.  All sampling, measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with 40 CFR 403, 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto, and the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole to the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. In case of laboratory procedural conflict, 40 CFR, Part 136 takes precedence. When 40 CFR, Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the director determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties approved by the director. 
B.  The samples collected shall be representative of daily operations. At least four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, F.O.G., sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, a continuous 24-hour composite sample collected during production hours must be obtained through flow proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. If conditions warrant, additional consecutive 24-hour sampling periods may be required by the county. The director may waive flow proportional composite sampling for any user that demonstrates that flow proportional sampling is infeasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through time proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. 
C.  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities, if such exist, or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with all pretreatment standards and requirements. Where an alternative concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the county. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1400. - Exceptions by the board of commissioners. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the board of commissioners and any industrial concern whereby industrial wastewater of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the county for treatment, subject to payment therefore, by the industrial concern. The board of commissioners shall never knowingly enter into any such special agreement or arrangement which violates any provision of the federal general pretreatment regulations for existing or new sources of pollution (40 CFR 403) or any of the federal industrial pretreatment categorical standards. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1410. - Sewage flow metering. 
It is the industry's responsibility to maintain accurate sewage flow measurements at all times and under all flow conditions, and to provide such information as required by the county to demonstrate that this requirement is being met. If the industry cannot prove to the county's satisfaction that accurate sewage flows are being maintained at all times, then the county shall base all wastewater treatment charges, surcharges or penalties on the water consumption metered on the water meter. If the county has reason to believe that metered consumption does not reflect the total volume of wastewater being discharged, the county reserves the right to use its own sewage flow monitoring data or historical data, as deemed necessary by the director, to determine wastewater discharge. No allowances for adjusted sewer flows will be allowed unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the director. To allow for sewer billing adjustments, all plans, specifications and equipment shall be submitted to and accepted by the county. The industry shall allow 30 days for the county's review and comments. When a user has an alternate water supply or other source of water such that the volume of wastewater generated is greater than the volume of metered water purchased, the county may require that a flowmeter be installed. When deemed necessary by the director or entered into agreement by the director and user, the county may maintain sewage flow measurement equipment with all costs borne to the industrial user. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1420. - National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
The categorical pretreatment standards found in 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated. Therefore, certain users are now, or shall become, subject to categorical pretreatment standards promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency found at 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 and specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants, or pollutant properties, which may be discharged into the POTW. All users subject to a categorical pretreatment standard may also be subject to the local limitations established in section 13.10.1220B. of this chapter or by the State of Georgia. Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards for existing sources which hereafter become subject to such standards shall be effected within three years following promulgation of the standards unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the standard. Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards for new sources shall be required upon promulgation of the standard by the Environmental Protection Agency. Within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed 90 days), new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1430. - Dilution prohibition. 
No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation developed by the county or the State of Georgia. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1440. - Potential problem discharges. 
A.  Protection from potential problem discharges. 
(1)  Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this article. At the discretion of the director and in accordance with section 13.10.1360B. of this chapter, procedures and facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or operator's own cost and expense. 
(2)  Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the director for review, and shall be approved by the director before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify his facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
B.  Notification of potential problem discharges. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load which may cause potential problems for the POTW (including a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Section 13.10.1220 of this chapter), it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the county emergency services (911) of the incident. This notification shall include the location of discharge, cause and duration of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article. 
(3)  Failure to notify the county of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a separate violation of this article. 
(4)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the permitted user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph B.(1) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(5)  Any enforcement action taken based on information gained from this provision shall be enforceable under sections 13.10.1610, 13.10.1620A. and B. and 13.10.1630 of this chapter. 
C.  Slug discharges. 
(1)  The county may use instantaneous grab samples for the determination of a slug discharge as defined in section 13.10.1030 of this chapter; 
(2)  The analytical results may be used by the control authority for enforcement actions as deemed necessary by the director. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1450. - Notification of changed conditions. 
Each permitted user is required to notify the director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change. For purposes of this requirement flow increases of ten percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, shall be deemed significant. Responsibilities of the director include: 
A.  The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 13.10.1360A. of this chapter; 
B.  The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 13.10.1360A. of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 13.10.1360E. of this chapter; and 
C.  The user shall not implement the planned changed condition without the director's approval. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1460. - Combined wastewater formula. 
Where process effluent is mixed prior to treatment with wastewaters other than those generated by the regulated process, fixed alternative discharge limits may be derived by the county, as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(a), or by the user with written concurrence of the county. These alternative limits shall be applied to the mixed effluent. Derivation and monitoring locations are to be conducted as outlined in 40 CFR 403.6(e). All expenses incurred in development and use of the formula shall be the requesting user's responsibility. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1470. - Certification of operators. 
Any permitted user that provides pretreatment shall comply with the rules of the Georgia State Board of Examiners for Certification of Water and Wastewater Treatment Plant Operators and Laboratory Analysts concerning individuals engaged in such activities. (Georgia Rules & Regulations Chapter 750). At the discretion of the director, more stringent certification requirements may be imposed based on the industrial user's previous operation or potential to impact the POTW. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1480. - Falsifying information. 
Any user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or wastewater permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall be in violation of this article and subject to the fines, penalties and punishment as provided for in this article. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1490. - Annual publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance. 
The county shall publish annually, in the legal organ of the county, a list of the industrial users and significant industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1600. - PENALTIES. 

13.10.1610. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
A.  Industry to notify county of violation. When any person violates any provision of this article, except section 13.10.1240 of this chapter, such person shall immediately notify the director or the director's designee or the POTW utilized by the user of such violation and immediately correct the violation or discontinue the use of water service and sewer service of the control authority. Any enforcement action taken based on information gained from this provision shall be enforceable under sections 13.10.1610, 13.10.1620A. and B. and 13.10.1630 of this chapter. 
B.  Penalty for violation. Whenever the director finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the director or his agent may serve upon said user a written notice of violation. Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the county to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
C.  Excessive contaminant penalties. At the point where a user's discharge exceeds the violation level for a particular pollutant, excessive contaminant penalties are imposed on the user. Excessive contaminant penalties are designed to recapture the economic benefit of noncompliance and deter future violations. These penalties escalate with the degree of violation and are based on contaminant level and amount of discharge. 
D.  Consent agreement. The director is hereby empowered to enter into consent agreements, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such agreements will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the agreement. Consent agreements shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to paragraphs F. and G. of this section and shall be judicially enforceable. 
E.  Show cause hearing. The director may order any user which causes or contributes to violation(s) of this article, wastewater discharge permits, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the director and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date. A show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
F.  Compliance order. When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this article, wastewater discharge permit or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance by the addition and correct operation and maintenance of adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amounts of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order release the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user. 
G.  Compliance schedules. Consent agreements and compliance orders may contain compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards. The following conditions shall apply to compliance schedules: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for meeting pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
(2)  No increment in a compliance schedule shall exceed nine months. 
(3)  No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the control authority including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for the delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months lapse between such reports to the control authority. 
H.  Cease and desist orders. When the director finds that a user is violating this article, the user's wastewater discharge permit, any order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user. 
I.  Administrative fines. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other section of this article, any user that is found to have violated any provision of this article, its wastewater discharge permit, and orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement may be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(2)  Assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge and the director shall have such other collection remedies as may be available for other service charges and fees. 
(3)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent of the unpaid balance and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one and one-half percent per month. A lien against the individual user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines and penalties. 
(4)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the director to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within ten days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the director shall convene a hearing on the matter within ten days of receiving the request from the industrial user. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the industrial user. The county may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions such as notices and orders to the fine. 
(5)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
J.  Emergency suspensions. The director may immediately suspend the wastewater treatment service and wastewater permit of a user, whenever such suspension is necessary, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, as referenced in paragraph L.(2) of this section. The director may also immediately suspend a user's discharge that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment, as referenced in paragraph L.(2) of this section. Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service or the wastewater permit or its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection and discontinuance of the water service to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the county that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in paragraph K. of this section, are initiated against the user. Within three days, a user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the director prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under paragraphs E. and K. of this section. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
K.  Termination of discharge. In addition to those provisions in paragraph J. of this section and section 13.10.1360F. of this chapter, any user that violates the following conditions of this article, wastewater discharge permits, orders issued hereunder, or any applicable or state and federal law, is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; and 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in sections 13.10.1200 through 13.10.1260 of this chapter. 
Noncompliant users will be notified of the proposed enforcement action and may show cause under paragraph E. of this section why the proposed action should not be taken. A terminated permit under any of the above provisions shall mean the user shall not discharge process wastewater into the county's sewerage system. 
L.  Authority to disconnect service. 
(1)  The director shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this article by the discontinuance of water service and sewer service in the event any person shall continue to violate the provisions of this article after receiving oral or written notice of the violation from the county. 
(2)  Whenever the director determines that a person is violating or has violated any provision of this article, except for section 13.10.1240 of this chapter, and determines that the violation of this article will cause immediate damage or harm to the sewers, sewerage treatment process, environment, equipment or treatment facilities of the control authority, or that the violation endangers the public health, safety or general welfare of the community, the director shall have the power and authority to immediately revoke, orally or in writing, the sewerage permit of the person violating any provision of this article and terminate that person's water service and sewer service. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by having a sewerage permit revoked by the director shall have the right to appeal the revocation to the board of commissioners. Such appeal shall be taken within five days from the date of the revocation by notifying the board of commissioners in writing and specifying the grounds of appeal. The board of commissioners shall, within five days after the receipt of the notice of appeal, fix a date and time for the hearing of the appeal and after due notice to the parties at interest, have a hearing on the appeal and decide the same within a reasonable time. 
(4)  The director shall have the power and authority to reinstate the sewerage permit and allow the use of the control authority's sewer service if the person who had been violating the provisions of this article shall discontinue and cease such violations. 
(5)  Any user who violates any provision of this article shall upon oral notification by the county and within ten days of such violation or violations furnish the county a written report concerning such violation or violations, which report shall specifically detail the cause of the violation or violations and the steps implemented by the person to assure that the violation or violations will not occur in the future. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after the receipt of notification. This section shall not restrict the authority of the director provided under section 13.10.1360E. of this chapter. 
M.  User to receive due process. Noncompliant users will be notified of the proposed enforcement action, with the exception of paragraphs J. and L.(2) of this section, and may show cause under paragraph E. of this section, why the proposed action should not be taken within five days from the date of the action by notifying the board of commissioners in writing and specifying the grounds of appeal. Any enforcement action taken based on information gained from this provision shall be enforceable under sections 13.10.1610, 13.10.1620A. and B. and 13.10.1630 of this chapter. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1620. - Judicial remedies. 
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this article or any order or permit issued hereunder, or if any person violates other provisions of this article, the county may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the appropriate court. 
A.  Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this article, wastewater discharge permit, or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the county may petition the court for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the industrial user. Such other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the county. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to taking any other action against a user. 
B.  Civil penalties. 
(1)  Any user which has violated or continues to violate this article, any order or wastewater discharge permit hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement may be liable to the county for a civil penalty of at least $1,000.00 plus actual damages incurred by the POTW per violation, per day, for as long as the violation continues. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. In addition to the above described penalty and damages, the county may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the control authority. In addition, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the county for any judgment, expense, loss, damage, fine, penalty or fee occasioned by the control authority by reason of such violation or violations, including, but not limited to, any fee, penalty or fine assessed against the control authority by any state or federal agency as a result of such violation or violations. 
(2)  In determining the amount of liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user and any other factor as justice requires. The director shall have such remedies to collect these fees as it has to collect other sewer service charges. 
(3)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user. 
C.  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of this article, any orders or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, § 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the Court. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate violation. 
(2)  Any person who introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, § 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the Court. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate violation. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(3)  Any person who knowingly falsifies information as described in section 13.10.1480 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, § 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the Court. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate violation. 
D.  Remedies nonexclusive. The county reserves the right to take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the county's enforcement response plan. However, the county reserves the right to take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the county is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently. 
E.  Penalty for violation; generally. Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided within this article of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, and as allowed under 40 CFR 403.8 and 403.12. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1630. - Supplemental enforcement remedies. 
A.  Performance bonds. The director may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, any orders or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the county, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
B.  Liability insurance. The director may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, any order, or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
C.  Water and sewer supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, orders, or wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, water and sewer service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
D.  Public nuisances. Any violation of this article, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director or his designee. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the county for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
E.  Informant rewards. The director is authorized to pay up to $1,000.00 for information leading to the discovery of noncompliance by a user. In the event that the information provided results in an administrative fine or civil penalty levied against the user, the director is authorized to disperse up to five percent of the collected fine or penalty to the informant. However, a single reward payment may not exceed $5,000.00. 
F.  Contractor listing. Users which have not achieved consistent compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the county. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the county held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards may be terminated at the discretion of the county. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1640. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
A.  Treatment upsets. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements, including wastewater discharge permit conditions, because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the permitted user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements if the requirements of paragraph A.(3) of this section are met. 
(3)  Any permitted user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(a)  An upset occurred and the permitted user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(b)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
(c)  The permitted user has submitted the following information to the POTW and treatment plant operator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
i.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
ii.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
iii.  A plan of action to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the permitted user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(5)  Permitted users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(6)  The permitted user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
B.  General/specific prohibitions. A permitted user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general and specific prohibitions in sections 13.10.1100 through 13.10.1160 and 13.10.1200 through 13.10.1260 of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged, and the industrial user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the control authority was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
C.  Treatment bypasses. 
(1)  A permitted user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements, including permit conditions, to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of Paragraphs C.(2) and (3) of this section. 
(2)  (a)  If a permitted user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW, at least ten days before the date of the bypass if possible. 
(b)  A permitted user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards or requirements to the POTW within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the permitted user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The POTW may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(3)  (a)  Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take enforcement action against a permitted user for a bypass, unless: 
i.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; and 
ii.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance. 
(b)  The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the two conditions listed above in Paragraph C.(3)(a) of this section. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1700. - FEES. 

13.10.1710. - Charges generally. 
All users of the public sewerage system shall pay such service charges, surcharges, connection fees, tap fees, or other charges for the use of same as are now or hereafter specified in the current Hall County Sewers and Sewage Disposal Fee Schedule adopted by the Hall County Board of Commissioners. The Hall County Board of Commissioners reserves the right to periodically adjust rates either upward or downward depending upon the need to do so. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A); Res. of 3-28-13, § 1(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1720. - User fee classifications. 
For the purpose of establishing sewer user charges under this article, users are classified as follows: 
A.  Residential; 
B.  Multifamily; 
C.  Commercial; or 
D.  General industry. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1730. - Fees charged. 
A.  Monthly account servicing fees and monthly per unit (100 cubic feet) sanitary sewer user charges: 
(1)  All classes of sanitary sewer users of the county who purchase water from public or private sources, shall pay a monthly account servicing fee on the sanitary sewer portion of the utility bill. 
(2)  All classes of sanitary sewer users whose sewer flow is metered and billed separately from their water meters, shall pay a monthly account servicing fee in accordance with fees established in this section. 
(3)  Unless other fees are established by contractual obligation between an entity and the county, monthly per unit (100 cubic feet) sanitary sewer user charges for all classes of users by district shall be as set forth in the Hall County Hall County Sewers and Sewage Disposal Fee Schedule adopted by the Hall County Board of Commissioners for monthly per unit (100 cubic feet) sanitary sewer user charges. 
(4)  For the purposes of this section, the Mulberry Creek District is defined as that portion of Hall County, Georgia shown in Exhibit B as the "16. Hall County/Municipality". Said Mulberry Creek District is generally bounded by the county Line and the Braselton City Limits to the South and East, Hog Mountain Road and Martin Road to the West with the exception of the Flowery Branch service area, along the Winder Highway Corridor from the intersection of Martin Road westerly to the intersection of Poplar Springs Road with the exception of the previously noted area served by Oakwood just north of Winder Highway in the drainage basin they are currently serving, then along the Poplar Springs Road corridor easterly from the intersection with Winder Highway to the intersection with Sherman Allen Road, along Sherman Allen Road to the county line on the east, also including areas of the Flowery Branch and Braselton service districts that the county is contractually obligated to serve. 
(5)  For the purposes of this section, the Eastern North Hall District is defined as that portion of Hall County, Georgia shown on Exhibit "C" as the "HB 489 District 11 Hall County". Said Eastern North Hall County District is generally bounded by the approximate area north of White Sulphur Road and west of Old Cornelia Highway to Lula city limits, then west of Highway 365 to north of Belton Bridge Road, along Belton Bridge Road/Pea Ridge Road to the county line, along the county line to Skitts Mountain Road, south on Skitts Mountain Road to Bowne Bridge Road, west on Bowen Bridge Road to Cleveland Highway, south on Cleveland Highway and east of the Cleveland Highway to the Chattahoochee River/Lake Lanier and north of White Sulfer Road. 
B.  The director shall notify all classes of users biennially of the actual cost of operation and maintenance of the system. 
C.  In addition to the above, all classes of users, except residential and multifamily, shall be billed, as a surcharge, a fee based upon their pollutant load in excess of that found in the maximum residential waste effluent. The director, in accordance with the standard practice for sample taking and sample analysis, shall compute monthly for each class of user the amount of waste pollutants in mg/L/ccf (milligrams per liter per hundred cubic feet) introduced in the sewer system in excess of the residential criteria hereafter established. Computation shall be based on sample(s) taken in a water service period. In the event there are no samples taken in a service period, the most recent sample shall be used for the monthly computation for up to four consecutive monthly computations. 
D.  In addition to surcharges, all classes of users, except residential and multifamily, shall be billed, as a penalty, a fee based upon their pollutant load of oil and grease in excess of that found in the maximum residential waste effluent. The director in accordance with the standard practice for sample taking and sample analysis, shall compute monthly for each class of user, the amount of waste pollutants in mg/L/ccf (milligrams per liter per hundred cubic feet) introduced in the sewer system in excess of residential criteria hereafter established. Computation shall be based on sample(s) taken in a water service period. In the event there are no samples taken in a service period, the most recent sample shall be used for the monthly computation for up to four consecutive monthly computations. 
E.  Waste effluent contaminants to be analyzed and measured for surcharge and penalty are: 
(1)  Biochemical oxygen demand; 
(2)  Suspended solids; 
(3)  Oil and grease; 
(4)  Phosphorus; 
(5)  Total Kjeldahl nitrogen. 
F.  The criteria hereby established for maximum or upper limit residential waste is: 
(1)  Biochemical oxygen demand, 250 mg/L; 
(2)  Suspended solids, 250 mg/L; 
(3)  Oil and grease, 100 mg/L; 
(4)  Phosphorus, 7 mg/L; 
(5)  Total Kjeldahl nitrogen, 40 mg/L. 
G.  The surcharge to industrial and commercial users for excess pollutants over the maximum residential criteria each month will be computed as set forth in the Hall County Sewers and Sewage Disposal Fee Schedule adopted by the Hall County Board of Commissioners for excess pollutant surcharges. 
H.  The penalty to industrial and commercial users for excess pollutants over the maximum residential criteria each month will be computed as set forth in the Hall County Sewers and Sewage Disposal Fee Schedule adopted by the Hall County Board of Commissioners for excess pollutant penalties. 

(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A); Res. of 12-13-12(1), § 1) 
13.10.1740. - Calculation of charges. 
A.  The monthly sewer charge for residential users who maintain public or private water service shall be calculated based on a percentage of the usage calculated from the monthly water meter readings. The percentage used for calculation of the monthly bill shall be 93 percent of the metered water usage up to 12 ccf. The percentage calculation shall apply to all residential users except for multiple users served by a single or master meter on which the sewer charge shall be calculated on each month's entire water usage. 
B.  The sewer charge for all other classes of users who maintain public or private water service and who are served by the sewers shall be calculated on each month's water usage as shown by the water meter. In the event that any user receives a water supply from sources other than the city's system, such additional sources shall be metered, and the sewer charge shall be based upon the monthly total of all metered water supplied. 
C.  In the event a portion of the water supply can be shown, to the satisfaction of the director, not to be discharged into the control authority's sewerage system, credit may be allowed by the county for that portion not discharged. 
D.  Should a user have water service that is not metered, the user shall be required to install a metering device on the sewer service capable of metering within two percent accuracy the sewer flows from this user and shall be billed based upon the monthly readings of this meter. The director shall approve the type of metering device to be installed. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A); Res. of 12-13-12(2), § 1; Res. of 8-25-16(1), § 1(Exh. A); Res. of 3-9-17(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1750. - Excess contaminated waste fees. 
Wastewater acceptable for treatment without incurring an excess contaminated waste fee is sewage with: 
A.  Generally. 
(1)  BOD of 500 mg per liter or less. 
(2)  Suspended solids of 500 mg per liter or less. 
(3)  Total phosphorus of 11 mg per liter or less. 
(4)  Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) of 75 mg per liter or less. 
(5)  Animal or vegetable oil or grease of 125 mg per liter or less. 
(6)  Any wastewater accepted with effluent contaminants in excess of the limits of paragraph A(1), (2), (3) and (4) of this section shall be charged a surcharge to be computed as set forth in the Hall County Sewers and Sewage Disposal Fee Schedule adopted by the Hall County Board of Commissioners for excess effluent contaminant surcharge. 
(7)  Any wastewater accepted with effluent contaminants in excess of the limit established in Paragraph A.(5) of this section shall be charged a penalty to be computed as set forth in the Hall County Sewers and Sewage Disposal Fee Schedule adopted by the Hall County Board of Commissioners for excess effluent contaminant penalty. 
B.  Payment of the surcharge as provided for herein shall not excuse the violator from any other penalty, termination of service or legal or equitable relief pursued by the county to terminate such violation. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1760. - Tapping and other fees. 
The fees for tapping into the sewer system of the control authority shall be as set forth in the Hall County Sewers and Sewage Disposal Fee Schedule adopted by the Hall County Board of Commissioners for tapping fees. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1770. - Sanitary sewer system connection fee. 
A.  Users subject to fee. Users of the sewer system shall pay a sewer connection fee before new or additional service will be made available. Applications for new or additional sewer service must include the street address for a specific lot or lots where the service is to be provided. Applications for sewer service shall expire unless all fees have been paid to the county's finance director no later than ten calendar days after the date of application issuance by the utilities department. Sewer service approved for a specific lot shall not be transferred to any other lot or property. Existing users shall be subject to the fee when their existing water service tap is inadequate to deliver the volume of water desired and requires an increase in the water service tap and meter size. New users will be subject to the fee at the time new service is requested. All users shall be subject to the sewer connection fee regardless of location of the service tap. 
B.  Determination of connection fee. 
(1)  The sanitary sewer system connection fee shall be imposed unless other fees are established by contractual obligation between an entity and the county including a three percent administrative fee to account for tracking the collection and use of the connection fee. Said fee shall be as set forth in the Hall County Sewers and Sewage Disposal Fee Schedule adopted by the Hall County Board of Commissioners for connection fees. The sanitary sewer system connection fee shall be paid at the time of application for sanitary sewer service and in addition to the meter and sanitary sewer system tapping fees. 
C.  Changing tap and meter size. 
(1)  After the original sewer connection fee has been paid and installation made, any customer requesting a change in water tap size resulting in a smaller water meter shall make proper application at the water and sewer department for this change. Such change shall be made without cost to the customer. No credit shall be given for sewer connection fees or water meter costs paid on the existing larger water meter. The water meter removed shall remain the property of the water provider and shall be returned to the same. 
(2)  After the original sewer connection fee has been paid and installation made, any customer requesting a change in water tap size resulting in a larger water meter shall make proper application for this change. The customer shall pay a sewer connection fee equal to the difference between the current applicable sewer connection fee for the existing water meter size and the current applicable sewer connection fee for the requested water meter size. 
D.  Payment of fee. 
(1)  Existing users shall pay the sewer connection fee at the time the application is made to increase the size of the existing water service tap on meter. 
(2)  New users shall pay the sewer connection fee at the time the application is made for sewer service. 
E.  Revenue restrictions. 
(1)  All revenues received from each sewer system connection fee service area shall be accounted for separately and distinctly from any other system revenues. Available sewer system connection fee balances shall be invested and all interest earned on these investments shall be accounted for as part of the sewer system connection fee revenues for each service area. The accounting system shall be established so that sewer system connection fee collections from each service area, interest earned, and expenses can be clearly tracked on a monthly basis and so that connection fees are properly deposited, accounted for and expended in accordance with this section. 
(2)  Sewer connection fee funds from each service area shall be expended only for costs related to system improvements, as defined in O.C.G.A § 36-71-2(20), as amended, that provide capacity to serve new connections to the sewer system located within that service area. All costs permitted under O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(19), as amended, shall be permitted under this section. Such costs include, but are not limited to, planning, design, engineering, land acquisition, land improvement, surveying, and construction or reconstruction costs as well as principal, interest and other financing costs on contracts, bonds, notes or other obligations issued by the county to finance such system improvements. Sewer connection fee funds shall not be expended for maintenance or repair of system improvements nor for operational expenses. 
F.  Applicant contributions of system improvements; credits/reimbursements. 
(1)  Project improvements are the responsibility of the developer or property owner and no credits against connection fees shall be made for project improvements. Project improvements include all lot or building improvements necessary to provide service (including for example the building sewer and cleanout and prestubs if required) and main extensions of eight inches in diameter and up to 100 feet in length from the property line or project boundary as required to connect to the nearest main. Project improvements also include any other sewer system facilities, including but not limited to pump stations and larger diameter lines, that are planned, designed and necessary to provide service to a particular development project in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(15), as amended. Tap costs are covered by the tapping fee imposed pursuant to this section. 
(2)  Upon application for new or increased sewer service, the sewer connection fee otherwise due shall be reduced by any applicable credits for the contribution of money or dedication of land for or the construction of system improvements, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-17-2(20), as amended, within the service area where the new connection is located and serving the new connection, and required or accepted by the county from the applicant or his predecessor in title or interest. In the event that the amount of credit due exceeds the total sewer connection fees due, an agreement between the applicant and the county shall govern the amount and timing of reimbursement payments to the applicant. The county shall have the option of reimbursing an applicant by a lump sum payment or periodic payments and from existing funds or from sewer connection fees collected in the future. 
(3)  The amount of applicable credit/reimbursement, if any, shall be determined based on credible evidence submitted by the applicant on forms provided by the county utility department, which: 
(a)  Describes the contribution for which credit/reimbursement is claimed; 
(b)  Establishes the original cost and date of the construction, contribution or dedication; 
(c)  Identifies the specific development project for which the construction, contribution or dedication was made, including the location, land use, size, number of buildings or number of dwelling units in the original development project; and 
(d)  Describes the development project for which the credit/reimbursement against sewer connection fees is requested, if different from the project described in paragraph F.(3)(c) of this section. Credits/reimbursements may not be transferred from one development project to another project. All costs related to submitting the credit/reimbursement application and any additional information requested by the director are the responsibility of the applicant. 
(4)  The director of public works and utilities, and the director of finance shall determine the amount of credit/reimbursement due per connection, if any, based on consideration of the original and current or depreciated value of the contribution or dedication, the facilities required to serve the development project, the ability of the contribution or dedication to provide service to other development, and, if the contribution or dedication is determined to be a system improvement which is eligible for credit/reimbursement, the per connection share of the present value of the construction, contribution and dedication. System improvements shall be determined based on accepted engineering principles and data produced by a registered engineer. The burden of establishing eligibility for a credit/reimbursement is on the applicant claiming the credit/reimbursement. All costs incurred by the county, including the value of staff time and consultant fees, as well as expenses related to applications for credit/reimbursement, shall be the responsibility of and charged to the applicant. Regardless of the results of any appeal of a determination of the director by the applicant, county costs billed to and paid by the applicant shall not be refunded. 
G.  Annual report. At least once every year, the director of public works and utilities and director of finance shall jointly prepare a report on the sewer connection fees. Such report shall include: 
(1)  The total amount of sewer connection fees collected within each service area during the past fiscal year; 
(2)  The total expenditures and projects funded in part or in whole by sewer connection fees within each service area during the past fiscal year; 
(3)  The sewer connection fee interest earned and account balance for each service area; 
(4)  The sewer system projects within each service area anticipated to be funded in whole or in part by sewer connection fees; 
(5)  Any proposed changes to the Hall County Sewers and Sewage Disposal Fee Schedule for sewer connection fee calculation methodology; and 
(6)  Any other recommendations as the director of public works and utilities or the director of finance deem appropriate or as may be requested by the board of commissioners. 
H.  Appeal process. 
(1)  Applicants for a new or changed sewer service may appeal any determination of the director of public works and utilities regarding the meter or line size required to serve the property or the amount of credits and reimbursement due for contributions of system improvements to the board of commissioners. Appeals shall be made to the board of commissioners and must be filed no later than 30 days after the date of determination by the director of public works and utilities. The board of commissioners shall provide the applicant with a written explanation of its determination within 60 calendar days of filing of the appeal with board of commissioners. Appeals shall be submitted on a form provided by the county. 
I.  Authority to establish an administrative fee. 
(1)  A reasonable fee to cover all or a portion of the administrative costs incurred in administering and managing the sewer connection fee system may be established by resolution of the board of commissioners. Such administrative fee may include, but is not limited to, the following costs to the extent the costs are related to the administration and operation of the connection fee system: reasonable charges for control authority staff time, consultant fees and expenses, computer equipment/software, and other equipment the costs of which are not included in the sewer connection fee calculations. 
(2)  The administrative fee adopted by resolution of the board of commissioners shall be paid at the time of application for new or changed sewer service and shall be paid in addition to the cost of the sewer system connection fees and sewer system tapping fees. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1780. - Disposition of tapping fees and connection fees. 
A.  All fees for tapping into the sewer system lines shall be paid into the sewer operational fund. 
B.  All revenues received from the sewer system connection fees shall only be used for debt service payments, for capital improvements or deposited into the sewer construction fund for construction and purchase of capital improvements. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1790. - Disposition on discontinuance of service. 
A.  In the event of failure of any person to pay any charge herein provided, execution therefore may be issued by the board of commissioners, and the same may be enforced by levy and sale of any property with which control authority sewers are connected. 
B.  In event of failure of any person to pay any charge herein provided, the county may discontinue sewer service to the property and may not reinstate sewer service to such property until the amount owing has been paid. 
C.  Upon failure to pay the monthly fees prescribed, the county shall have the right after five days' notice to the party in default to discontinue sewer service to the party in default. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.1800. - User charge system for operation and maintenance costs. 
A.  Basis for user charge. The wastewater characteristics which are used to determine user charge are: 
(1)  BOD; 
(2)  Suspended solids; 
(3)  Flow volume; 
(4)  Oil and grease; 
(5)  Phosphorus; and 
(6)  TKN. 
Normal wastewater dischargers and industrial wastewater dischargers of normal strength wastewaters shall be charged a basic user charge in which flow volume is the wastewater characteristic for determining the charge. 
B.  Basic user charge. The formula for determining basic user charge which applies to normal strength discharges shall be as follows: 

 
C.  Surcharged wastewater. When BOD, suspended solids, oil and grease, phosphorus or TKN concentrations in a user's wastewater discharge is in excess of the range of concentration in normal strength wastewater as set forth in Section 13.10.1740A., a surcharge shall be added to the base charge. 
D.  Surcharge determination. When BOD, suspended solids, oil and grease, phosphorus, or TKN exceed the range of concentration of those pollutants in normal strength wastewater as set forth in Section 13.10.1750A., a surcharge shall be added in the basis charge. The surcharge shall be determined as follows: 

 
E.  Sanitary sewer user charge determination. The sanitary sewer user charge, C t, which shall be revised not less frequently than biennially, shall be determined as follows: 

 
Ct, Bc, Sc, Gc and Pc are as defined in paragraphs B. and D. of this section. Bd,Sd,Gd and Pd shall be revised not less frequently than biennially and shall be determined by dividing actual wastewater treatment plant loading less total surcharged loading by total annual volume contribution by domestic waste water dischargers. 
Vc, Bc, Sc, Gc and Pc shall be revised not less often than two years by dividing their respective annual maintenance and operation costs by their respective annual loadings. Wastewater discharge volume (Vm) for dischargers of normal strength wastewater shall be 100 percent of the amount of water metered. For industrial wastewater dischargers which discharge surcharged waste, the wastewater discharge volume (Vu) shall be 100 percent of the amount of water metered, unless it can be shown that the volume of wastewater discharge is less. 
F.  Biennial review. The total cost of operation, maintenance and debt service of the sewerage system, its approved user charge system and the contribution of the users shall be reviewed not less than every two years. Charges for users shall be revised to maintain the distribution of costs among users and to generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance cost necessary to the proper operation and maintenance of the sewerage system. 
G.  Inconsistent agreements. The user charge system shall take precedence over any terms, conditions of agreements, or contracts between the county and the user, including industrial users, districts, other municipalities or federal agencies which are inconsistent with the requirements of Section 204(b)(1)(a) of the Clean Water Act and these regulations. 
H.  Excess revenue. Revenues collected in excess of revenues used to defray operation, maintenance and renewal and extension costs in any year shall be applied to the costs of operation and maintenance for the next year, and the user charge adjusted to absorb the excess. 
I.  Toxic pollutants. Each user which discharges any toxic substance to the publicly owned sewer which causes an increase in the costs of managing the effluent or the sludge of the treatment works shall pay for the increased costs. 
J.  Extraneous flows. Maintenance and operation costs for all flows not attributable to users shall be distributed among all users in proportion of flow volume of the user discharge. 
K.  Notification. Each user shall be notified no less than annually with a regular bill of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment services. 
L.  Implementation. The county shall implement the user charge system upon its adoption by the Hall County Board of Commissioners. For the first year of operation, operation and maintenance charges shall be based upon past experience and judgment. After one year of documentation of operation and maintenance cost and user loadings, user charges will be revised based on actual data. User charges shall be reviewed annually and revised to reflect actual operation and maintenance cost of the treatment plant works. 
M.  Records. The county shall document the various waste treatment plant loading categories and the operation and maintenance costs attributable to each category, record user charge revenues and demonstrate that the user charge derived is a proportional distribution of operation and maintenance costs. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED 

13.10.2000—13.10.2170. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Res. of May 14, 2009, § 1, deleted Art. II, §§ 13.10.2000—13.10.2170, which pertained to on-site sewage management systems. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

13.10.3000. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all of the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia regardless of whether the location is served by public sewer, has an approved on-site sewage management system or other means of sewage disposal. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.3010. - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, § 13.10.1030 are hereby incorporated by reference and shall have the meaning ascribed to them except where the context in this article clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.3020. - Discharges to the environment. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to the environment, including any natural outlet within the county, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the county, any wastewater, other polluted waters or polluting substances, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this title. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.3030. - Unlawful construction or maintenance for wastewater disposal. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, cesspool, or other non permitted facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater unless said facility is constructed and maintained in accordance with all local, state and federal laws. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.3040. - Commercial waste transportation and reporting requirements. 
A.  Applicability. In addition to any applicable requirements of section 13.10.2100 of this chapter, this paragraph shall apply to any facility that generates commercial wastes, to any person who removes commercial wastes, to any person who processes commercial wastes, and to any person who accepts commercial wastes for final disposal. 
B.  Definitions. In addition to the definitions set forth in section 13.10.1030 of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Commercial waste transporter permit is a permit issued by a local governing authority for an individual tank truck. 
Grease interceptor means a structure or device designed to collect and retain oils, grease, and fatty substances usually found in kitchen or similar wastes. 
Grit trap means a structure or device designed primarily for the accumulation and removal of grit. 
Oil-water separator means a structure or device designed primarily to collect and retain oily substances. 
On-site sewage management system means any system that has been permitted by the county board of health for sewage disposal under article II of this chapter or any other applicable Hall County ordinance or state health regulation. 
Originator means the owner or operator of the grease or F.O.G. interceptor, grit trap, oil-water separator, or sand trap from which commercial wastes are removed. 
Registration means acceptance by EPD of a transporter. 
Registered commercial waste transporter is a business/owner registered by the division and whose tank trucks are permitted by a local governing authority. 
Sand trap means a receptacle designed for the accumulation and removal of sand, grit, rocks and other similar debris. 
Septic wastes means the contents of a septic tank. 
Tank truck means any vehicle that removes and transports commercial wastes. 
Transporter means any person or firm, which owns or operates one or more waste tank trucks that receive or dispose of commercial waste in this state. 
C.  Originators. An originator shall: 
1.  Have commercial waste removed from their facility only by a transporter who holds a valid commercial waste transporter permit; 
2.  Sign the received manifest form and maintain such record for a period of three years; and 
3.  Keep a copy of all manifests for a period of three years at the originator's principal place of business and shall make the same available for inspection by the county. 
D.  Transporters. 
1.  Transporter registration. Any transporter, owning or operating one or more waste tank trucks that receive, transport or dispose of commercial waste in the county, shall submit a registration form to EPD for the purposes of receiving a registration number. 
2.  Commercial waste transporter permit. 
a.  Application. Application for a commercial waste transporter permit shall be made to Hall County by submitting the following: 
(1)  A complete and accurate permit application on the form prescribed by the EPD; 
(2)  The location of the disposal site(s) to be used; 
(3)  Evidence of the tank truck owner's registration as a commercial waste transporter with EPD; and 
(4)  The transporter permitting fee adopted by Hall County as set forth in the Hall County Sewers and Sewage Disposal Fee Schedule for a Commercial Waste Transporter Permit. 
b.  Permit issuance. The commercial waste transporter permit shall be issued only after: 
(1)  A fully completed application is received by the county, and 
(2)  If, after inspection, the county finds that the tank truck is substantially leak proof, durable, of easily cleaned construction, and is maintained in good repair. 
c.  Permit conditions. All permits shall be issued on the following conditions: 
(1)  The only disposal facilities used are identified on the permit application; 
(2)  The tank truck is substantially leak proof; and 
(3)  The tank truck is maintained in good repair. 
d.  Permit term. Any commercial waste transporter permit issued shall have a fixed term not to exceed one year. 
e.  Permit renewal. A commercial waste transporter permit can be renewed prior to 60 days of its expiration if the conditions for permit issuance in section 13.10.3040D.2.(a) and (b) of this section have been met. 
f.  No transporter shall pump-out or vacuum F.O.G. separators, grit traps, sand traps, or oil-water separators without a valid commercial waste transporter permit issued by a LGA of this state. 
g.  A commercial waste transporter permit shall be required for each individual tank truck owned and operated by a transporter. 
h.  The commercial waste transporter permit issued by any LGA for operation of a tank truck shall be valid throughout the state. 
i.  A transporter, who has trucks permitted by an LGA, and who decides to have additional trucks permitted by another LGA, must provide copies of the current commercial waste transporter permits with the new commercial waste transporter permit application. 
j.  A transporter cannot have two tank trucks permitted with the same commercial waste transporter permit number. 
k.  The EPD registration number, which shall begin with F.O.G., shall be part of the commercial waste transporter permit number issued by the LGA. 
3.  On the vehicle that transports commercial waste, a transporter shall display the commercial waste transporter permit number. 
4.  A transporter shall remove the entire contents of any commercial tank that is serviced. 
5.  A transporter shall dispose of the contents of any commercial tank service, unmingled with hazardous wastes or septic wastes. 
6.  A transporter shall dispose of the contents of any commercial tank service only at a facility permitted by EPD to receive such waste. 
7.  A transporter shall utilize a manifest for each location being serviced. 
8.  A transporter shall sign the transporter portion of the manifest and leave a copy of the manifest with the originator. 
9.  A transporter shall present the manifest to the disposal operator to complete and sign the disposal section, and shall leave one copy of the manifest with the disposal site operator. 
10.  Prior to sending a completed copy, a transporter shall ensure that the manifest contains all the information required on the manifest form prescribed and furnished from time to time by the county. 
11.  A transporter shall send a completed copy of the manifest to the county within 15 days after the commercial waste is delivered and disposed of at the commercial waste disposal or processing facility, and the manifest has been signed and completed by the disposal or processing facility. 
12.  A transporter shall send a completed copy of the manifest to the originator with the signature of the disposal site operator within 30 days after the commercial waste is delivered and disposed of at the commercial waste disposal or processing facility, and the manifest has been signed and completed by the disposal or processing facility. 
13.  A transporter shall keep one copy of the completed manifest form demonstrating delivery to the disposal site operator for their records and maintain such records for a period of three years; except that the transporters manifest (or copy thereof) covering not less than the immediately preceding 30-day period for a particular tank truck shall be kept in the transporter's tank truck. All such records shall be available for inspection for EPD, any LGA or their designee. 
14.  A transporter shall provide a copy of the commercial waste transporter permit for the tank truck to each disposal site where the transporter disposes of commercial wastes. 
E.  A receiver of commercial waste shall: 
1.  Maintain copies of all manifests of tank pumping at their principal place of business for a period of three years; and 
2.  Make such records available to EPD, the county, any LGA or their designee for inspection. 
F.  Manifests. All originators, transporters, and processing and disposal site operators involved in the removal, transport, and disposal of commercial wastes and commercial waste sludge and byproducts shall participate in proper maintenance of manifests that shall be on a multicopy form as prescribed by EPD. This manifest will require signatures from the originator, transporter and disposer in order to maintain and establish accountability. 
G.  Inspection. 
1.  Representatives of EPD, the county, any LGA or their designee, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter the premises of any originator, transporter, processor, or disposal site at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this section or any commercial waste transporter permit. 
2.  Representatives of EPD, the county, any LGA or their designee, during inspections of the originator, transporter, processor, and the disposal site operator, may review records to determine compliance with provisions of these regulations. The right of inspection shall include the right to measure, observe, sample, test, record, review and make copies of all pertinent documents in accordance with this section. 
H.  Removal of commercial waste from any grease interceptor, sand trap, oil-water separator, or grit trap that is not connected to an on-site sewage management system for the purpose of transporting such waste to a disposal site shall be accomplished: 
1.  In a clean and sanitary manner; 
2.  By means of a vacuum hose or pump; 
3.  By removing the entire contents of the holding tank or pretreatment system being serviced; and 
4.  By being received: 
a.  As unmingled with any hazardous waste or septic waste; and 
b.  Into a leakproof tank truck approved and permitted for such service as provided by section. 
I.  Any commercial waste spilled, leaked, discharged, or otherwise released or removed from a grease interceptor, sand trap, oil-water separator, or grit trap that is not connected to an on-site sewage management system to any location other than a licensed leakproof tank truck shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
J.  Commercial waste vacuumed or pumped from any grease interceptor, sand trap, oil-water separator, or grit trap that is not connected to an on-site sewage management system and which waste is carried by tank trucks and disposed therefrom in this state shall be disposed only at a facility which is authorized by law to receive and process such waste. 
K.  No person shall dispose of commercial waste from a tank truck at any location in this state other than the place inside the property boundaries designated for such waste by the authorized facility's owner. 
L.  Any originator in this state, transporter, or disposal site operator in this state of any load of commercial waste vacuumed or pumped from any grease interceptor, sand trap, oil-water separator, or grit trap that is not connected to an on-site sewage management system shall be each responsible for maintaining a manifest system for such load of commercial waste, and the transporter shall certify on its manifest that such load of commercial waste is disposed in accordance with this section or in accordance with the law of such other state in which it is disposed. 
M.  Notice of enforcement action. The county is required to provide timely written notice to EPD of any enforcement action taken pursuant to this section against an operator permitted under this article who is alleged to be in violation of the same. EPD shall be notified of the initiation of any such local enforcement action and of the final conclusions or ultimate outcome of any such action. 
N.  Civil penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this article, the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per violation. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Hall County Magistrate Court is authorized to impose a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.10.3050. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating this article as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, § 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
Exhibit B 

(Res. of 1-8-09(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. B)) 
CHAPTER 13.20 - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND OPERATIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES FOR SEWERAGE SYSTEMS AND FOR REUSE SYSTEMS[3] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of 1-8-09(2), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), deleted the former Ch. 13.20, §§ 13.20.010—13.20.080, and enacted a new Ch. 13.20 as set out herein. The former Ch. 13.20 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

13.20.010. - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, § 13.10.1030 are hereby incorporated by reference. In addition, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them when used in this chapter except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
End user equipment is not part of the reuse system and is defined as all pipes and pumps needed to transport reuse water from the reuse meter to the point of use as well as storage ponds for the holding of reuse water by the reuse user. The owner is responsible for the operation and costs of this equipment. 
End user fee is defined as the amount charged to each end reuse user of the reuse water system to pay for the ongoing cost of operating and maintaining the reuse system and the administrative costs to administer distribution and other similar costs of the reuse system. 
Irrigate is defined as application of reuse water through hand watering, sprinkling, sprinkler system, drip irrigation system or other means of distribution. 
Owner is defined as the owner of the property or his authorized agent as defined in section 13.10.1030 of this chapter. 
Public information program is defined as a program available through seminar, video, printed material or whatever format the county may choose and is approved by EPD for educating reuse users and operators about reuse systems. 
Reject water is defined as wastewater that does not meet the 3 NTU criteria. 
Reserve is defined as a fund that maintains the balance of the user surcharges and is only used to pay for repair and eventual replacement of the sewerage system and reuse system, exclusive of normal operating and maintenance costs. 
Reuse area is defined as the irrigated area of any designated reuse user. 
Reuse water is defined as wastewater that has received treatment to urban water reuse standards, meets the treatment criteria specified in the publication set forth in section 13.20.040B. of this chapter, and is utilized at a reuse area or is sent to a permitted reuse user. 
Reuse system is defined as the sewage treatment plant providing reuse water, the booster pump stations, and distribution pipes between the treatment plant and the end user equipment. 
Reuse user is defined as any person who has successfully participated in the required public information program for utilizing reuse water and has signed the written reuse user agreement with the county for obtaining reuse water. 
Runoff is defined as reuse water, which has been applied to a reuse area in sufficient amounts to cause the water to leave the irrigation area in the form of surface flow during and shortly after irrigation application. 
Storage pond is defined as an artificial impoundment designed and constructed in accordance with publication set forth in section 13.20.040B. of this chapter that is designed and maintained to store a specific volume of reclaimed water. For the purposes of this definition, a storage pond may also mean a storage tank constructed above, on, below, or partially below the ground surface that also meets the criteria in the publication set forth in section 13.20.040B. of this chapter. 
User charge is defined as the amount charged to each reuse user to pay for the ongoing cost of operating and maintaining the reuse system or sewerage system and the administrative costs to administer collections and other similar costs. 
User equipment is not part of the sewerage system and reuse system and is defined as all pipes and pumps needed to collect and transport the sewage to the sewage treatment plant. The owner is responsible for the operation and costs of this equipment until such time as the owner turns over responsibility to the county. 
User surcharge is defined as the amount charged to each sewerage system user and reuse user to cover short and long-range costs of repair and eventual upgrade of the sewerage system and reuse system. Sewerage system user surcharges and reuse user surcharges will be accumulated in the reserve. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(2), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.20.020. - Responsibilities. 
A.  When Hall County deems that a sewer system is warranted for the development, the owner shall provide a sewerage system and/or reuse system that meets or exceeds reliability, maintainability, performance, operational cost effectiveness, and parts availability factors as determined by the county and in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and chapter 13.10. The county reserves the right to specify an existing manufacturer and/or existing model numbers as minimum standards of these factors. 
B.  For a sewerage system, the owner shall build a sewerage system that, at 80 percent of capacity, will adequately handle the sewage processing needs of 100 percent of the prespecified number of reuse users. The county reserves the right to use the remaining 20 percent of the capacity of the sewerage system in any way that it sees fit, including contingency. 
C.  The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance of the sewerage system and reuse system, including all costs, unless the county accepts responsibility for operation and maintenance of the sewerage system and reuse system. 
D.  All persons obtaining reuse water from a reuse system must do so in accordance with: 
1.  The permit of the county, 
2.  Any written reuse user agreement between the county and the user of the reuse water, and 
3.  The established public education program for the use of reuse water. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(2), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.20.030. - Application, review and fee requirements. 
A.  Review. Prior to submission of the application permit and plans for the construction of a sewerage system or reuse system to the Hall County Planning Department and Building Inspections for final review, all documents shall be submitted to the Hall County Public Works and Utilities for preliminary review. 
B.  Fee. The fee for inspections shall be as set in the Hall County Sewers and Sewage Disposal Fee Schedule as adopted by the Hall County Board of Commissioners and shall cover the cost of construction inspections of a sewerage system or reuse system performed by the Hall County Public Works and Utilities Department. 
C.  Sewerage systems. 
1.  No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written building sewer permit from the building official. 
2.  Classes of building sewer permits. 
(a)  There are two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service, and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastewater. 
(b)  For either class of building sewer permit, the owner(s) or an authorized representative shall make application on a form furnished by the county, which application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information required by the county. In addition to the building sewer permits described in this section, all significant industrial users and other users, as determined by the director or other sections of this chapter shall obtain an industrial discharge permit as described in chapter 13.10. of this title. 
(c)  The director may require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this chapter. For residential developments over ten homes, commercial developments and industrial developments, this information shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia. These requirements may include: 
(1)  Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period; 
(2)  Chemical analyses of wastewaters; 
(3)  Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting wastewater volume and quality; 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important to sewer use control; 
(5)  A drawing of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and; if any; pretreatment facility location; 
(6)  Details and descriptions of wastewater pretreatment facilities; and 
(7)  Details and descriptions of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the county's sewer. 
D.  Reuse systems. 
1.  All permit applications for reuse water shall describe water uses requested by the applicant. 
2.  No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any reuse system or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written building sewer permit from the building official. 
3.  Connections to the reuse pipe may occur only after the end reuse user has completed and signed the reuse water end user application and had their participation in the public information program documented by the county. 
4.  Any permit granted by the county is only for the owner and does not transfer when there is a change in the ownership of the reuse user or any change in the tenancy of the property for which the permit is applicable. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(2), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A); Res. of 3-28-13, § 1(Exh. A)) 
13.20.040. - Adoption of standard construction practices. 
A.  For sewerage systems, the following publications are hereby incorporated by reference and are adopted as the standard construction practices for sewerage systems: 
1.  Standard Construction Practices for Water and Wastewater Systems, latest edition, Hall County, Georgia; and 
2.  Minimum Design Standards for Community Sewerage Systems, latest edition, United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
B.  For reuse systems, the following publications are hereby incorporated by reference and are adopted as the standard construction practices for reuse systems: 
1.  Standard Construction Practices for Reuse Systems, latest edition, Hall County, Georgia; and 
2.  Guidelines for Water Reclamation and Urban Water Reuse, latest edition, Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
C.  In the event any provisions of the documents above are in conflict with each other or the provisions of this chapter, the more stringent standard shall be applied. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(2), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.20.050. - Minimum design standards for sewerage systems. 
A.  Building sewers and connections: 
1.  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. 
2.  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. However, where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, then the front building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. The county shall not be liable for any damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
3.  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the building official, to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
4.  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes and other applicable rules and regulations of the county. All work shall conform to the applicable regulations of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials and Water Environment Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, as amended, shall apply. 
5.  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
6.  No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the director for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
7.  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes and other applicable rules and regulations of the county, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials and the Water Environment Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, as amended. All such connections shall be made watertight and verified by proper testing. 
8.  Cleanout required at point of connection. 
(a)  A sanitary sewer cleanout shall be installed on all building sewers as close as possible to the point at which county maintenance begins. This point shall be the curbline, the right of way line, the property line, or the easement line, whichever is applicable. Such cleanout shall be six inches in diameter and shall have a brass cleanout plug. 
(b)  The installation and cost of such cleanout shall be borne by the owner at the time of development. 
9.  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the director or his representative. 
10.  All sewer connections or "taps" shall be made exclusively by personnel of the county or their designee. 
11.  Connections to lines laid in streets; responsibility for chokes. 
(a)  Sewer connections or "taps" hereinafter made by the county to sewer lines laid in the streets shall run from the sewerline to the curb line of the street. When such connections or "taps" are made on outfall or interceptor sewerlines, or any sewerline other than one laid in the street, such "tap" shall extend for a distance of not more than 20 feet from the line connected with or "tapped". 
(b)  The property owners, or persons using sanitary sewer service, shall be responsible for repairs due to sewer chokes when the sewer choke is beyond the curb line of the street or 20 feet from the line connected with or tapped, whichever distance is closest to the sewerline. The county will make repairs and charge the cost thereof to the property owner or person using sanitary sewer service. 
12.  Connections—Fittings, equipment, and supervision. 
(a)  All connections to sewer pipes comprising the sewer system of the county shall be made with an insertion type "Y" or "T" fitting under the supervision of the director. 
(b)  All fittings and other equipment used in such connections shall be approved by the director before use in making any connection. 
13.  The county shall designate the size of all sewers, the grade and location of all manholes. 
14.  Property owners using sanitary sewer service pursuant to this chapter shall furnish all right-of-way and easements needed for sewer construction and for use thereof. 
15.  Unless approved by the Hall County Public Works and Utilities Director, no person shall construct any sewer pipe or conduit for sewage in any street within four feet on each side of the centerline of any sewer. 
B.  Redundancy, reliability of sewerage system: 
1.  Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Class I Reliability will be provided. 
2.  Unless authorized by the director, pump stations, when required, shall have a minimum of three submersible type pumps, with two of the pumps jointly capable of pumping two and one-half times the estimated average daily flow. 
3.  Raw sewage screening and grit removal operations must have a minimum of two units, each having a capacity for two and one-half times the average daily flow. 
4.  Aeration basin operations must employ a minimum of two basins with equal volumes. If sequencing batch reactor (SBR) process is employed, then there will be three basins with equal volume, with two of the basins having 75 percent of the maximum month design flow. 
5.  Activated sludge aeration: If diffused aeration is used, then multiple blowers will be installed with remaining units capable of transferring 100 percent of the oxygen demand with the largest blower out of service; diffuses with multiple sections capable of transferring 110 percent of oxygen demand. If mechanical aerators are used, then multiple units are required in each basin. The remaining units must be capable of maintaining design oxygen transfer level with largest aerator out of service. 
6.  Final clarifiers: Multiple final clarifier units must be utilized with remaining units capable of handling 75 percent of the maximum month design flow. 
7.  Chemical use: Multiple chemical feeders must be used and must incorporate a backup unit. 
8.  Filters: Must utilize multiple filter units, with remaining units having 75 percent of the design maximum month flow when one unit is out of service and a second unit is in backwash. 
9.  Disinfection: Must utilize multiple disinfection units, with remaining units having 75 percent of the design maximum month flow when one unit is out of service. System must be designed to automatically switch over in case of failure. Ozonation systems and UV systems must have standby capabilities of 100 percent. 
10.  Sludge digester: System must incorporate two sludge digester units, each with 75 percent capacity for the maximum month flow with sufficient volume to meet Class A pathogen destruction in accordance with the federal Environmental Protection Agency 503 regulations. 
11.  Must have multiple sludge pumps with remaining units capable of handling 75 percent of the design maximum month flow. 
12.  The sewerage system must utilize best available technology, including, but not limited to reverse osmosis and ultraviolet disinfection. Best available technology practices are available through Hall County Public Works and Utilities. 
13.  The sewerage system must be constructed within a secondary containment structure. The containment structure must have capacity equal to, or greater than, 110 percent of the volume of the largest vessel. 
C.  Alarm systems, remote monitoring, and emergency power generation: 
1.  The alarm system will be incorporated into the design, and the alarm system shall activate in the following circumstances: 
a.  Loss of normal power, 
b.  Failure of pumping systems, 
c.  Failure of disinfection systems, or 
d.  Excess turbidity. 
The alarm system must have remote monitoring/autodialing capabilities. 
2.  Pump stations will be equipped with a monitoring system compatible with current county standards to relay alarm conditions to the county's designated monitoring center. 
3.  On-site emergency power generation shall be capable of operating all pump stations, lift stations, operator's office, and one aeration blower. Emergency power generation shall switchover automatically in case of outage. Alternatively, the system may be equipped with dual feed power supply. The system must switchover to the auxiliary feed automatically in the case of an outage. 
D.  Pump stations: 
1.  Pump stations shall meet the minimum design standards set forth by the most recent county pump station guidelines. These guidelines are available through Hall County Public Works and Utilities. 
2.  Pump stations will have sumps capable of containing two hours of flow at the estimated average daily flow rate. The normal pumping cycle will be set so that no more than 15 minutes of the volume will be used during the normal pumping cycle. 
E.  Storage/capacity requirements of sewage: 
1.  Minimum storage of four weeks inclement weather shall be provided for reuse water or effluent. 
2.  Wastewater treatment works needs to be designed for a ten-year rainfall of 65 inches including the reuse water rate. 
3.  Maximum one and one-half inches of reuse water irrigation per week is allowed. 
F.  Buffer requirements: 
Plant construction must comply with all federal, state and local buffer requirements, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, chapter 8.40 (Erosion and Sedimentation Protection), chapter 8.170 (Stream Buffer Protection) and chapter 17.225 (Protected Water Supply Watershed, Protected Groundwater Recharge Area, and Wetlands Protection Overlay Zoning) as well as any subsequent buffer requirements adopted into the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia; 
2.  The state buffer guidelines as found in Guidelines for Slow-Rate Land Treatment of Wastewater, latest Edition, Georgia Department of Natural Resources and Guidelines for Water Reclamation and Urban Water Reuse, latest Edition, Georgia Department of Natural Resources; and 
3.  All other applicable state and federal law. 
In the event any requirements are in conflict, the more stringent standard shall be applied: 
(Res. of 1-8-09(2), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.20.060. - Minimum design standards for reuse systems. 
A.  Distribution system. 
1.  Each section of reuse pipe, shall be painted with Pantone 522C or 512C or other shade of purple accepted by the county over a minimum of 60 percent of the circumference of the pipeline except for any distinguishing marks of manufacture or product information which shall remain visible and unpainted. 
2.  Reuse water piping shall be wrapped in a Pantone 522C polyethylene tube wrap where required for cathodic protection (ANSI/AWWA C105/A21.5). 
3.  During the installation of the reuse water piping, a three-inch-wide tape to say "REUSE WATER-NONPOTABLE" (purple with white or black lettering) is to be installed two inch above the line during installation. 
4.  Reuse water pipe must maintain three feet horizontal separation and 18 inches vertical separation from both proposed and existing sanitary sewer force mains and water mains. Unless approved by the Hall County Public Works and Utilities Director, no person shall construct any reuse pipe or conduit for reuse water in any street within four feet on each side of the centerline of any sewer. 
5.  All reuse water valves shall have square valve boxes with the words "RECLAIMED WATER" cast in the lid. All boxes must be painted on the inside and lid with Pantone 522C or 512 or other shade of purple accepted by the county. Valve boxes shall be Russco C2503 6.5" square. Standard round valve boxes are prohibited in the nonpotable reuse system. 
6.  All valves must be marked with a purple drivable marker 78 inches long and extend to the valve. The markers are not to protrude the finished surface grade more than three feet and no less than 18 inches above the finished grade. There must be a label on both sides of the marker with the following information: "REUSE WATER VALVE, DO NOT TAP, NON-POTABLE, BEFORE DIGGING CONTACT HALL COUNTY PUBLIC WORKS AND UTILITIES, PHONE # 770-531-6800." 
7.  There shall be no physical connection between the reuse system and any other water supply. An isolation valve does not constitute a separation. 
8.  Reuse water may only be connected to "in the ground" sprinkler systems or to a nonstandard hose bib located within a lockable meter box only where specifically approved by the county in the end reuse user agreement. 
9.  No aboveground irrigation system using reuse water will be approved on residential sites. 
10.  All piping and pipelines carrying reuse water shall be color-coded Pantone Purple 522C using sunlight stable pigment. 
11.  All valves, hose bibs where allowed, and outlets shall be tagged and color-coded purple to differentiate reuse water from potable water. All reuse water valves and outlets shall be appropriately tagged or labeled "Do Not Drink" together with the equivalent standard international symbol to warn the public and employees that the water is not intended for drinking. 
12.  Where hose bibs are allowed, nonstandard hose connections shall be used to preclude the interchange of hoses with the potable water system. Hose bibs are prohibited from residential customer sites. 
13.  Hose bibs must be installed underground within a lockable meter box. Cam Lock connection assemblies in small sizes (one-half to three-quarter-inch) with lockable meter boxes will be required on all hose connections designated for reuse water. 
14.  Reuse water irrigation systems shall be designed, constructed and operated so as to minimize over spray onto impervious surfaces. 
15.  Runoff of reuse water into ditches or streams is prohibited. 
16.  Low trajectory nozzles, or other means to minimize aerosol formation, shall be used within 100 feet of outdoor public eating, drinking and bathing facilities. Irrigation systems should be designed so that spray does not go outside of the established boundaries. 
17.  All sites utilizing reuse water for irrigation such as golf courses, residential developments, parks and other public areas, are required to post visible signs at all entrance locations notifying the public of reuse water. 
B.  New service installations/meters and meter boxes. 
1.  Reuse meters must be a badger meter for reuse water, measuring in gallons consumed. To ensure identification of reuse water meters, the international color of Pantone 522C is located on the lid of the register. The register face, lid, shroud and meter bottom and the word "REUSE" is marked on the brass housing. 
2.  All reuse meters will be installed in a Carson-Brooks Plastics box. Meter box lids will be purple colors 1419, 1220 or 1324 and labeled "REUSE WATER". 
3.  All reuse meter installations must maintain a minimum of three feet from the potable water meter. 
C.  Drawings. As-built drawings shall be provided to Hall County Public Works and Utilities upon completion of each phase of installation showing valve locations, storage ponds, tap locations, and size of taps. 
D.  Storage ponds. A reuse user may store reuse water on his property in a storage pond that is constructed and maintained in accordance with all standards for the same in local, state and federal law including any such standards set forth in the publications listed in section 13.20.040B. of this chapter. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(2), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.20.070. - Bonding, county acceptance and easements. 
A.  Owner must provide a security escrow account or bond to protect the public's interest in ensuring proper construction and ongoing maintenance of the system. The escrow account or bond will have a monetary value equal to 100 percent of the costs to install any related pipes, mechanical equipment, paving or other appurtenances deemed pertinent to the operation of the proposed sewerage or reuse system. This amount will be determined by Hall County Public Works and Utilities Director after review of design plans and construction documents. The escrow account or bond must be accepted by Hall County Board of Commissioners and held by the board unless ownership of the sewerage system and reuse system is transferred to the county and all requirements of this chapter are met. 
B.  The county retains the right to audit the amount of the escrow or bond and the balance in the reserve to ensure they are being collected and disbursed in accordance with the objectives of this chapter. The owner shall pay for the costs of this audit and promptly remedy any discrepancies determined by the audit. 
C.  The sewerage system and reuse system will be conveyed to Hall County, Georgia, along with the reserve balance and security escrow account and bond within 30 days after notice of final acceptance by the county. The owner will provide a reserve balance that is equal to 70 percent of the cost to replace the sewerage system and reuse system, except the land. An appraiser, chosen by the county, will determine the prevailing costs. 
D.  Thirty days prior to the county accepting responsibility for any sewerage system and reuse system, the owner, at his expense, must use a professional engineering firm licensed in the State of Georgia to provide certification that the sewerage system and reuse system is in compliance with all design criteria, certification that the sewerage system and reuse system is in good working order and has no known maintenance problems or deficiencies, certification that the user charges are sufficient to pay the operating costs of the sewerage system and reuse system, and certification that the reserve balance is adequate considering the past maintenance and current condition of the sewerage system and reuse system. The county will not accept ownership of the sewerage system or reuse system without said certification. 
E.  The owner agrees to provide proof that adequate sewerage system and reuse system capacity exists to service the maximum number of prespecified users. 
F.  In no event shall the county accept ownership prior to the sewerage system or reuse system operating for a time period of at least five years after final platting, or 90 percent of the maximum prespecified number of users, whichever the county desires. 
G.  The sewerage system and reuse system, the land necessary for the proper operation of the sewerage system and reuse system and all required buffers shall be conveyed to the county fee simple in the form of a permanent easement certified by a registered surveyor in the State of Georgia. No obstruction shall be built, constructed, or planted that would inhibit access to the easements. Linear easements shall be a minimum of 30 feet in width. 
H.  The owner must make the following certification prior to the county's acceptance: "The owner understands that this approval for providing Sewerage System and/or Reuse System for the development (or other name) named ___________ and is not for general use by others unless specifically approved by the County as a modification. The pre-specified number of users for this subdivision (or other name) is ___________." 
(Res. of 1-8-09(2), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.20.080. - Responsibility for operation and maintenance costs. 
When the county accepts responsibility for operation and maintenance of the sewerage system or the reuse system, the residents whose property is served by the sewerage system or the reuse system become responsible for the costs of the system. For sewerage systems, operational costs, including maintenance, will be billed by the county to the residents in the form of a user charge and administrative fee as noted in chapter 13.10. For reuse systems, the cost shall be billed at the rate established in the Hall County Sewers and Sewage Disposal Fee Schedule adopted by the Hall County Board of Commissioners. The reuse systems, the operational and maintenance costs as well as administrative fee shall be billed monthly, separate from sewer billing, based upon actual reuse water meter readings and may be amended from time to time to reflect actual operating costs. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(2), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.20.090. - Operation of sewerage systems and reuse systems. 
A.  Sewerage systems. Operation and maintenance of the sewerage system must be performed by operators that have been duly certified by the State of Georgia for the duties to be performed by said person. 
B.  Reuse systems. 
1.  Operation, maintenance of the reuse system including valves, outlets, couplers, and sprinkler heads shall be performed: 
a.  By personnel whose participation in the reuse water public information program has been documented; 
b.  By operators that have been duly certified by the State of Georgia for the duties to be performed by said person; and 
c.  Only in accordance with the terms of the written reuse user agreement between the reuse user and the county. 
2.  The reuse user must notify anyone who is working with, who may be around or who may come in contact with reuse water in the reuse area of the presence of reuse water and the reuse water's origin. 
3.  The only water other than reuse water that enters a storage pond shall be water that falls on the surface during a rain event or is transferred into the storage pond from other sources to supplement irrigation needs. 
4.  Unless in accordance with an NPDES or as a result of permitted use of reuse water, discharge of reuse waters to waters of the state are prohibited, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Overflow from storage ponds, and 
b.  Runoff from irrigation systems. 
5.  All reuse users must maintain the reuse water in accordance with all local, state and federal laws, including, but not limited to maintaining the 3 NTU criteria. 
6.  Any reuse water that does not meet the 3 NTU level must be returned to the county's sewerage system as reject water or transported to a permitted alternate disposal location as per the terms of the written reuse user agreement between the reuse user and the county. 
7.  The reuse user shall not allow reuse water: 
a.  To be used to fill swimming pools, hot tubs, spas, wading pools or other recreational contact systems; 
b.  To be used for human or animal consumption; 
c.  To be used to interconnect with another water source; 
d.  To be used to irrigate edible crops including gardens; 
e.  To be used to irrigate agricultural crops not intended for direct human consumption without specific authorization by the director of Hall County Public Works and Utilities and EPD; 
f.  To be used for any purpose other than irrigation unless specifically authorized by Hall County Public Works and Utilities within the written reuse user agreement; or 
g.  To enter any dwelling unit. 
8.  Tank trucks and other portable equipment that is used to distribute reuse water shall be clearly identified with reuse or nonpotable water signs. 
9.  The truck used to transport and distribute reuse water may not be used to transport potable water that is used for drinking water purposes. 
10.  Any truck used to transport and distribute reuse water must return any unused portion of their load back to the source facility and must not discharge it to a ditch or stream. 
11.  Malfunctioning irrigation systems and line breaks shall be repaired immediately. 
12.  All sites utilizing reuse water for irrigation such as golf courses, residential developments, parks and other public areas, are required to post visible signs at all entrance locations notifying the public of reuse water. 
13.  Runoff of reuse water into ditches or streams is prohibited. 
14.  No person shall be permitted to use reuse water unless in accordance with the written reuse user agreement between the reuse user and the county. 
15.  All reuse users must allow Hall County Public Works and Utilities to inspect their end user equipment and upon first connection and anytime thereafter for operation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the written reuse user agreement between the reuse user and the county and all applicable laws. 
16.  The reuse user shall maintain records of the utilization of any reuse water at least concerning the volume and quantity of reused water utilized obtained from the county and shall provide these records and otherwise permit inspection of the same by the county as requested. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(2), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.20.100. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists, or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, § 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the Court. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(2), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
CHAPTER 13.21. - STANDARDS FOR OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPE 

13.21.010. - Restrictions on outdoor watering of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(Res. of 10-28-10, § 1(Exh. A)) 
13.21.020. - Exceptions to water restrictions. 
There shall be no limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
A.  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
B.  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with Hall County Resolutions and Ordinances and state guidelines. 
C.  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations. 
D.  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water. 
E.  Watering personal food gardens; 
F.  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation. 
G.  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
H.  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or hand held container; 
I.  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property. 
J.  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale or installation; 
K.  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas. 
L.  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
M.  Hydroseeding. 
(Res. of 10-28-10, § 1(Exh. A)) 
13.21.030. - Enforcement. 
A.  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this chapter. 
B.  The county marshals shall be the enforcement authority for this chapter. The county manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement of this chapter. 
(Res. of 10-28-10, § 1(Exh. A)) 
13.21.040. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists, or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 10-28-10, § 1(Exh. A)) 
CHAPTER 13.30 - TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL OF WASTEWATER BY LAND APPLICATION[4] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of 1-8-09(3), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), deleted the former Ch. 13.30, §§ 13.30.010—13.30.100, and enacted a new Ch. 13.30 as set out herein. The former Ch. 13.30 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

13.30.010. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Treatment and Disposal of Wastewater by Land Application." 
(Res. of 1-8-09(3), §§ 1,2(Exh. A)) 
13.30.020. - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, § 13.10.1030 are hereby incorporated by reference. In addition, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them when used in this chapter except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A.  Cease operations order means a written order from the director of public works and utilities which requires that the spraying or subsurface discharging of wastewater for land application be immediately stopped. 
B.  Direct land application discharge means the discharge of any treated wastewater outside of the designated wetted area of the land application system by means of pipes, flumes, or any other facility, including surface runoff not related to storm events. 
C.  Land application system means a system for wastewater treatment or disposal by spray irrigation or subsurface drip irrigation. The term refers to the advanced treatment and disposal of wastewater by irrigation onto land to support vegetative growth. 
D.  Sanitary nuisance means the commission of any action by any person, or the keeping, maintaining, propagation, existence or permission of anything by any person, by which the health or life of an individual, or the health or life of individuals, may be threatened or impaired or by which or through which, directly or indirectly, disease may be caused. 
E.  Water pollution means the introduction in any surface or underground water of any organic or inorganic matter or deleterious substances in such quantities, proportions or accumulations which are injurious to human, plant, animal, fish and other aquatic life or property, or which unreasonably interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or the conduct of business. 
F.  Written violation means a notification of violation given or a consent order issued by the environmental protection division or a citation issued by Hall County. A consent order issued by the environmental protection division is considered a written violation unless a notification of violation has been given for the same item included in the consent order. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(3), §§ 1,2(Exh. A)) 
13.30.030. - General conditions and exclusions. 
A.  This chapter shall apply to any and all wastewater treatment or disposal systems within the jurisdiction of Hall County including, but not limited to, residential, commercial or industrial systems except for the following: 
1.  Residential, commercial or industrial septic tank systems; 
2.  Residential, commercial or industrial stormwater systems; 
3.  Agricultural practices involving farming operations on the farm; and 
4.  Oxidation or treatment ponds not utilizing land application for disposal. 
B.  All proposed wastewater treatment facilities shall be designed and constructed as subsurface drip irrigation systems for the disposal of wastewater. Existing land application systems are grandfathered and may continue to operate as either drip irrigation or spray irrigation. Additions to existing land application systems permitted before the effective date of this chapter may utilize either technology for the added irrigation area, provided the facility flow rate does not increase by greater than 50 percent. Sites that have undergone multiple additions will be required to utilize subsurface drip irrigation when the cumulative effect of the additions is greater than 50 percent, as compared to the pre-effective date flow rate. No direct land application discharges of proposed treated wastewater into surface waters will be allowed unless specifically approved by the environmental protection division. 
C.  The property where the land application system is located or proposed to be located must be properly zoned for the use of said land application system prior to construction of a new wastewater land application system or land expansion of an existing wastewater land application system. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(3), §§ 1,2(Exh. A)) 
13.30.040. - Private wastewater disposal. 
A.  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of chapter 13.10, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter and other county or state requirements. 
B.  Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the building official. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the county, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as is deemed necessary by the building official or health department. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the county at the time the application is filed. 
C.  A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed and approved by the building official. The building official shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the building inspector when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. 
D.  The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of state and federal water pollution control agencies of jurisdiction and with the local board of health. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the front footage of the lot is less than 75 feet and the area of the lot is less than 12,000 square feet. Prior to issuing a permit for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities, such facilities must meet all regulations governing such systems as required by the county's planning and zoning regulations and Hall County Health Department regulations. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet or to any well. 
E.  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in section 13.10.1110, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 90 days after notification by the building official or by the health department that the operation of the private facility is no longer acceptable, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
F.  The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the county. 
G.  No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health department. 
H.  Private wastewater disposal into publicly owned septic tank receiving station. 
1.  Permit and bond required. No person shall discharge wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facility without a written permit signed by the director or his designated representative. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the county, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, analyses, specifications and any other information as deemed necessary by the director or any state or federal regulatory agency. All persons at the time of obtaining a written permit to discharge wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facility shall post a cash bond in an amount equal to the cost of the installation. 
2.  Designated area for private wastewater disposal. No person shall discharge wastewater at any point of the sewerage system of the county except at the publicly owned treatment works or storage facilities at times specifically designated by the director. 
3.  Prohibited discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged wastewater from sources other than single-family dwellings or equivalent domestic sewage located in Hall County, Georgia. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged materials, water or waste if it appears likely in the opinion of the director that such wastes will harm either the sewers, sewerage treatment process and/or equipment or the environment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; prevent the use or disposal of sludges by processes as may be selected in the future; will endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance; or cause the treatment plant to violate its NPDES permit or applicable receiving water standards. Some of the substances prohibited are: any pumping from grease, sand, or oil interceptors and any substances the Act (Public Law 92-500), all amendments thereto and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
4.  Action required by the director. If in the opinion of the director the private wastewater to be discharged into the publicly owned septic tank receiving station is from a source located outside of Hall County, Georgia, or may have deleterious effect on the sewerage works, processes, equipment, receiving waters, or the environment or would otherwise create a hazard to human or animal life or constitute a public nuisance, the director may: 
(a)  Reject the waste and require the removal of the wastewater by the person who discharged the wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facility within 24 hours after oral or hand-delivered written notice, and if the wastewater is not removed within 24 hours after the person receives such notice, the wastewater shall be removed by the county at the person's expense. 
(b)  Require a complete analysis of such wastewater to determine compatibility with current treatment processes at the expense of the person who proposes the discharge of the wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facility. 
(c)  Require additional payment to cover the added costs of processing and treating the waste not covered by existing fees or sewerage charges as may be enacted from time to time by the county commission under provisions of chapter 13.10. 
(d)  Immediately revoke, orally or in writing, the sewerage permit of the person violating any provision of this chapter and terminate that person's future use of the publicly owned treatment works or storage facility. 
5.  Fees charged. All persons using the publicly owned treatment works or storage facilities shall pay such charges for the use of same as are now in effect or as may hereinafter shall be enacted by the county commission. 
6.  Collection of costs or expenses. The director shall notify the person in writing of all additional costs or expenses owed by the person to the county under this chapter, and the person shall pay such costs or expenses to the county within 30 days of the date that the written notice is mailed. If the costs or expenses are not paid within such 30 days, the director shall pay the costs or expenses out of the person's posted cash bond and the person shall post a new cash bond under section 13.30.040H.(1) of this chapter and shall not discharge wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facilities until a new cash bond is posted pursuant to section 13.30.040H.(1) of this chapter. 
7.  Identification of wastewater source. No person shall discharge wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facilities, without having supplied the following information to the director: 
(a)  The name and address of the owner or tenant of each residential single-family dwelling from which wastewater is collected; 
(b)  The number of gallons of wastewater collected from said residential single-family dwelling; and 
(c)  Any other information deemed necessary by the director. 
8.  Exceptions by county commission. No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the county commission and private waste collectors subject to payment therefore by the private waste collectors. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(3), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.30.050. - Required information for zoning application; application fee. 
1.  Required information for zoning application. 
A.  The following information shall be submitted to the director of public works and utilities for review of a zoning application and subsequent submittal of a report to the planning commission for consideration of the zoning of any land for a wastewater land application system: 
1.  The design development report submitted to the environmental protection division certified by a professional engineer experienced in the design of land application systems and registered to practice in the State of Georgia. 
2.  A plan for the disposal of excess biological solids. 
3.  Certification from a professional geologist, registered to practice in the State of Georgia, certifying that the land application site is not located within two miles of a significant groundwater recharge area as defined by the environmental protection division. 
4.  A detailed history of all the owner's previous activities, within the State of Georgia, in the field of land application, including every other facility it has operated, and including a detailed account of all past violations of federal, state, or county laws or regulations, and all past and pending litigation, favorable or unfavorable. 
2.  Application fee. 
A.  An application review fee as set forth in the Hall County Sewers and Sewage Disposal Fee Schedule adopted by the Hall County Commission shall be paid by the applicant. The fee shall be due upon submittal of the application information. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(3), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A); Res. of 3-28-13, § 1(Exh. A)) 
13.30.060. - Environmental protection division approval; operation fees. 
1.  Environmental protection division approval. 
Environmental protection division approval required. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into, let a contract for, or to commence the installation, extension, enlargement, alteration, addition, modification, or operation of any wastewater land application system without first obtaining the necessary approval from the environmental protection division. 
2.  Operation fees. 
A.  Annual operation fees required. An annual operation fee will be required of all wastewater land application systems to provide for environmental monitoring and testing services, preparation and prosecution of enforcement actions and responding to and attempting to resolve citizen complaints. 
B.  The operation fee will be required prior to issuance of a business license or subsequent renewals and shall be as set in the Hall County Sewers and Sewage Disposal Fee Schedule adopted by the Hall County Board of Commissioners. 
C.  The operational fee shall be due at the time each business license is obtained or renewed and shall be collected by the director of business licenses. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(3), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A); Res. of 3-28-13, § 1(Exh. A)) 
13.30.070. - Minimum standards for treatment. 
The preapplication treatment of wastewater shall be to a level permitted by the environmental protection division. No wastewater shall be discharged unless treated to the level prescribed by the environmental protection division in the permit for the wastewater land application system. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(3), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
13.30.080. - Minimum standards for land application. 
This chapter, as a minimum, incorporates by reference the following two documents as produced by the environmental protection division, including any future modifications, changes, or deletions. These documents are incorporated in their entirety except where they are in conflict with section 13.30.030 of this chapter: Criteria for Slow Rate Land Treatment (February 1986, or current edition), and Guidelines for Land Treatment of Municipal Wastewater by Drip Irrigation (February 1996, or current edition). 
(Res. of 1-8-09(3), §§ 1,2(Exh. A)) 
13.30.090. - Inspection and monitoring; bond. 
1.  Inspection and monitoring. 
A.  The director of public works and utilities will monitor every wastewater land application system permitted by the environmental protection division and within the jurisdiction of Hall County to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the permit issued by the environmental protection division. Samples of surface water may be collected and tested to determine compliance with this chapter and the permit. Inspections shall be required on a semiannual basis at a minimum. No notice shall be provided prior to inspection. 
B.  The director of public works and utilities shall have the responsibility for maintaining the 24-hour environmental emergency hot-line through the Hall County Central Communications Division (911). Every effort shall be made to respond to incidents in a timely manner. Copies of all reports of all incidents shall be sent to the environmental protection division and to the director. 
C.  If, through inspection, it is deemed that the land application activity as defined herein is not operating in compliance with this chapter or the permit, the director of public works and utilities shall provide written notice to the environmental protection division for further investigation. 
D.  The owner shall maintain records of all inspections, tests results, analyses, reports, correspondence, complaints, and any other information related to the wastewater treatment and land application system, including operational reports to the environmental protection division, and all records shall be submitted to the director of public works and utilities or their representative on a monthly basis and made available on-site for inspection by the director of public works and utilities. 
E.  The public works and utilities director shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at any time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of land application activities. 
F.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, who requested entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
G.  If the owner receives or has received two or more written violations of this chapter or land application permits issued by the environmental protection division for a site within Hall County within any three-year period (said three-year period to include the three years immediately preceding the effective date of this chapter as well as any time after the effective date of this chapter), the director of public works and utilities shall notify the owner in writing that a cease operation order will be issued in 30 days unless the owner complies with an inspection and monitoring plan (hereinafter referred to as "plan") submitted by the owner to the director of public works and utilities. The plan shall include appropriate corrective action and require that the owner assume full responsibility for the cost of all required inspections and monitoring, to include testing by an independent firm approved by the director of public works and utilities for as long as the owner is under the plan. The plan shall also include that the owner shall remain under said plan until 12 consecutive months have passed from the start of said plan without the owner having received any written violation of this chapter or land application permits issued by the environmental protection division for said site. The plan shall be submitted to the county commission by the director of public works and utilities for consideration of approval. In addition, the county commission shall require the applicant to post a performance bond in the amount as set in the Hall County Sewers and Sewage Disposal Fee Schedule as adopted by the Hall County Board of Commissioners. The requirement for a performance bond shall terminate upon the completion of a consecutive 12-month period within which the applicant has operated the land application system without any violations of this chapter or land application permits issued by the environmental protection division. The performance bond can be satisfied by one of the following methods: 
1.  The depositing of United States currency with the county commission in a special interest bearing account controlled by the county commission, with the owner entitled to receive all interest earned on said account; 
2.  A surety bond issued by a company approved by the county commission for such purposes, and naming as the obligee the county commission. Under the terms of the bond, the surety will become liable on the bond obligation when the owner fails to perform as guaranteed by the bond; 
3.  An irrevocable standby letter of credit submitted to the county commission by a financial institution which has authority to issue letters of credit and whose letter of credit operations are regulated and examined by a federal or state agency; or 
4.  Any other similar type performance bond recommended by the Hall County Attorney and approved by the county commission. 
2.  Bond. 
A.  The purpose of the performance bond shall be to serve as a source of funds to insure payment of any of the following claims: 
1.  The payment in full of any costs imposed by Hall County as a result of violations of the terms of this chapter; and 
2.  The payment of any costs incurred by Hall County in removing any pollutant created by the owner on the site of the land application system as a result of any violation of the terms of this chapter or any violation of a permit issued by the environmental protection division by the owner. 
B.  If the owner has posted a performance bond as required by this chapter and the owner does not then comply in full with this chapter, the county commission, after giving due consideration to the nature of the violation or violations, and after affording the owner an opportunity to be heard, may cause the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited as necessary to pay the claims guaranteed by the performance bond. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(3), §§ 1,2(Exh. A)) 
13.30.100. - Water pollution prohibited; penalty. 
A.  Prohibition against water pollution. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any land application system, whether permitted or unpermitted, to throw, drain, run, or otherwise discharge into any of the surface waters of the state or into federal wetlands, or to cause, permit or suffer to be thrown, drained, or otherwise discharged into such waters or wetlands, any organic or inorganic matter which shall cause water pollution as defined herein, or cause a sanitary nuisance as defined herein, and such person shall be subject to the penalties and incentives set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Civil and criminal penalties. Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any permit conditions, cease order or any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by permit conditions, a cease order or this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, § 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(3), §§ 1,2(Exh. A)) 
13.30.110. - Effective date; validity; liability for damages. 
A.  Effective date. This chapter shall become effective upon its adoption by the Hall County Board of Commissioners. As of said date, the terms and requirements contained herein shall supersede existing conflicting county ordinances. 
B. Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
C.  Liability. Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law or impose any liability upon Hall County for damage to any person or property. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(3), §§ 1,2(Exh. A)) 
CHAPTER 13.40. - CABLE SERVICES FRANCHISING 

 

13.40.010. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
1.  Cable services means cable services as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"), but does not include telecommunications services. In the event that cable services is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, cable services shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
2.  Cable system means any cable system as defined in the Cable Act. 
3.  Board of commissioners means the Hall County, Georgia Board of Commissioners and its designee or any successor thereto. 
4.  Commissioner or commissioners means one or more members of the commission. 
5.  County means Hall County, Georgia. 
6.  Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the board of commissioners of Hall County, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorized the occupation and use of the streets to provide cable services through a cable system or open video system. 
7.  Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to furnish, supply and distribute cable services to inhabitants within the franchise area. 
8.  May is permissive 
9.  Open video system means open video system as defined by Section 76.1500(a) of Part 76 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
10.  Resolution means the cable servicing franchise resolution and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
11.  Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the county. 
12.  Shall is mandatory, not merely directive. 
13.  Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the county. 
14.  Telecommunications services means telecommunications service as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but does not include cable services. In the event that telecommunications service is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, telecommunications service shall mean telecommunications service as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
(Res. of 5-24-01) 
13.40.020. - Granting authority. 
A.  No person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any cable services or operate a cable system or open video system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The board of commissioners may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this chapter, provided that the board of commissioners of Hall County reserves the right to modify any provision of this chapter by amendment hereof. 
C.  The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate resolution by the board of commissioners of Hall County and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate resolution and/or a franchise agreement between the county and the grantee. 
D.  Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The board of commissioners of Hall County specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises as it deems appropriate and/or itself engage in the provision of cable services. 
E.  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the county. 
F.  The grant of franchises by the board of commissioners of Hall County shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the Cable Act, as amended, governing cable television system and open video system franchises and the renewals of cable television system franchises. 
(Res. of 5-24-01) 
13.40.030. - Franchise applications. 
A.  Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the board of commissioners may determine, subject to applicable law. 
B.  Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise and such other information as the board of commissioners shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
1.  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant. 
2.  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following and to whatever extent required by the board of commissioners: 
a.  The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.  The names, residence, and business address of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
c.  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to cable systems and open video systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby; 
d.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the board of commissioners, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed cable system or open video system in Hall County, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable system or open video system in the county; 
e.  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements, and a sources and uses of funds statement; and 
f.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable television franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said franchise(s) within respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such franchised cable system(s) and open video system(s); and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof. 
3.  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A description of the cable services proposed to be provided; 
b.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
c.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges, cable service charges, and any other service charges; 
d.  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
e.  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to cable services; and 
f.  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise; 
4.  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility, including but not limited to, poles, lines, or conduits; and 
5.  Any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertaining to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the board of commissioners, or by any other provision of law. 
(Res. of 5-24-01) 
13.40.040. - Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises. 
No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. 
1.  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the county in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal and consultant's expenses. 
2.  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the county in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $10,000.00 by certified check or cashier's check made payable to Hall County, Georgia. In the event that the county's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the county to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. 
(Res. of 5-24-01) 
13.40.050. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, and other directives of Hall County and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Res. of 5-24-01) 
13.40.060. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the board of commissioners of Hall County, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated county office during normal business hours. 
(Res. of 5-24-01) 
13.40.070. - Evaluation criteria. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the board of commissioners of Hall County may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including without limitation: 
1.  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the county, including the value of any facilities and cable services offered by the applicant to the county; 
2.  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; 
3.  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the county in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
4.  The value and efficiency to the county and its residents of the cable services to be provided, including the type of cable services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise; 
5.  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and 
6.  Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the board of commissioners for safeguarding the interests of the county and the public. 
(Res. of 5-24-01) 
13.40.080. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
A.  The board of commissioners of Hall County may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the board of commissioners of Hall County deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the board of commissioners may seek advice from other county officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the board of commissioners, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
B.  If the board of commissioners of Hall County, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider any application(s), the board of commissioners shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the board of commissioners of Hall County, and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) in accordance with applicable law. 
C.  The board of commissioners of Hall County may authorize negotiations between county officials and applicants to determine whether the county and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise. 
D.  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the board of commissioners may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The board of commissioners also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the county may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(Res. of 5-24-01) 
13.40.090. - Terms and conditions of franchise. 
The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the separate resolution granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate resolution or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: 
1.  The term of the franchise; 
2.  The franchise area and the cable services which are the subject of the franchise; 
3.  The compensation to be paid to the county, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
4.  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or canceled; 
5.  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise; 
6.  The county's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; 
7.  Insurance indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; 
8.  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the county's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
9.  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
10.  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable county, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; 
11.  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the grantee by the county; 
12.  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the board of commissioners; 
13.  Remedies available to the county to protect the county's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; 
14.  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited, to the Federal Communications Commission; 
15.  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the county and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; 
16.  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the county are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and 
17.  Such other provisions as the board of commissioners of Hall County determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest. 
(Res. of 5-24-01) 
13.40.100. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this chapter is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Res. of 5-24-01) 
13.40.110. - Delegation. 
Consistent with applicable law, the board of commissioners of Hall County shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this chapter to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this chapter or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or grantee. The board of commissioners of Hall County may also establish and appoint one or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the board of commissioners of Hall County shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this chapter. 
(Res. of 5-24-01) 
13.40.120. - Retroactivity. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for cable services existing on the effective date hereof, but shall apply to any renewal or extension of such franchises. 
(Res. of 5-24-01) 
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION[1] 

 
Editor's note— Res. of Jul. 13, 2006, deleted ch. 15.00, which pertained to in general—codes adopted. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Business licenses and regulations, tit. 5; health and safety, tit. 8; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 8.40; abatement of nuisances, ch. 8.140; house numbering system, ch. 12.10; driveway construction, ch. 12.40; utility franchises and easements, ch. 12.50; public services, tit. 13; subdivisions, tit. 16; zoning regulations, tit. 17; signs, ch. 17.270; tree protection, ch. 17.280; minimum standards for apartments, ch. 17.300; application for building permit, § 17.360.010. 

CHAPTER 15.10. - STANDARD CODES AND AMENDMENTS[2] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of a resolution adopted April 11, 1996, adopted Ch. 15.10 to read as herein set out. Such provisions were treated as superseding the existing Ch. 15.10, §§ 15.10.010—15.10.110, which pertained to the Standard Building Code and derived from § 1 of a resolution adopted Nov. 14, 1988; § 1 of a resolution adopted Aug. 14, 1989; § 1 of a resolution adopted Aug. 28, 1989; §§ 1, 2 of a resolution adopted Sept. 9, 1991; §§ 1—4 of a resolution adopted Dec. 9, 1991; § 1 of a resolution adopted Oct. 26, 1992; §§ 1, 2 of a resolution adopted Oct. 18, 1993; a resolution adopted Feb. 23, 1995; and §§ 15.04.010—15.04.110 of the 1991 Code. Subsequently, Ord. of July 13, 2006, § 1, repealed Chapters 15.10—15.70. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted provisions designated as a new Ch. 15.10 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 

15.10.010. - Title. 
This chapter will be known as "Standard Codes and Amendments". 
(Ord. of 7-13-06, § 2) 
15.10.020. - Standard Codes, adopted, future amendments, referenced codes and conflicts. 
A.  Minimum Standard Codes. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20, et. seq., the following minimum standard codes as adopted by the State of Georgia and as amended by the State of Georgia Department of Community Affairs, are incorporated by reference and adopted as part of this chapter as if fully set out herein. A copy of each code is filed in the office of the Clerk of the Hall County Commission and is authenticated by his or her signature. However, the minimum standard codes below are amended as set forth in this chapter: 
1.  International Building Code 2000 Edition, International Code Council (ICC). 
2.  National Electrical Code 2005 Edition, National Fire Protection Association (NFPA). 
3.  International Fuel Gas Code 2003 Edition (ICC). 
4.  International Mechanical Code 2000 Edition (ICC). 
5.  International Plumbing Code 2000 Edition (ICC). 
6.  International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings 2000 Edition (ICC). 
7.  International Energy Conversation Code 2000 Edition (ICC). 
8.  International Fire Code 2003 Edition (ICC). 
B.  Future amendments. Any subsequent amendments to or future editions of the Codes adopted pursuant to section 15.10.020, that are enacted and adopted by the State of Georgia are hereby incorporated and adopted and shall be enforced by Hall County as if set forth verbatim in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. A copy of the latest edition of such codes shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Hall County Commission and will be authenticated by his or her signature. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the unincorporated area of Hall County, Georgia. 
C.  Referenced codes. The codes and standards referenced in any code adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be considered to be adopted to the extent only of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia shall apply. 
D.  Conflicts. Should any provision of the above adopted codes conflict with any other provision of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, that provision which is most restrictive shall control. 
(Ord. of 7-13-06, § 2) 
15.10.030. - Minimum Standard Codes, administration. 
A.  Administration. In addition to the provisions of the International Building Code adopted by the State of Georgia and as amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 1 of the International Building Code is hereby adopted in its entirety, except as amended in this Section, and is applicable as Chapter 1 for each Minimum Standard Code adopted pursuant to section 15.10.020.A with the exception of the International Fire Code. Said amendments are as follows: 
1.  Department of building safety. International Building Code § 103, Department of Building Safety, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
The term "department of building safety" or "building safety" as used in this Code shall refer to the Hall County Building Inspections Department or other Hall County administrative division or department as designated by the Hall County Administrator. The building official shall be designated by the Hall County Administrator. 
2.  Fees. For all Codes adopted in section 15.10.020, fees shall be administered as specified in § 108 of the International Building Code, based on the current fee schedule established by the Hall County Board of County Commissioners. 
3.  Board of appeals. International Building Code § 112 "Board of Appeals" is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
(a)  Appeals-general. Whenever the building official, code official or other county official responsible for the application and enforcement of this Code shall reject or refuse to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the erection or alteration of a building or structure, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply, or that an equally good or more desirable form of construction can be employed in any specific case, or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of the code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such building or structure or his authorized agent may appeal from the decision of the building official, code official or other county official responsible for the application and enforcement of this Code to the Hall County Board of Commissioners in writing, setting forth the action or ruling appealed in detail, within 30 days of the action or ruling. The Hall County Board of Commissioners shall hold a hearing on the appeal within 15 days of filing and shall render a decision within 30 days of the hearing. A fee of $50.00 shall be paid for each appeal filed. 
(b)  Variance to code after hearing. The Hall County Board of Commissioners, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice, and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this Code or public interest, or when, in its opinion, the interpretation of the building official, code official or other county official responsible for the application and enforcement of this Code should be modified or reversed. 
(c)  Recording minutes of hearing. A decision of the Hall County Board of Commissioners to vary the application of any provision of the code, or to modify an order of the building official, code official or other county official responsible for the application and enforcement of this Code shall specify in what manner such variation of modification is made, the conditions upon which it is made and the reasons therefor and shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting at which the decision is made. 
(d)  Reversal of decision. If a decision of the Hall County Board of Commissioners reverses or modifies a refusal, order or disallowance of the building official, code official or other county official responsible for the application and enforcement of this Code or varies the application of any provision of the code, the building official, code official or other county official responsible for the application and enforcement of this Code shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision 
4.  Violations. 
(a)  Prosecution of violation. International Building Code § 113.3, Prosecution of Violation, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
In case any building, structure, land, mechanical system, plumbing system, or other system, installation or equipment regulated by this Code is or is proposed to be used, operated, occupied, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure, land, mechanical system, plumbing system, or other system, installation or equipment regulated by this Code is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of the this chapter, the building or code official, county attorney, or other appropriate authority of the county may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful operation, occupation, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use to correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
(b)  Violation penalties. International Building Code § 113.4, Violation penalties, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who operates, occupies, erects, constructs, reconstructs, alters, converts, maintains or repairs a building, structure, land, mechanical system, plumbing system, or other system, installation or equipment regulated by this Code in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, code official or other official responsible for the application and enforcement of this Code, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the Court. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. of 7-13-06, § 2) 
15.10.040. - International Building Code, amendments. 
A.  Swimming pool enclosures, general. International Building Code § 3109.1, General, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
General. Swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of this Section and other applicable sections of this Code with the exception that nothing contained in § 3109 shall apply to any pool in existence or under construction as of May 22, 1997. 
B.  Mobile homes, manufactured homes and mobile/manufacture home parks. In addition to any other adopted provision of the International Building Code, the following provisions shall apply where applicable: 
1.  Definitions. 
(a)  "Manufactured home." For the purposes of Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 15.10.040, "manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such terms shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq. 
(b)  "Mobile home". For the purposes of Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 15.10.040, "mobile home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
(c)  "Manufactured/mobile home park." For the purposes of Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 15.10.040, "manufactured/mobile home park" means a parcel of land containing not less than five acres under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more manufactured homes or mobile homes for nontransient uses. Excepted from this definition are those parcels of land on which two or more manufactured homes or mobile homes existed prior to August, 1978, and are identified on public records maintained in the Hall County Planning Director's Office. 
(d)  Pre-owned "manufactured home" means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling. 
2.  Installation of manufactured homes. 
(a)  Any installation of a manufactured home in Hall County shall be performed in strict compliance with the applicable manufacturer's installation instructions, specifically including, without limitation, correctly installed tie-downs and anchors. In the absence of such instructions, installations shall be performed in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations adopted by the Georgia Safety Fire Commission. 
(b)  In those instances in which no manufacturer's installation instructions are available, the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner's rules and regulations governing the installation of manufactured homes are to be followed. Said rules and regulations are incorporated herein by reference to become a part of this Code, and to be known as "Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes." 
(c)  Each newly installed manufactured home in Hall County that is installed in an approved manufactured home park shall be completely underpinned and skirted with approved masonry, metallic, nonmetallic, wooden, or other approved manufacturer's underpinning kits. Each existing mobile home or manufactured home located in a manufactured home park shall be completely underpinned and anchored in accordance with the applicable provisions for nonhurricane anchorage. 
(d)  Each existing mobile home or manufactured home in Hall County that is not located in a manufactured home park shall be completely underpinned and skirted with approved masonry, metallic, nonmetallic, wooden, or other approved manufacturer's underpinning kits. Further, each manufactured home or mobile home shall be anchored in accordance with applicable provisions for nonhurricane zone anchorage. The manufactured home or mobile home shall have removed from the body of said home the tongues (where the removing of the tongues does not affect the structural integrity of the frame) and wheels. Mobile homes and manufactured homes with current occupancy permits that are not located in manufactured home parks shall fully comply with the restriction of this paragraph. 
(e)  Each new manufactured home shall be installed such that the finished floor level of the home elevation shall not exceed an average height higher than five feet elevation from finished grades. 
(f)  Each manufactured home and mobile home in Hall County shall have beneath and descending from each outside door of the home a landing and guard rails around said landing, steps with handrails descending to the ground or grade level. The landing, steps and rails must be constructed of all-weather materials or manufactured kits. Furthermore, all construction and/or manufactured kits shall comply with the requirements of the building code resolution as adopted by Hall County, including all amendments thereto. All manufactured homes and mobile homes with current occupancy permits in Hall County shall comply with this section. Each newly installed manufactured home in this county shall comply with the requirements of this section before an occupancy permit is issued for said home. 
(g)  Each newly installed manufactured home in Hall County shall conform to the minimum construction standards required by the U.S. Housing and Urban Development Department before that manufactured home is entitled to receive any utility service to said home. It is the intent of this section to prohibit moving homes into Hall County that do not conform to the applicable U.S. Housing and Urban Development Department Construction Standards. To that end, no manufactured home shall be allowed to locate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this county unless that manufactured home complies with the minimum construction standards required by the U.S. Housing and Urban Development Department and has been inspected by the Hall County Building Inspection Department to show that all windows, doors, smoke detectors, plumbing system, electrical system, heating system and ventilation systems are in working order. 
3.  Moving used manufactured homes, site built homes or stick built homes into the county. 
(a)  No pre-owned manufactured home being moved into Hall County shall be allowed to locate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this county except as provided in this section. Provided, however, that any manufactured home that is located in Hall County as of December 9, 1991, shall not be affected by this section and said existing manufactured home shall be freely transferable and relocated in Hall County, unless said existing manufactured home was manufactured prior to U.S. Housing and Urban Development Department Construction Standards. 
(b)  In the event a mobile home was manufactured prior to U.S. Housing and Urban Development Department Construction Standards, said mobile home shall not be allowed to locate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this county, and said mobile home shall not be freely transferable and relocated in Hall County except as provided in this section. 
(c)  No mover, hauler, person, firm, corporation or other entity shall: 
1.  Move a mobile home to any location beyond the limits of the lot or parcel of land upon which it presently is located; 
2.  Move a mobile home into Hall County; or 
3.  Move a manufactured home or mobile home out of Hall County without first obtaining a relocation permit from the building official of Hall County in charge of issuing building permits. Provided, however, this relocation permit shall not be required when a manufactured home is moved from the manufacturing site to the dealer's place of business. 
(d)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, a manufactured home or site built home or stick built home may be moved into Hall County provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  Said home is inspected by the Hall County Building Inspection Department prior to being brought into Hall County and must pass the same test as to the condition of the home as that is required by all new or pre-owned manufactured homes. 
2.  An application for a permit to locate the home will be filed with the Hall County Planning Commission. Each application must have with it a site plan for the placement of the home. Each application will be heard by the Hall County Planning Department and then referred to the Hall County Commissioners for final approval or denial. Each application will be processed and considered by the Hall County Planning Commission and the Hall County Commissioners in the same manner as a rezoning application. 
3.  The fees to be paid with each application will be the same as in filing an application for rezoning. 
4.  The criteria for approval or denial shall be as follows: 
a.  The same criteria as is set out in section 17.370.060(c) of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, said criteria being incorporated fully in this section and made a part hereof. 
b.  The compatibility with existing housing in the surrounding area in terms of type, style, age, and condition. 
c.  No pre-owned manufactured home or site built home being moved into Hall County shall be allowed to locate for permanent or temporary occupancy in Hall County unless such manufactured home or site built home has been occupied by the applicant owner for the previous consecutive 12 months as his or her principal residence immediately prior to its being moved into Hall County. Furthermore no such manufactured home or site built home shall be moved into Hall County to be used for a purpose other than occupancy by its owner as his or her principal residence. 
d.  Each newly installed site built or stick built home in Hall County shall conform to the minimum construction standards required by the Standard Building Code before that home is entitled to receive any utility service to said home. It is the intent of this section to prohibit moving site built homes and stick built homes into Hall County that do not conform to the applicable Standard Building Code standards. To that end, no site built or stick built home shall be allowed to locate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this county unless that site built or stick built home complies with the minimum construction standards required by the Standard Building Code. No used stick built or site built home being moved into Hall County shall be allowed to locate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this county if the said home is more than seven years old except as provided in this section. Provided, however, that any site built or stick built home that is located in Hall County as of December 9, 1991, shall not be affected by this section and said existing site built home or stick built home shall be freely transferable and relocated in Hall County. 
e.  A manufactured home that does not meet the requirements of this section and a mobile home that is located in Hall County, Georgia, and was manufactured prior to U.S. Housing and Urban Development Department Construction Standards may be transferred to a Hall County licensed dealer authorized to buy and sell mobile homes for location at said dealer's place of business for sale or transfer outside Hall County. In no event shall this exception allow any person to transfer said mobile home to another location within Hall County, live in said mobile home or allow said mobile home to receive any utility service. 
4.  Manufactured home contractor bonds. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the location of manufactured homes or relocatable homes for which a permit is required, and every contractor subletting the same, or any part thereof, to obtain where required by state law or local ordinance or resolution, a current and valid business tax certificate, business license or occupation tax certificate reflecting the payment of all occupation taxes; and it shall be the further duty of every such person to give good and sufficient bond in the sum of $10,000.00, to be approved by the county attorney, conditioned to conform to the building code and other ordinances or laws of the governing body in reference to manufactured homes and relocatable homes. 
5.  Permits. 
(a)  It shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of any permit required by this section that the owner of said manufactured or mobile home submit to the tax commissioner of Hall County proof that all state and county taxes theretofore accruing and payable with respect to such home have in fact been paid; and if said manufactured home or mobile home which is to be relocated or located is then located within any portion of the county that lies within the limits of a municipality therein, such owner shall likewise submit proof that all applicable municipal taxes have been paid before a permit may be issued. The proof required by this section shall be met when the applicant presents the tax commissioner with either the manufactured home or mobile home location decal permit or a receipt for such decal. Both of these documents are issued by the county when the owner of a manufactured home or mobile home pays the taxes due on the home. If the receipt has been lost and the decal has been permanently affixed to the manufactured home or mobile home, the applicant may provide the tax commissioner with the permit number and, upon verification by personnel in the tax office that the taxes on that manufactured home or mobile home have in fact been paid, the applicant shall be deemed to have met the proof required by this section. 
(b)  Every person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity owning or operating a manufactured home park, and each such entity engaged in the sale or rental of manufactured homes or mobile homes or lots upon which to place them, shall furnish the tax assessor and tax commissioner of Hall County on or before the tenth day of each month with a complete list of all manufactured homes and mobile homes parked, rented, or otherwise located as of the first day of that month upon the property of the entity or in a manufactured home park operated by the entity. 
6.  Manufactured home minimum standards. 
(a)  Exterior. All components of the exterior, including siding, windows and exterior doors of the manufactured home shall be aesthetically uniform in appearance and free of any condition that may hinder operation as originally intended or might admit moisture. 
(b)  Roof. The roof of the manufactured home shall be in sound condition with no obvious defects. 
(c)  Interior. The flooring, interior wall and ceiling shall be in sound condition and appearance. 
(d)  Egress windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable escape window. 
(e)  Ventilation. Bathrooms and kitchen without a window must have an operable ventilation device. 
(f)  Smoke detectors. Each manufactured home shall contain one operable battery powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen area. The smoke detectors must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(g)  Sanitary facilities. Each manufactured home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom in the manufactured home shall contain a lavatory and water closet, at least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked when properly connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(h)  Electrical. The distribution panels of each manufactured home shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. Connections shall be checked for tightness. The electrical panels shall be accessible. All electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures shall be properly and securely installed. 
(i)  Hot water supply. Each manufactured home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(j)  Heating source. Each manufactured home shall have a safe central heating system in working condition. Un- vented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(k)  Skirting. Installation of skirting shall be required. Installation shall be in accordance with the building inspector. Acceptable materials may include masonry, stone, metal, or other materials manufactured for the purpose of skirting. Vinyl is prohibited. 
7.  Rules and regulations for manufactured homes. A copy of The Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes as set forth by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof. In addition, a copy of the rules and regulations shall be placed in the bulk file of the Hall County Board of Commissioners containing the adopted International Building Code. 
(Ord. of 7-13-06, § 2; Res. of 9-9-10(2), §§ 1—7) 
15.10.050. - National Electrical Code, amendments. 
A.  Administration. National Electrical Code Chapter 1, Administration, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
The provisions of Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 15.10.030 shall apply to this Code. 
B.  Load calculations for service and feeder conductors. National Electrical Code § 555.12, Load calculations for Service and Feeder Conductors, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
1.  General lighting and other loads. General lighting and other loads shall be calculated in accordance with National Electrical Code Article 220, and, in addition, the demand factors set forth in National Electrical Code Table 555.12 shall be permitted for each service and/or feeder circuit supplying receptacles that provide shore power for boats. These calculations shall be permitted to be modified as indicated in notes (1) and (2) to National Electrical Code Table 555.12. 
2.  Electrical services for boat docks and marinas. The U.S. Army Corp of Engineers Regulations for Electrical Services for Boat Docks attached to this resolution codified in this section and on file in the office of the county clerk is permitted to be used for demand factors for electrical services and feeders for boat docks and marinas in the county. 
(Ord. of 7-13-06, § 2) 
15.10.060. - International Fuel Gas Code, amendments. 
International Fuel Gas Code Chapter 1, Administration, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
The provisions of Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 15.10.030 shall apply to this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-13-06, § 2) 
15.10.070. - International Mechanical Code, amendments. 
International Mechanical Code Chapter 1, Administration, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
The provisions of Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 15.10.030 shall apply to this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-13-06, § 2) 
15.10.080. - International Plumbing Code, amendments. 
International Plumbing Code Chapter 1, Administration, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
The provisions of Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 15.10.030 shall apply to this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-13-06, § 2) 
15.10.090. - International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, amendments. 
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings Chapter 1, Administration, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
The provisions of Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 15.10.030 shall apply to this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-13-06, § 2) 
15.10.100. - International Energy Conservation Code, amendments. 
International Energy Conservation Code Chapter 1, Administration, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
The provisions of Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 15.10.030 shall apply to this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-13-06, § 2) 
15.10.110. - International Fire Code, amendments. 
A.  Department of fire prevention. International Fire Code § 103, Department of Fire Prevention, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
Fire Department. Whenever the term "fire prevention department" is used herein, the term shall mean the Hall County Fire Department. 
Enforcement. 
1.  The Hall County Fire Chief shall be responsible for the enforcement of this fire code. The Hall County Fire Chief may designate such staff of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. 
2.  To assist in the performance of the responsibilities and duties placed upon the fire chief, a bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the county is created. This bureau shall operate under the supervision of the fire chief of the county. The fire chief shall designate an official of the fire department as fire marshal. The fire marshal shall be administrator of the bureau of fire prevention. The fire marshal shall be responsible for the direct administration and enforcement of this fire code under the supervision of the Hall County Fire Chief. 
3.  Fire inspectors of the county bureau of fire prevention shall also have authority to administer and enforce this fire code under the supervision of the fire marshal. 
B.  Board of appeals. International Fire Code § 108, Board of Appeals, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
1.  Appeals—General. Whenever the fire code official shall reject or refuse to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the erection or alteration of a building or structure, or when the fire code official has ordered that certain action be taken or refrained from, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the International Fire Code do not apply, or that an equally good or more desirable form of construction or safety precaution can be employed in any specific case, or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this Code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such building or structure, or his authorized agent, or the person or corporation against whom said action is directed, may appeal from the decision of the fire code official to the Hall County Board of Commissioners in writing, setting forth the action or ruling appealed in detail, within ten days of the action or ruling. The Hall County Board of Commissioners shall hold a hearing on the appeal within 15 days of filing and shall render a decision within 31 days of filing. 
2.  Unsafe or dangerous building. In case of a building or structure or operation which, in the opinion of the fire code official, is unsafe or dangerous, the fire code official may, in his order, limit the time for such appeal to a shorter period. 
3.  Variance to Code after hearing. The Hall County Board of Commissioners, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this Code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice, and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the code or public interest, or when, in its opinion, the interpretation of the fire code official should be modified or reversed. 
4.  Recording of minutes of hearing. A decision of the Hall County Board of Commissioners to vary the application of any provision of the code, or to modify an order of the fire code official, shall specify in what manner such variation or modification is made, the conditions upon which it is made and the reasons therefor and shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting at which the decision is made. 
5.  Reversal of decision. If a decision of the Hall County Board of Commissioners reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the fire code official or varies the application of any provision of the code, the fire code official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. 
C.  Violations. 
1.  Prosecution of violations. International Fire Code § 109.2.3, Prosecution of Violations, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
In case any building, structure, land, mechanical system, plumbing system, or other system, installation or equipment regulated by this Code is or is proposed to be used, operated, occupied, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure, land, mechanical system, plumbing system, or other system, installation or equipment regulated by this Code is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of the this chapter, the fire code official, county attorney, or other appropriate authority of the county may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful operation, occupation, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use to correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
2.  Violation penalties. International Fire Code § 109.3, Violation penalties, is deleted in its entirety and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who operates, occupies, erects, constructs, reconstructs, alters, converts, maintains or repairs a building, structure, land, mechanical system, plumbing system, or other system, installation or equipment regulated by this Code in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the Court. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
D.  Appendices. All appendices set forth in the International Fire Code, 2012 edition, with the exception of Appendix A and Appendix J, are expressly included in this section. A copy of the International Fire Code, 2012 edition, and the appendices thereto are on file in the office of the Hall County Commissioners, and together are marked and designated as the "International Fire Code, 2012 edition." 
(Ord. of 7-13-06, § 2; Res. of 6-11-15(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 15.80. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT/FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of March 12, 2015(1), § 1, repealed the former Ch. 15.80, §§ 15.80.010—15.80.070, and Exhibit A to said resolution enacted a new Ch. 15.80 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.80 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. of December 14, 2006(4), § 1. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 8.40; subdivisions, tit. 16; stormwater facilities for subdivisions, § 16.80.110 et seq. 

15.80.010. - General provisions. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, stream bank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
1.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
2.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
3.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
4.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
5.  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and, 
6.  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation, and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
B.  Applicability. This chapter shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within Hall County. 
C.  Designation of chapter administrator. The Hall County Engineer or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, areas of future-conditions flood hazard and associated floodplain characteristics—Flood area maps and studies. For the purposes of defining and determining "areas of special flood hazard," "areas of future-conditions flood hazard," "areas of shallow flooding," "base flood elevations," "floodplains," "fioodways," "future-conditions flood elevations," "future-conditions floodplains," potential flood hazard or risk categories as shown on FIRM maps, and other terms used in this chapter, the following documents and sources may be used for such purposes and are adopted by reference thereto: 
1.  The flood insurance study (FIS) dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. 
2.  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the base or one percent (100-year) floodplain and floodprone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to Hall County; and 
b.  Any base flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared by utilizing FEMA approved methodology and approved by the Hall County Engineer. 
3.  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and floodprone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to Hall County; and 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology approved by the Hall County Engineer. 
4.  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the Hall County Engineering Office. 
E.  Compatibility with other regulations. This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
F.  Severability. It the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
G.  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Hall County or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Res. of 3-12-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
15.80.020. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
Adjacent means those areas located within the defined horizontal distance from the future-conditions floodplain boundary that are at or lower in elevation than either three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, unless the area is hydraulically independent, (meaning absolutely no connection to the flooding source such as through pipes, sewer laterals, down drains, foundation drains, ground seepage, overland flow, gated or valved pipes, excavated and backfilled trenches, etc., with no fill or other manmade barriers creating the separation). 
Appeal means a request for a review of the Hall County Engineer's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of future-conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one percent annual chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood). 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land area subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the base flood elevation designated as Zones A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
Accessory structure or facility means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary structure. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the base flood. 
Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides. 
Building has the same meaning as "structure." 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, tilling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above the ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, post, piers, pilings or columns. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the initial FIRM, November 2, 1983. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the initial FIRM, November 2, 1983. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by FEMA providing an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream, river, or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land use conditions based on a community's zoning maps, comprehensive land use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of stormwater management (flood detention) structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Mean sea level means the datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM, November 2, 1983, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM, November 2, 1983. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by Hall County to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and, 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Repetitive loss means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of the structure on a site such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building (including a gas or liquid storage tank) that is principally above ground, or a manufactured home. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement to a structure taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been identified by the Hall County Building Official or Hall County Enforcement Officer. The term also does not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with requirements of this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Res. of 3-12-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
15.80.030. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
A.  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
1.  Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to Hall County Development Services a permit application on a form provided by Hall County Development Services for that purpose. 
2.  No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
B.  Floodplain management plan requirements. An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard located on the site shall include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
1.  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. 
2.  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 15.80.050.B.2; 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of flood openings as required in section 15.80.050.A.5; and 
e.  Design plans certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s); 
3.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
4.  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodways, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
5.  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development, including but not limited to permits required by Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; and 
6.  All appropriate certifications required under this chapter. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
C.  Construction stage submittal requirements. 
1.  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide the Hall County Engineer a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction, including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by same using the FEMA floodproofing certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to assure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
2.  Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Hall County Engineer shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
D.  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the Hall County Engineer shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
1.  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
2.  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; 
3.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the Hall County Engineer shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of sections 15.80.040 and 15.80.050 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia; 
4.  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
5.  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
6.  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, the Hall County Engineer shall review the design and operation/maintenance plan and obtain certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect; 
7.  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (GA DNR) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
8.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the Hall County Engineer shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
9.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the Hall County Engineer and shall be open for public inspection; 
10.  Coordinate all FIRM revision with the GA DNR and FEMA; and 
11.  Review variance applications and make recommendations to the planning commission. 
(Res. of 3-12-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
15.80.040. - Standards for development. 
A.  Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
1.  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
2.  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the Hall County Engineer. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the Hall County Engineer, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Hall County Engineer. 
B.  Definition of floodway boundaries. 
1.  The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA-approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the Hall County Engineer. If floodway data is not available from the Hall County Engineer, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Hall County Engineer. 
C.  General standards. 
1.  No development shall be allowed within any area of special flood hazard of area of future-conditions flood hazard that could result in any of the following: 
a.  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
b.  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
c.  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
d.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
2.  Any development within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard allowed under section 15.80.040.C.1 shall also meet the following conditions: 
a.  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
b.  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
c.  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
d.  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 15.80.040.D; 
e.  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
f.  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the Hall County Engineer using the FEMA community concurrence forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of development, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys and plans for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
D.  Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. This study shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the Hall County Engineer prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
1.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
2.  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the Hall County Engineer. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
3.  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; and 
4.  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
E.  Floodway encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in section 15.80.040.E.2 below; 
2.  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment will not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A licensed professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
3.  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the Hall County Engineer until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA or a no-rise certification is approved by the Hall County Engineer. 
F.  Maintenance requirements. The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is maintained. The Hall County Engineer may direct the property owner (at no cost to Hall County) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the Hall County Engineer. 
(Res. of 3-12-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
15.80.050. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
In all areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard, the following provisions apply: 
A.  General standards. 
1.  New construction and substantial improvements of structures (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of section 15.80.040.C, D, and E have been met; 
2.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
3.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
4.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
5.  Elevated buildings: All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
i.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms; 
6.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
7.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
8.  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of Hall County to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
9.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
10.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
11.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to, or contamination from, such systems during flooding; 
12.  Other public utilities such as gas and electric systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or public safety hazard from them, during flooding; 
13.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; 
14.  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones, or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence; 
15.  When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this chapter; and 
16.  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: 
a.  All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the floodprone area; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
B.  Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
1.  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 15.80.040.C, D, and E have been met. If all of the requirements of subsections 15.80.040.C, D, and E have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 15.80.050.A.5. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 15.80.050.A.5. 
2.  Nonresidential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal nonresidential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 15.80.040.C, D and E have been met. If all requirements of subsections 15.80.040.C, D and E have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 15.80.050.A.5. New construction that has met all of the requirements of subsections 15.80.040.C, D and E may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Hall County Engineer using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones may be authorized by the Hall County Engineer to be elevated or floodproofed. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 15.80.050.A.5. Substantial improvements may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Hall County Engineer using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
3.  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which meet the requirements of subsections 15.80.040.C, D and E and are permitted to be located within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to provide adequate flood openings in accordance with section 15.80.050.A.5 and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
4.  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  Meet all the requirements for Residential buildings—substantial improvements (section 15.80.050.B.1.b), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
5.  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 15.80.040.C, D and E have been met. If all of the requirements of subsections 15.80.040.C, D and E have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 15.80.050.A.5. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
i.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
ii.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of section 15.80.050.A.7. 
C.  Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
1.  Residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 15.80.050.A. 
2.  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 15.80.050.A. Nonresidential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
D.  Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and floodway (A-zones). For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the Hall County Engineer shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this chapter. 
If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
2.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for floodprone enclosures in accordance with section 15.80.050.A.5. 
E.  Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas, the following provisions apply: 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate the automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 15.80.050.A.5; 
2.  New construction and substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice and shall provide such certification to the Hall County Engineer using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and 
3.  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
F.  Standards for subdivisions of land. 
1.  All subdivision proposals shall identify the areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard therein and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data. 
2.  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required. 
3.  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 15.80.030.B. 
(Res. of 3-12-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
15.80.060. - Variance procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the Hall County Engineer. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the Hall County Engineer. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
B.  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the Hall County Engineer may appeal said decision to the Hall County Planning Hall County Planning Commission within 30 days from the Hall County Engineer's decision along with the costs of appeal in accordance with section 17.30.010.C. An appeal shall not be considered as filed until the required fee is paid. Pursuant to section 2.60.030.O, said appeal shall be heard by the Hall County Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 2.60 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, with the exception that: 
1.  For any appeal to the Hall County Planning Commission pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, all references to Title 17 in sections 2.60.060 and 2.60.070 shall instead refer to chapter 15.80 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia; and 
2.  All appeals shall be heard by the planning commission after notice to affected parties at the next scheduled public meeting that is 15 days or more from the filing of the appeal. The planning commission shall have 30 days from the date of its hearing within which to make its decision to affirm or reverse the decision of the Hall County Engineer. If the planning commission fails to make a decision within the specified period, it shall be deemed to have affirmed the decision of the Hall County Engineer. 
C.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Hall County Planning Commission may appeal such decision to the Hall County Commission in accordance with procedures set forth in chapter 17.370 with the exception that: 
1.  Said appeal shall follow all the procedures in chapter 17.370 as though it was a zoning decision or a use permitted subject to approval of the planning commission; 
2.  The justification required pursuant to section 17.370.020 should make specific reference to such relevant criteria for a variance as listed in section 15.80.060.D—K instead of section 17.380.060.C; and 
3.  The criteria for variances established pursuant to section 15.80.060.D—K of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia shall be used instead of section 17.380.060 for the relevant factors to be considered pursuant to section 17.380.130.C. 
D.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
E.  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
F.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
G.  In reviewing such requests, the Hall County Engineer, the Hall County Planning Commission and the Hall County Commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
H.  Conditions for variances: 
1.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
2.  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
3.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance resulting from the lowest floor elevation being placed below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property, and that such costs may be as high as $25.00 for each $100.00 of insurance coverage provided. 
4.  The Hall County Engineer shall maintain the records of all variance actions, both granted and denied, and report them to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
I.  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the Hall County Engineer and the Hall County Planning Commission shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
J.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the Hall County Engineer and the Hall County Planning Commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
K.  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Res. of 3-12-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
15.80.070. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
A.  Notice of violation. If Hall County determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, a notice of violation shall be written to such applicant or other responsible person. In the event that a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
1.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
2.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
3.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
4.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
5.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
6.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Hall County Magistrate Court by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation. 
B.  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, Hall County shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, Hall County may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
1.  Stop work order. Hall County may issue a stop work order, which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
2.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. Hall County may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
3.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. Hall County may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as Hall County may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
4.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as Hall County shall deem appropriate (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after Hall County has taken one or more of the actions described above, Hall County may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
5.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, Hall County may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person. Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Res. of 3-12-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
CHAPTER 15.90. - HOUSING CODE 

15.90.010. - 1994 Standard Housing Code adopted. 
The Standard Housing Code, 1994 Edition, published by Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., Birmingham, Alabama, attached hereto and initialed by the chairman of the board of commissioners of Hall County, is incorporated by reference and adopted as part of this chapter as if fully set out herein; provided, however, the 1994 Standard Housing Code is amended as follows in this chapter. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.020. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 101.4.1 amended. 
Section 101.4.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Alterations, repairs, or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing building without requiring the building to comply with all the requirements of this code, provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of this code for new construction. The building official shall determine, subject to appeal, the extent, if any, to which the existing building shall be made to conform to the requirements of this code for new construction. Such determination is subject to appeal as set forth in section 15.90.160 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.030. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 101.4.3 amended. 
Section 101.4.3 is amended to read as follows: 
If the occupancy classification of an existing building is changed, the building shall be made to conform to the intent of this code for the new occupancy classification as established by the building official. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.040. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 101.5 amended. 
Section 101.5, Special Historic Buildings and Districts, is amended to read as follows: 
The provisions of this code relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving [of] buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. The applicant must submit complete architectural and engineering plans and specifications bearing the seal of a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.050. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 102.1 amended. 
Section 102.1, Enforcement Officer, is amended to read as follows: 
There is hereby established by the applicable governing body provisions for the enforcement of this code by the building official. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.060. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 102.2 amended. 
Section 102.2, Restrictions on Employees, is amended to read as follows: 
An officer or employee connected with the building inspection department shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, or in the making of plans or of specifications therefor, unless he is the owner of such building. Such officer or employee shall not engage in any work which is inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the building inspection department. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.070. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 102.3 amended. 
Section 102.3, Records, is amended to read as follows: 
The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the building inspection department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A § 50-18-70 et. seq. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.080. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 103.1 amended. 
Section 103.1, Right of Entry, is amended to read as follows: 
The building official shall enforce the provisions of this code, and he or his duly authorized representative, upon presentation of proper identification to the owner, agent, or tenant in charge of such property, may enter any building, structure, dwelling, apartment, apartment house, or premises during all reasonable hours, except in cases of emergency where extreme hazards are known to exist which may involve the potential loss of life or severe property damage, in which case the above limitations shall not apply. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.090. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 103.2.2 amended. 
Section 103.2.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Whenever the housing official determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this code or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor and such alleged violations shall constitute a nuisance. Such notice shall: 
(A)  Be put in writing; 
(B)  Include a statement of the reasons why it is being used; 
(C)  Allow 45 days to correct major violations and 60 days to correct minor violations with a maximum time limit of 120 days for either, subject to approval of the building official; and 
(D)  State that if such repairs, reconstruction, alterations, removal or demolition are not voluntarily completed within the stated time as set forth in the notice, the building official shall institute such legal proceedings charging the person or persons, firm, corporation or agent with a violation of this code. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.100. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 103.3 deleted. 
Section 103.3, Requirements Not Covered by Code, is deleted in its entirety. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.110. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 103.4 amended. 
Section 103.4, Liability, is amended as follows: 
Any officer or employee, or member of the Hall County Building Inspection Department charged with the enforcement of this chapter, in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee of Hall County, Georgia, because of this code shall be defended by the county attorney for Hall County, Georgia, until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.120. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 103.5 amended. 
Section 103.5, Reports, is amended to read as follows: 
The building official shall annually submit a report to the chief administrator covering the work of the department during the preceding year. He shall incorporate in such report a summary of the appeal decisions during such year. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.130. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 103.6 amended. 
Section 103.6, Letter of Compliance, is amended to read as follows: 
A letter of compliance with the provisions of this code may be issued by the building official. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.140. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 104 amended. 
Section 104, Inspections, is amended to read as follows: 
The building official shall make or cause to be made inspections to determine the condition of residential buildings and premises in the interest of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of such buildings and of the general public. For the purpose of making such inspections, the building official, or his agent, is hereby authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times all residential buildings and premises. The owner or occupant of every residential building or the person in charge thereof shall give the building official free access to such residential building and its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination, and survey. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.150. - Standard Housing Code, section 105 amended. 
Section 105, Hardships, is amended to read as follows: 
Where the literal application of the requirements of this code would appear to cause undue hardship on an owner or tenant or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this code or any of the regulations therein have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such building or structure, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal the decision of the building official as set forth in section 15.90.160 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.160. - Standard Housing Code, sections 106 and 107 repealed and replaced (Appeals). 
Section 106, Housing Board of Adjustment and Appeals, and Section 107, Appeals, are stricken in their entirety and the following is substituted in lieu thereof: 
Section 106. Appeals. 
106.1 Appeals-General. Whenever the building official determines that there has been a violation of any provision of the 1994 Standard Housing Code or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the 1994 Standard Housing Code do not apply, or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of the 1994 Standard Housing Code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such building or structure, or his authorized agent, may appeal from the decision of the building official to the board of commissioners in writing, setting forth the action or ruling appealed in detail, within 30 days of the action or ruling. The board of commissioners shall hold a hearing on the appeal within 15 days of filing and shall render a decision within 30 days of the hearing. 
106.2 Variance to code after hearing. The board of commissioners, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the 1994 Standard Housing Code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice, and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this code or public interest, or when, in its opinion, the interpretation of the building official should be modified or reversed. 
106.3 Recording minutes of hearing. A decision of the board of commissioners to vary the application of any provision of the 1994 Standard Housing Code, or to modify an order of the building official, shall specify in what manner such variation of modification is made, the conditions upon which it is made and the reasons therefor, and shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting at which the decision is made. 
106.4 Reversal of decision. If a decision of the board of commissioners reverses or modifies a refusal, order or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the 1994 Standard Housing Code, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.170. - Standard Housing Code, section 108 repealed and replaced (Violations and penalties). 
Section 108, Violations and Penalties, is stricken in its entirety and the following is substituted in lieu thereof: 
108. Violations and penalties. 
In case any building or structure is (or is proposed to be) reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained in violation of any provision of this code, the building official, county attorney, or other appropriate authority of the county may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use to correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. Where a violation of these regulations exists with respect to a structure or land, the Hall County Building Official may, in addition to other remedies, notify all public utilities and county service departments of such violation and request that service be withheld therefrom until such time as the structure or premises is no longer in violation of these regulations. 
Any, person, firm, corporation, association or partnership who shall do anything prohibited by this code as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, or who shall fail to do anything required by the this code as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
15.90.180. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 110 amended. 
Section 110, Permits, is amended to read as follows: 
Any owner, authorized agent or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change a residential building or structure or to cause any such work to be done shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit therefor. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of this code. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.190. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 202 amended. 
Section 202, Definitions is amended to add the following definitions: 
APPLICABLE GOVERNING BODY - a city, county, state, state agency or other political government subdivision or entity authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this code, as adopted or amended. 
APPROVED - approved by the building official or other authority having jurisdiction. 
BUILDING OFFICIAL - the officer, or his duly authorized representative, charged with the administration and enforcement of this code. 
HISTORIC - means any structure that is: 
(A)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the United States Government's Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the United States Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; 
(B)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(C)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in Georgia which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(D)  Individually listed on any local inventory of historic places in Hall County that have been classified either by an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior or directly by the secretary of the interior. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.200. - Standard Housing Code, sections 303.2.2, 303.4, 303.5, 305.1, 305.2, 305.3.1, 305.3.2, 305.5, 305.6, 305.7, 305.8, 305.9, 305.10, 305.11.1, 305.11.2, 305.12.1, 305.12.2, 305.13.1, 305.13.2, 305.14, 305.17, 305.19.1, 305.19.2, 305.20, 305.21, 307.1, 307.2, 307.5, 307.6, 308.7, Appendix A, Appendix B, and Appendix C deleted. 
Standard Housing Code sections 303.2.2, 303.4, 303.5, 305.1, 305.2, 305.3.1, 305.3.2, 305.5, 305.6, 305.7, 305.8, 305.9, 305.10, 305.11.1, 305.11.2, 305.12.1, 305.12.2, 305.13.1, 305.13.2, 305.14, 305.17, 305.19.1, 305.19.2, 305.20, 305.21, 307.1, 307.2, 307.5, 307.6, 308.7, Appendix A, Appendix B, and Appendix C are deleted in their entirety. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.210. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 307.4 amended. 
Section 307.4, Care of Premises, is amended to read as follows: 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a residential building, structure, or property to utilize the premises of such residential property for the open storage of any inoperable motor vehicle, ice box, refrigerator, stove, glass, building material, building rubbish or similar items. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every such owner or occupant to keep the premises of such residential property clean and to remove from the premises all such abandoned items as listed above, including, but not limited to, weeds, dead trees, trash, garbage, etc., upon notice from the building official. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.220. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 309.1 amended. 
Section 309.1, Dangerous Structures, is amended to read as follows: 
Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and declared to be a nuisance and shall be so designated and placarded by the building official: 
(A)  One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or the public. 
(B)  One which lacks illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or the public. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.230. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 309.2 amended. 
Section 309.2, Form of Notice, is amended to read as follows: 
Whenever the building official has declared a dwelling or multiple dwelling as unfit for human habitation and constituting a nuisance, he shall give notice to the owner of such declaration and placarding of the dwelling or multiple dwellings as unfit for human habitation. Such notice shall: 
(A)  Be in writing; 
(B)  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification; 
(C)  State the time occupants must vacate the dwelling units; and 
(D)  State that, if such repairs, reconstruction, alterations, removal, or demolition are not voluntarily completed within the stated time as set forth in the notice, the building official shall institute such legal proceedings charging the person or persons, firm, corporation, or agent with a violation of this code. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.240. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 309.4 amended. 
Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation and so designated and placarded by the building official shall be vacated within 30 days after notice of such condemnation has been given by the building official to the owner and/or occupant of the building. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.250. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, section 309.5 amended. 
No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until approval is secured from and such placard is removed by the building official. The building official shall remove such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.260. - 1994 Standard Housing Code, adoption of future amendments. 
Future amendments to the 1994 Standard Housing Code. Any future amendment to the Standard Housing Code, 1994 Edition, published by Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., Birmingham, Alabama, except when in conflict with [section] 15.90.010 in this section [chapter], is hereby adopted upon review and recommendation by the building official and approved by the board of commissioners. A copy of the amendment shall be placed in the bulk file of the board of commissioners containing the originally adopted 1994 Standard Housing Code. 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
15.90.270. - Schedule of permit fees. 
The permit fees for demolition of all unsafe buildings, structures or service systems that are declared illegal and abated by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code are as follows: 
Structures zero to 10,000 square feet ..... $25.00 
[Structures] over 10,001 square feet ..... 50.00 
(Res. of 5-22-97, § 1) 
CHAPTER 15.100. - HALL COUNTY VACANT AND FORECLOSED PROPERTY 

 

15.100.010. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Hall County Vacant and Foreclosed Property". 
(Res. of 6-27-13(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
15.100.020. - Definitions. 
[As used in this chapter, the following terms shall apply:] 
Agent means an individual with a place of business in this state in which he or she is authorized to accept inquiries, notices, and service of process on behalf of a vacant or foreclosed real property owner. The definition of "agent" shall have the same meaning as set forth in the O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14 should that definition differ from the definition in this chapter. 
Foreclosed real property means improved or unimproved real property held pursuant to a judicial or nonjudicial foreclosure of a mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, or other security instrument securing a debt or obligation owned to a creditor or a deed in lieu of foreclosure in full or partial satisfaction of a debt or obligation owed to a creditor or shall have the same meaning as set forth in the O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14, should that definition differ from the definition of this chapter. 
Street address means the street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. The definition of 'street address' shall have the same meaning as set forth in the O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14 should that definition differ from the definition in this chapter. 
Vacant real property means real property that: 
1.  Is intended for habitation, has not been lawfully inhabited for at least 60 days, and has no evidence of utility usage within the past 60 days; or 
2.  Is partially constructed or incomplete, without a valid building permit. 
Such term shall not include a building or structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one unit occupied with evidence of utility usage. The definition of "vacant real property" shall have the same meaning as set forth in the O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14 should that definition differ from the definition in this chapter. 
(Res. of 6-27-13(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
15.100.030. - Registration of vacant or foreclosed property. 
A.  Owner or agents of foreclosed real property or vacant real property, including foreclosed real property and vacant real property which is also residential rental property, are required to register such property with the Hall County Marshal's office, within 30 days of such property becoming foreclosed or vacant real property by following the provisions of this section unless otherwise exempted by this chapter or state law. 
B.  Any such owner or agent of foreclosed real property or vacant real property located within the jurisdiction of Hall County is required to obtain from and file with the Hall County Marshal's Office, a registration, and shall submit the following information: 
1.  The real property owner's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
2.  The agent's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
3.  The real property's street address and tax parcel number; 
4.  The transfer date of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner; and 
5.  At such time as it becomes available, recording information including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner. 
C.  Registration is required for all vacant or foreclosed real property unless otherwise exempted, pursuant to this chapter, but is not required for vacant or foreclosed real property within 90 days of such real property's transfer: 
1.  Pursuant to a deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure; or 
2.  To the first subsequent transferee after the vacant real property has been acquired by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to the O.C.G.A. § 44-14-160, or acquired pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
D.  Any owner or agent required to register any vacant or foreclosed real property pursuant to this article or to Georgia law shall also be required to update the information with the Hall County Marshal's Office specified in subsection 15.100.030 within 30 days after any change in such required information regardless of whether the information provided to the registry was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(Res. of 6-27-13(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
15.100.040. - Foreclosed and vacant real property exemptions. 
A.  Registration or payment of any administrative fees of foreclosed real property pursuant to this chapter and Georgia law is not required of transferees as described in subsection 15.100.040.B of this section. 
B.  Any transferee who acquires any real property by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to the O.C.G.A. § 44-14-160 or acquires any real property pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure and: 
1.  The deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure contains the information specified in section 15.100.030 of this chapter; 
2.  The deed is filed with the clerk of the superior court within 60 days of the foreclosure sale or transfer of the deed in lieu of foreclosure; and 
3.  Proof of the following is provided to the Hall County Marshal's Office, the office in charge of the Hall County foreclosed real property registry: 
a.  A filing date stamp or receipt showing payment of the applicable filing fees; and 
b.  The entire deed under power of sale or entire deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
c.  Any owner or agent required to register any vacant or foreclosed real property pursuant to this article or to Georgia law shall also be required to update the information specified in section 15.100.030 of this chapter within 30 days after any change in such required information regardless of whether the information provided to the registry was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(Res. of 6-27-13(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
15.100.050. - Removal from registry. 
A.  Any owner or agent of a vacant or foreclosed real property may apply to the Hall County Marshal's Office to remove a vacant or foreclosed real property from the Hall County, Georgia registry at such time as the real property no longer constitutes a vacant or foreclosed real property. 
B.  Any application for removal allowed under subsection 15.100.050.A of this section shall be granted or denied by the Hall County Marshal's Office within 30 days, and if no such determination is made within 30 days then the application for removal from the registry shall be deemed granted. 
(Res. of 6-27-13(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
15.100.060. - Administrative costs. 
Any owner or agent of a vacant or foreclosed real property which is required to be registered with the Hall County Marshal's Office under this chapter shall be required to make a payment of $100.00 for such registration as administrative costs to Hall County for the establishment, maintenance, operation, and administration of the registry. 
(Res. of 6-27-13(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
15.100.070. - Appeal procedures. 
A.  Any owner or agent aggrieved of any determination or decision of the Hall County Marshal's Office or Hall County in the administration of this chapter may appeal to the Hall County Commission. All appeals hereunder must be taken within 30 days of the decision in question by filing with the Hall County Marshal's Office, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
B.  The Hall County Marshal's Office shall forthwith transmit to the notice of appeal and all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken to the Hall County Commission Clerk who shall schedule an appeal hearing within 60 days following the date the appealing party submits its completed written appeal with subsection 15.100.070.A above. 
C.  The Hall County Commission may call for further information to be provided within the next 35 days following the hearing and may continue the hearing for the purpose of receiving such information or for such other proceedings and reasons as the Hall County Commission deems appropriate. 
D.  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Hall County Marshal's Office certifies to the Hall County Commission, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, the proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the state or superior court of Hall County on notice to the Hall County Marshal's Office and on due cause shown. 
E.  The Hall County Commission may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the decision, requirement, or determination of the Hall County Marshal's Office appealed from by the owner or agent and may make such decision, requirement, or determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
F.  Further appeal from the decision of the Hall County Commission may be had to the Hall County Magistrate's Court in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14(j). Appeal to the magistrate's court shall be filed within 30 days of the written decision of the Hall County Board of Commissioners. 
(Res. of 6-27-13(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
15.100.080. - Administration. 
A.  The foreclosure and vacant real property registry is subject to the Open Records Act of the State of Georgia and Hall County may make such registry information available online. 
B.  Registration information shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements contained therein in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Res. of 6-27-13(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
15.100.090. - Nuisances. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair, limit, or preempt in any way the power of Hall County to enforce any applicable codes, as defined in state law, or to define or declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Res. of 6-27-13(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
15.100.100. - Penalties. 
Any owner or agent required to register a vacant or foreclosed real property under this chapter with the Hall County Marshal's Office who fails to register or fails to update the information specified in section 15.100.030, registration of vacant or foreclosed property, may be fined up to $1,000.00 per occurrence. 
(Res. of 6-27-13(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Planning commission, ch. 2.60; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 8.40; streets, sidewalks and public places, tit. 12; assignment of structure numbers for new subdivisions, § 12.10.080; road acceptance standards, § 12.20.020; utility franchises and easements, ch. 12.50; public services, tit. 13; buildings and construction, tit. 15; flood protection, ch. 15.80; zoning regulations, tit. 17; planned development district, ch. 17.180; tree protection, ch. 17.280; development standards for open space subdivisions, ch. 17.320; approval of subdivision amenities, § 17.350.150; approval of temporary sales offices, § 17.350.170. 

CHAPTER 16.10. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

 

16.10.010. - Short title. 
These regulations shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as the subdivision regulations of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 100; Code 1991, § 16.04.010) 
16.10.020. - Policy. 
A.  In the interest of orderly, planned, efficient and economical development, and furtherance of the general health and welfare of the county and its citizens, and to ensure consistency with the land use plan, it is declared to be the policy of the county to consider the subdivision of land and its development to be subject to the control of the county. 
B.  Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace and that it can be serviced with those public facilities deemed necessary and appropriate for such development. 
C.  The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform with and be properly related to the proposal shown in the land use plan, and it is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in building and housing codes, the zoning regulations, the land use plan, and the capital budget and program of the county. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 103; Code 1991, § 16.04.020) 
16.10.030. - Purposes. 
These subdivision regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
A.  To encourage the development of an economically sound and stable community so as to help conserve and protect the natural, economic, and scenic resources of the county; 
B.  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to both residential and nonresidential subdivision developments; 
C.  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, and to help insure that all lots will be accessible to fire fighting equipment and other emergency and service vehicles; 
D.  To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land development through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes; 
E.  To insure adequate drainage by providing for the proper layout of streets and lots, thereby reducing maintenance problems; 
F.  To help prevent the spread of urban blight and slums; 
G.  To promote a safe and healthy environment; 
H.  To assure adequate identification of property on the public records; 
I.  To encourage, in general, the wise development of the community in accordance with the land use plan. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 104; Code 1991, § 16.04.030) 
16.10.040. - Conditions on development; compliance. 
Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated by the state to this county. The developer has the duty of compliance with these regulations and any reasonable conditions laid down by the planning commission for design, dedication, improvement, planning, etc., so as to conform to the physical and economical development of the county and to the safety and general welfare of the future lot owners in the subdivision and of the community at large. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 109; Code 1991, § 16.04.040) 
16.10.050. - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations shall control the subdivision of residential and nonresidential land within the unincorporated portion of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 102; Code 1991, § 16.04.050) 
16.10.060. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 105; Code 1991, § 16.04.060) 
16.10.070. - Conflicting provisions. 
Where any provision of these regulations imposes a restriction different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 105.1(a); Code 1991, § 16.04.070) 
16.10.080. - Easements, covenants and other private restrictions. 
These regulations are not intended to supplant any easement, covenant or any other private restriction; provided that, when the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards than such easement, covenant, or other private restriction, the provisions of these regulations shall govern. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 105.1(b); Code 1991, § 16.04.080) 
16.10.090. - Subdivisions relying on provision of access or services by municipal corporations or other counties. 
The planning commission may disapprove all or any part of a subdivision where proper access and the provision of services affecting the health, safety, and welfare of the subdivision are jeopardized by reliance upon the performance of another jurisdiction. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 107; Code 1991, § 16.04.090) 
16.10.100. - Saving provision. 
These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the county under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of the regulations codified in this title, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm, or corporation, by lawful action of the county, except as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 106; Code 1991, § 16.04.100) 
16.10.110. - Separability. 
If any part or provision of these regulations or application thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision, or application directly involved in all controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances. The board of commissioners declares that it would have enacted the remainder of these regulations even without any such part, provision, or application. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 105.2; Code 1991, § 16.04.110) 
CHAPTER 16.20. - DEFINITIONS[2] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq. 

16.20.010. - Generally; rules of construction. 
A.  For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms, and words used herein shall be used, interpreted and defined as set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural number include the singular; the word "herein" means "in these regulations"; the word "regulations" means "these regulations." 
C.  A "person," includes, but is not necessarily limited to, a corporation, a partnership, and an incorporated association of persons such as a club; "shall" is always mandatory; a "building" includes a "structure"; a "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. 
D.  Words or phrases not defined in this chapter shall have definitions as stated in the zoning regulations or, if not defined in the zoning regulations, shall be considered to have definitions consistent with generally accepted planning principles as determined by the planning department. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B100; Code 1991, § 16.08.010) 
16.20.020. - Appeal. 
"Appeal" means the process by which an aggrieved party may petition for review of a decision made by an official or department of county government. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.020) 
16.20.030. - Approved street. 
"Approved street" means any street, whether public or private, meeting all applicable construction and design standards and specific actions in this title, or any accepted public streets. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.030) 
16.20.040. - Arterial street or major highway. 
"Arterial street or major highway" means a highway, parkway, freeway, expressway or arterial street utilized primarily for high vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic on a continuous route with intersections at grade or separated. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.040) 
16.20.050. - Board of commissioners. 
"Board of commissioners" means the board of commissioners of Hall County. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.050) 
16.20.060. - Building. 
"Building" means any structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering and designed, built, or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, or property of any kind. This definition includes tents or awnings used for purposes of a building. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.060) 
16.20.070. - Building permit. 
"Building permit" means a written permit issued by the building inspector authorizing construction, renovation, or repairs to a structure. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.070) 
16.20.080. - Centerline. 
"Centerline" means: 
A.  The centerline of any right-of-way having a uniform width; 
B.  The original centerline where a right-of-way has been widened irregularly; 
C.  The new centerline whenever a road has been relocated. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.080) 
16.20.090. - Collector street. 
"Collector street" means any street designed and located to collect traffic from intersecting minor streets while still giving access to abutting property, and to conduct such traffic to and from a variety of destinations outside a single subdivision, neighborhood or business district. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.090) 
16.20.100. - Common areas. 
"Common areas" means those portions of a site and/or building(s) collectively owned or controlled. See the definition for "common land" in section 16.20.110. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.100) 
16.20.110. - Common land. 
"Common land" means that land set aside for open space or recreational use for the owners of the residential lots in a subdivision, which land is conveyed by the developer in fee simple absolute title by a warranty deed to trustees whose trust indenture provides that the common land be used for the sole benefit, use and enjoyment of the lot owners, present and future. No lot owner shall have the right to convey his interest in the common land except as an incident of the ownership of a regularly platted lot. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.110) 
16.20.120. - Construction plan. 
"Construction plan" means the maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the planning commission as a condition of the approval of the plat. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.120) 
16.20.130. - County. 
"County" means Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.130) 
16.20.140. - Cross drain. 
"Cross drain" means the pipe system designed to accommodate a drainage basin's 25-year stormwater runoff passing under a street. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.140) 
16.20.150. - Cul-de-sac. 
"Cul-de-sac" means a local street with only one outlet, closed and terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.150) 
16.20.160. - Dead end street. 
"Dead end street" means a street having only one end open for vehicular traffic and the other permanently terminated by an approved turnaround for vehicles. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.160) 
16.20.170. - Director of engineering. 
"Director of engineering" means the engineer for Hall County, licensed and registered in the State of Georgia to perform the duties of engineer as herein specified. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.170) 
16.20.180. - Double-frontage lot. 
"Double-frontage lot" means a lot having frontage on two streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.180) 
16.20.190. - Driveway. 
"Driveway" means an access way connecting one or more dwelling units and/or their parking spaces with a street. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.190) 
16.20.200. - Engineer. 
"Engineer" means a registered, practicing engineer, licensed by the State of Georgia. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.200) 
16.20.210. - Final plat. 
"Final plat" means the map or plan or record of a subdivision and any accompanying material, as provided in section 16.40.040. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.210) 
16.20.220. - Health department. 
"Health department" means the Hall County Health Department, which is duly authorized to perform health services in the county. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.220) 
16.20.230. - Improvements. 
"Improvements" means street pavement, sidewalk pavement, pedestrian way pavement, water mains, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, signs, monuments, landscaping, street lights, buildings or other structures, and other similar items. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.230) 
16.20.240. - Land use plan. 
"Land use plan" means a development plan or any part thereof adopted by the county which indicates the general location for the various physical classes of public works, places, and structures and depicting the general planned physical development of the county. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.240) 
16.20.250. - Lot area. 
"Lot area" means the computed ground area inside the lot lines. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.250) 
16.20.260. - Modification. 
"Modification" means a relaxation of the terms of these regulations where such modification will not be contrary to the public health, safety and welfare, and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property, and not the result of actions of the subdivider or owner, a literal enforcement of these regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.260) 
16.20.270. - Nonresidential subdivision. 
"Nonresidential subdivision" means a subdivision whose intended use is other than residential, such as commercial or industrial. Such subdivision shall comply with the applicable provisions of these regulations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.270) 
16.20.280. - Nuisance. 
"Nuisance" means any condition, including visual conditions, or use of any premises or building, including exterior surfaces, which is detrimental to the public health, safety, morals, or welfare or which is detrimental to the property of others, or causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of property in the subdivision. Nuisance includes, but is not confined to, any of the following: garbage, trash, weeds, building materials or debris, abandoned, discarded, or unused objects, junk, or collections of equipment such as automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, boxes, or containers. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.280) 
16.20.290. - Open space. 
"Open space" means a parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or a combination of both land and water within the site designated for development, designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of residents of a development or for the general public, not including streets or off-street parking areas. Open space shall be substantially free of structures but may contain such improvements as are in the plans as finally approved and are appropriate for the benefit of residents of the development. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.290) 
16.20.300. - Owner. 
"Owner" means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient (51 percent) proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under these regulations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.300) 
16.20.310. - Parcel. 
"Parcel" means a general term including all plots of land shown with separate identification on the official tax appraisal maps. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.310) 
16.20.320. - Pavement. 
"Pavement" means that portion of a street having an all-weather, stable constructed surface and subsurface for the support and movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.320) 
16.20.330. - Pavement width. 
"Pavement width" means the shortest distance as measured from edge of pavement to edge of pavement exclusive of curb and gutter sections. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.330) 
16.20.340. - Planned development. 
"Planned development" means a method of development described in the zoning regulations of the county. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.340) 
16.20.350. - Planning commission. 
"Planning commission" means the county planning commission. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.350) 
16.20.360. - Planning director. 
"Planning director" means the director of the Gainesville-Hall County Planning Department. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.360) 
16.20.370. - Public improvements. 
"Public improvements" means any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the county may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which county responsibility is established. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.370) 
16.20.380. - Public utilities. 
"Public utilities" means water, gas, sanitary and storm sewer, electrical, and communications lines and facilities. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.380) 
16.20.390. - Reserve strip/area. 
"Reserve strip/area" means land which is set aside for a specific purpose. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.390) 
16.20.400. - Right-of-way. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by any or all of the following: a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electrical transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use. The usage of the term right-of-way for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.400) 
16.20.410. - Right-of-way width. 
Right-of-way width means the distance between property lines measured at a right angle to the centerline of the right-of-way. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.410) 
16.20.420. - Road, county. 
County road means a street which is owned or maintained by the county. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.420) 
16.20.430. - Rough grade. 
Rough grade means proposed finished grade plus or minus one foot as shown on the appropriate construction plans. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.430) 
16.20.440. - Shoulder. 
Shoulder means that portion of a street or road from the outer edge of the paved surface or back of curb to the inside edge of the ditch or gutter or original ground surface. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.440) 
16.20.450. - Sidewalk. 
Sidewalk means the portion of the right-of-way which is parallel to the street or road and intended for pedestrian traffic. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.450) 
16.20.460. - Slope. 
Slope means the rate of deviation of the ground surface from the horizontal surface, expressed as a percent. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.460) 
16.20.470. - Storm sewer. 
Storm sewer means the pipe system designed to accommodate the ten-year stormwater runoff collected in the street. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.470) 
16.20.480. - Street. 
Street means a right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, expressway, freeway, road, avenue, drive, boulevard, lane, place, circle, or otherwise. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.480) 
16.20.490. - Street grade. 
Street grade means the grade of the centerline of a street measured at any point along the street, expressed as a percent. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.490) 
16.20.500. - Subdivider. 
Subdivider means any person who, having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.500) 
16.20.510. - Subdivision. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale, legacy, a new street, or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision; where appropriate to the context, subdivision also relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. The term shall also include the opening of a new street or road. The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots meet the standards of the county subdivision regulations are not included within this definition. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.510) 
16.20.520. - Surveyor. 
Surveyor means a registered, practicing surveyor, licensed by the State of Georgia. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.520) 
16.20.530. - Turnaround. 
Turnaround means the circular pavement at the end of a cul-de-sac. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.530) 
16.20.540. - Vicinity map. 
Vicinity map means a drawing incorporated in the preliminary plans covering a one-mile radius from the proposed subdivision. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.540) 
16.20.550. - Zoning regulations. 
Zoning regulations means the zoning regulations adopted by the county, codified in Title 17 of this Code. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § B101; Code 1991, § 16.08.550) 
CHAPTER 16.30. - PROCEDURES FOR SUBMITTAL OF PLANS AND PLAT RECORDATION 

 

16.30.010. - General procedure. 
When any subdivision of land is proposed, before any permit for the subdivision shall be granted, the subdividing owner, or his authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedures of this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 200; Code 1991, § 16.12.010) 
16.30.020. - Subdivision defined. 
A "subdivision" is the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale, legacy, a new street, or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision where appropriate to the context; "subdivision" also relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. The term shall also include the opening of a new street or road. The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots meet the standards of the county subdivision regulations are not included within this definition. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 101.1(a); Code 1991, § 16.12.020) 
16.30.030. - Plat approval required. 
No person shall sell or transfer any land by reference to or exhibition of or other use of a plat of a subdivision before such plat has been approved by the county planning director and recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county. The description of any land by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from this title. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 101.1(b); Code 1991, § 16.12.030) 
16.30.040. - Submittal of required plats. 
Any subdivider of land within unincorporated Hall County shall submit to the planning director the required plats of the subdivision, which shall conform to the requirements of this title. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 101.1(c); Code 1991, § 16.12.040) 
16.30.050. - Preliminary plat approval required. 
No subdivider shall proceed with any construction work on the proposed subdivision, including clearing of land, before obtaining a preliminary plat approval from the county planning commission. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 101.1(d); Code 1991, § 16.12.050) 
16.30.060. - Approved street access required for all lots. 
From and after the time when the platting jurisdiction of the planning commission shall have attached by virtue of adoption by the planning commission of a street plan and the adoption by the governing authority of the county of a set of land subdivision regulations recommended to them by the planning commission, no building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot within the subdivision unless the street giving access to the lot upon which said building is proposed to be placed shall have been accepted or opened as, or shall have otherwise received the legal status of, a public street prior to that time, or unless such street and lot corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by said planning commission, or on a street plat made and adopted by said planning commission, or a street located and accepted by the governing authority of the county. Any building erected in violation of this section shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the building official, county attorney, or other official designated by the governing authority of the county may bring appropriate action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 101.1(e); Code 1991, § 16.12.060) 
Cross reference— County road system, ch. 12.20; access design standards, § 16.50.040; street frontage requirements, § 17.240.130 et seq. 
16.30.070. - Exemptions from preliminary plat requirements. 
The following types of subdivision shall be exempted from the requirements of a preliminary plat and shall not be required to obtain a certificate of preliminary plat approval. The subdivision shall be required to obtain a recording and approval certificate as a final plat: 
A.  A subdivision which shall have lots fronting on a road or street shown on the official road map of the county; provided no new street, no community water system and no community sewer system is required. 
B.  The subdivision of land in a designated planned development meeting the requirements and having been approved by the county. 
C.  A subdivision in which all lots having frontage on a proposed street exceed 1.25 acres per lot shall be exempt from curb and gutter and the related storm drainage (for cross section see Plate 5 of the resolution codified in this section and on file in the office of the county clerk [and included at the end of this title]). Those lots which front on the proposed street may not thereafter be subdivided into lots smaller than 1.25 acres. A statement to this effect shall be placed on the final plat to be recorded. Additionally, those lots shall have a minimum lot width of 100 feet at the building line. The building line shall be measured at the minimum required setback line and shall be the shortest distance between the side property lines. Any lot which has at least 50 percent of its frontage on the radius section of a turnaround at the end of a street may measure the building line at a point beyond the minimum required setback line but in no case may the building line be less than 50 feet from the minimum required rear setback line. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 101.2; Code 1991, § 16.12.070) 
16.30.080. - Preapplication review. 
The owner, or his authorized design representative, shall review his plans with the planning director prior to submittal of a preliminary plat when the proposed subdivision involves a tract greater than 20 acres, any tract with a community water or sewer system or any tract in a planned development district with a proposed new street. The informal review shall be for the purposes of: 
A.  Review of the requirements of these regulations; and 
B.  Review of the owner's plans and the development's impact on soil erosion control, subdivision design, water supply and waste treatment. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 201.1; Code 1991, § 16.12.080) 
16.30.090. - Boundary survey required. 
The subdivider should present a boundary survey of the tract and a rough sketch of his proposal. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 201.2; Code 1991, § 16.12.090) 
16.30.100. - Submittal of plans to affected agencies. 
The planning director may require the developer to present his plans to any affected agency. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 201.3; Code 1991, § 16.12.100) 
16.30.110. - Preliminary plat application required. 
The owner or his authorized agent shall make application for preliminary plat approval to the planning director by filing in the office of the planning director the following items, if applicable, in sections 16.30.120 and 16.30.130. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 202.1; Code 1991, § 16.12.110) 
16.30.120. - Contents of preliminary plat application. 
The preliminary plat shall contain an application signed by the owner, setting out: 
A.  Total acreage; 
B.  Number of lots; 
C.  Average lot size; 
D.  Minimum lot size; 
E.  Proposed use of each lot; 
F.  Water supply system; 
G.  Sewer system; 
H.  Length of proposed roads; 
I.  Phasing of the subdivision; 
J.  Estimated time for completion; 
K.  An outline of any proposed organizations to control a portion or all of the tract, i.e., a homeowners' association or equivalent body; and 
L.  Notice of intent to dedicate any portion of the property to the public. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 202.1(a); Code 1991, § 16.12.120) 
16.30.130. - Preliminary plat; agency approvals and engineering certificate. 
The preliminary plat shall contain copies of the preliminary plat, drawn according to chapter 16.40, having affixed to them the stamps or signatures of the following applicable agencies or firms. A letter from an applicable agency may be submitted in lieu of a plat stamp: 
A.  Approval of the director of utilities if to be served by a public water system; 
B.  Approval of the department of natural resources and director of engineering if to be served by a community water system; 
C.  Approval of the director of utilities if to be served by a public sewer system; 
D.  Approval of the department of natural resources and director of engineering if to be served by a community sewer system; 
E.  Approval of the county health department; 
F.  Preliminary engineering certificate, signed and sealed by an engineer, surveyor or landscape architect registered in Georgia; 
G.  Approval for construction by the director of engineering. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 202.1(b); Code 1991, § 16.12.130) 
16.30.140. - Preliminary plat; review by planning director. 
The planning director shall review the application and submit it to the planning commission. The planning director may recommend changes that are necessary to meet the standards and intent of this title to serve the best interest of the county. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 203.1; Code 1991, § 16.12.140) 
16.30.150. - Preliminary plat; review by planning commission. 
The planning commission may: 
A.  Grant preliminary plat approval; or 
B.  Grant preliminary plat approval conditional upon any changes, which shall be noted on the preliminary plat or attached thereto; or 
C.  Deny preliminary plat approval, if the plat does not meet the standards and intent of this or any other regulations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 203.2; Code 1991, § 16.12.150) 
16.30.160. - Preliminary plat; notation of action. 
Action of the planning commission shall be noted on three copies of the preliminary plat. One copy of the plat shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 203.3; Code 1991, § 16.12.160) 
16.30.170. - Preliminary plat; expiration of approval. 
A certificate of preliminary plat approval shall expire 12 months following the date of approval. The applicant must have, at a minimum, received an approved grading inspection within the 12 months in order to continue work on the subdivision without an extension (see section 16.30.220). 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 203.4; Code 1991, § 16.12.170) 
16.30.180. - Preliminary plat; approval by planning director. 
The planning commission may grant the planning director authority to approve preliminary plats which meet all requirements of this [title] and any other applicable regulations. The director will present the approved plat to the planning commission at the next regular meeting to obtain formal approval of the plat. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 203.5; Code 1991, § 16.12.180) 
16.30.190. - Preliminary plat; appeals. 
Should an applicant disagree with the comments of the director, concluding that factual or interpretive errors have been made, the following appeal procedure is designed to resolve the issues: 
A.  Submit to the director a written statement clearly defining the nature of the disagreement, the specific reference to the section of these regulations at issue, and the applicant's own opinion. 
B.  Should the director, after review of the applicant's statement, conclude that neither these regulations nor other applicable regulations or conditions of zoning would be violated, the director shall modify his comments accordingly. However, should the director conclude that these or other applicable regulations would be violated, the case shall be referred to the planning commission at the earliest regularly scheduled meeting. 
C.  The planning commission shall, after receiving a report from the director, decide the issue. 
D.  Should the applicant disagree with the decision of the planning commission, an application may be filed (see chapter 16.130) to appeal the decision to the board of commissioners. This application shall constitute the final administrative appeal. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 203.6; Code 1991, § 16.12.190) 
16.30.200. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control permit; issuance. 
Following the approval of a preliminary plat, and review and approval by the planning department, a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit may be issued by the engineering department. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 204.1; Code 1991, § 16.12.200) 
Cross reference— Soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 8.40. 
16.30.210. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control permit; implementation of measures. 
Upon the issuance of a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit: 
A.  Erosion control measures must be installed by the subdivider and inspected and approved by the engineering department prior to any grubbing or grading; and 
B.  Sediment retention facilities must be installed and operational prior to major grading operations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 204.2; Code 1991, § 16.12.210) 
16.30.220. - Extension of time limit on development. 
Before a certificate of preliminary plat approval has expired, the subdivider may request an extension of the certificate. An application shall be made in writing to the planning commission. The planning commission shall take action on the application in the same manner as an original application. However, if modifications are made to regulations, the plat must meet these changes. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 205; Code 1991, § 16.12.220) 
_____
16.30.230. - Construction inspection schedule. 
Each phase of the subdivision shall be constructed according to the following schedule. Care should be taken to observe the schedule, as unnecessary delay and additional expense may result if the construction is varied substantially from the schedule. 
CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION 

 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 206.1; Code 1991, § 16.12.230; Res. of 4-13-00, § 1; Res. of 4-13-00) 
_____
16.30.240. - Completion of water and sewer installations. 
All underground water and sewer installations, including sewer cross taps to individual lots, shall be completed prior to the application of the base course. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 206.2; Code 1991, § 16.12.240) 
Cross reference— Water and sewer system requirements, ch. 16.80. 
16.30.250. - Inspection required. 
The inspection of all construction is required. The subdivider shall be responsible for notification of the inspection authority 24 hours prior to the covering of the work. Before reinspection of any subdivision development site by the county, the developer of such site shall pay the reinspection fee as established in Appendix "I" Hall County Plan Review and Inspection Fee Schedule if the reinspection is necessitated by the developer's failure to comply with these regulations. From time to time, upon the recommendation of the director of public works and utilities of Hall County, Georgia, and approval of the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, said schedule may be revised as deemed necessary. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 207.1; Code 1991, § 16.12.250; Res. of 8-22-13(3), § 2(Exh. B)) 
16.30.260. - Stages for notification of county engineering department. 
The county engineering department shall be notified: 
A.  At completion of clearing and grubbing and prior to grading; 
B.  Prior to covering stormwater drainage pipe; 
C.  At completion of grading and restaking the centerline prior to setting curb forms and line; 
D.  For subgrade and curbing inspection prior to application of base course; 
E.  At completion of the base course and prior to the application of the prime coat; 
F.  At completion of the prime coat and prior to the application of the paving course in order to schedule the presence of a county inspector during application of plant mix; 
G.  Upon construction of sidewalk formwork, prior to pouring of concrete. (Note: Inspections on sidewalks poured on a lot-by-lot basis are handled by county building inspections.) 
H.  After pouring and finishing of sidewalks. (Note: Inspections on sidewalks poured on a lot-by-lot basis are handled by county building inspections.) 
I.  At completion of shoulder reconstruction and shaping, prior to final seeding; 
J.  At completion of construction and final plat; 
K.  Fifteen months from acceptance of the maintenance bond or 75 percent build-out, whichever occurs last; (publicly maintained residential subdivisions) 
L.  One year from acceptance of maintenance bonds for paving only in any subdivision with roads built to industrial standards (depths of base and asphalt only); 
M.  One year from acceptance of the maintenance bond in privately maintained subdivisions and; 
N.  At such other times as the director of engineering should specify. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), deleted the former § 16.30.260, and enacted a new § 16.30.260 as set out herein. The former § 16.30.260 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
16.30.270. - Private utility inspection schedule. 
The owner of any utility serving a subdivision shall set its own inspection schedule. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 207.3; Code 1991, § 16.12.270) 
16.30.280. - Inspection of community water or sewer system. 
The inspection of any community water system or any community sewer system shall be as required by the director of engineering and the applicable state agency. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 207.4; Code 1991, § 16.12.280) 
16.30.290. - Use of testing agency. 
If tests of materials or construction are required, a recognized testing agency shall be used, and the owner of the subdivision shall bear any expense. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 207.5; Code 1991, § 16.12.290) 
16.30.300. - Final plat approval; generally. 
Whenever the provisions of these regulations have been complied with and while the certificate of preliminary plat approval is in effect, the subdivider may submit to the planning director, for final plat review and approval, the following items in sections 16.30.310 through 16.30.330. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 208; Code 1991, § 16.12.300) 
16.30.310. - Final plat approval; contents of application. 
The subdivider may submit an application signed by the subdivider, stating: 
A.  Total acreage; 
B.  Number of lots; 
C.  Minimum lot size; 
D.  Proposed use of each lot; 
E.  Water supply system; 
F.  Sewer system; 
G.  Length of proposed roads; 
H.  Phasing of the subdivision; 
I.  Estimated time for completion; 
J.  An outline of any proposed organizations to control a portion or all of the tract, i.e., a homeowners' association or equivalent body; and 
K.  Notice of intent to dedicate any portion of the property to the public. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 208.1(a); Code 1991, § 16.12.310) 
16.30.320. - Final plat approval; agency approvals and surveyor's certificate. 
The subdivider may submit copies of the final plat, drawn according to chapter 16.40, having affixed to them the stamps or signatures of the following applicable agencies or firms. A letter from an applicable agency may be submitted in lieu of a plat stamp: 
A.  Approval of the director of utilities if to be served by a public water system; 
B.  Approval of the department of natural resources and director of engineering if to be served by a community water system; 
C.  Approval of the director of utilities if to be served by a public sewer system; 
D.  Approval of the department of natural resources and director of engineering if to be served by a community sewer system; 
E.  Approval of the county health department; 
F.  Surveyor's certificate; 
G.  Approval of construction by the director of engineering. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 208.1(b); Code 1991, § 16.12.320) 
16.30.330. - Final plat approval; copy of improvement guarantee. 
The subdivider may submit a copy of any improvement guarantee for which provision is made in section 16.100.050.B. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 208.1(c); Code 1991, § 16.12.330) 
16.30.340. - Final plat review; review by planning director. 
The planning director shall review the final plat for compliance with these regulations, the zoning regulations, conditions of zoning, and the regulations of other county departments and state agencies, as appropriate. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 209.1; Code 1991, § 16.12.340) 
16.30.350. - Final plat review; compliance responsibility. 
The subdivider shall be responsible for compliance with all appropriate regulations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 209.2; Code 1991, § 16.12.350) 
16.30.360. - Final plat review; approval requirements and maintenance bond. 
Final approval by the planning director shall not be shown on the final plat until all requirements of these regulations have been met, and the director of engineering has certified by letter or endorsement on the plat that a maintenance bond (either in the form of a guaranty bond or cash deposited for the county in escrow), or an irrevocable letter of credit, has been received providing for the maintenance of all installations and improvements required by these regulations for a period of 15 months following the date of final plat approval for base, paving, grassing, stormwater management facilities, and sidewalks. Either a guaranty bond or escrow must be accompanied by completed forms provided by the county engineering department. Irrevocable letters of credit must be valid for a minimum 24 months from the date of issuance. 
Developers will need to re-bond for the cost of any sidewalks not completed at the 15-month time period for an additional nine months. 
Stormwater management facilities will need to be cleaned of silt accumulation and maintained as provided in [section] 8.150.110 prior to release of bonds. 
The amount of the bonding mechanism will equal 30 percent of all completed infrastructure including base, paving, grassing, stormwater management facilities, and sidewalks plus 100 percent of the cost of all incomplete infrastructure such as remaining sidewalks and asphalt topping. The unit cost data used in the calculations will be based upon the latest Georgia Department of Transportation (GADOT) Item Mean Summary, or the latest Hall County contract data, whichever is higher. 
Request for final acceptance and release of bonds can occur after all asphalt road construction has been in place for a minimum of one year, and all infrastructure is installed to the satisfaction of Hall County Engineering Division. Release of bonding mechanism may occur only upon a favorable vote by the Hall County Board of Commissioners. 
The director of engineering shall confirm that: 
A.  All improvements and installations to the subdivision required for approval of the final plat under the rules and regulations of the county have been completed in accordance with the appropriate specifications; and 
B.  All of the drainage and retention facilities, grading, water and sewer utilities, street base and curbing construction, and grassing required for approval of the final plat have been completed. 
(Res. No. 14-002, § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-14) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 14-002, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 23, 2014, deleted the former § 16.30.360 and enacted a new § 16.30.360 as set out herein. The former § 16.30.360 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
16.30.370. - Final plat review; certification of approval. 
When the planning director has approved the final plat and other affected departments and agencies of government as required have certified compliance and signed the original, the planning director shall certify by his signature on the plat that all of the requirements of these regulations, the zoning regulations, and the conditions of zoning approval have been met. The final plat shall not be deemed approved until it has been signed by the planning director and duly authorized representatives of the engineering department, water department and health department. The director will present the approved plat to the planning commission at the next regular meeting. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 209.4; Code 1991, § 16.12.370) 
16.30.380. - Issuance of certificates of occupancy. 
Where an improvement guarantee has been required for a subdivision, no certificate of occupancy for any building on any lot fronting a proposed road in the subdivision shall be issued prior to completion of improvements under the guarantee. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 210; Code 1991, § 16.12.380) 
16.30.390. - Final plat; revisions. 
No change, erasure, or revision shall be made on any preliminary or final plat, nor on accompanying data sheets, after approval of the planning commission has been endorsed in writing on the plat or sheets, unless authorization for such changes has been granted in writing by the planning commission. In no case shall the planning commission approve a revision thereof unless the fact that it is a revised plat is clearly stated thereon. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 211; Code 1991, § 16.12.390) 
16.30.400. - Final plat; filing for recordation. 
A.  An approved final plat shall be filed for recording by the subdivider in the office of the clerk of superior court within 60 days after final approval thereof. Otherwise, such approval shall be void. No clerk of superior court shall fine [file] or record a plat of a subdivision until such plat has been approved by the planning director. 
B.  The approval of a plat by the planning commission shall not be deemed to constitute or effect acceptance by the county of any street or other ground shown on the plat. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 212; Code 1991, § 16.12.400) 
16.30.410. - Final plat; recordation. 
The clerk of superior court shall file and record in his office maps or plats relating to real estate in the county. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 212.1; Code 1991, § 16.12.410) 
16.30.420. - Specifications for maps and plats. 
Maps or plats to be filed and recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court shall be prepared in accordance with the following minimum standards and specifications: 
A.  Material. 
1.  Any such maps or plats shall conform to the Georgia Plat Act, as amended; 
2.  When a map or plat is filed for recording, a legible original blue line print, which shall not be larger than 17 inches by 23 inches, shall be submitted to the clerk for microfilming. 
B.  Caption. The maps or plats shall have a title or name which shall be contained in the caption, and the caption shall also provide the following information: 
1.  The county, city, town, or village, land district and land lot, and subdivision, if the property lies within a particular subdivision; 
2.  The date of plat preparation; 
3.  The scale, stated and shown graphically; 
4.  The name of the land surveyor and his registration number. 
C.  Size. Maps or plats shall not be less than 8½ inches by 11 inches and not larger than 17 inches by 23 inches. 
D.  Data. Maps or plats shall be made in a professional manner and in accordance with the standards of good drafting procedures and shall show the following information, as specified: 
1.  All maps or plats shall show the direction and distance from a point of reference to a point on the boundary of the individual survey, and such additional data as may be required to relocate the boundary point from the point of reference with the same degree of accuracy required of the parcel surveyed. The point of reference shall be an established monument position which can be identified or relocated from maps, plats, or other documents on public record. 
2.  All maps or plats of boundary surveys or subdivision surveys shall show bearings and distances of all lines, and area of the parcels expressed in acres or square feet. 
3.  All maps or plats of boundary surveys shall show the closure precision of the field survey as the ratio of one foot to the traversed distance in which an error of one foot would occur and a statement as to the method of adjustment. The closure may be stated as follows: "The field data upon which this map or plat is based has a closure precision of one foot in _____ feet, and an angular error of _____ per angle point, and was adjusted using ___________ rule." 
4.  All maps or plats of boundary surveys shall show the closure precision of the data shown on the map or plat. The closure may be stated as follows: "This map or plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one foot in _____ feet." 
5.  All maps or plats shall show the width, and the former widths if pertinent, of all rights-of-way adjacent to or crossing the property or adjacent to any point of reference. 
6.  All maps or plats shall show easements and apparent encroachments, if pertinent. 
7.  In the case of curved lines, pertinent data must be given for regular curves. Chord distances and directions shall be given for irregular curves. 
8.  All land lot lines, land district lines, land section lines and city and county boundaries intersecting or adjacent to the surveyed property shall be indicated by lines drawn upon the map or plat with appropriate words and figures. 
9.  All corner markers and markers of pertinent reference points shall be fully described and indicated as to their material or types and shall be constructed of a permanent material such as iron, steel, concrete, or stone. 
10.  An arrow shall be shown on the map or plat to indicate the principal meridian, and a notation shall be made as to the reference of bearing to magnetic north, astronomic north, or grid north. A grid north reference shall indicate the zone. 
11.  All linear distances shown on maps or plats shall be horizontal. 
12.  All angular directions shown on maps or plats shall be represented in degrees and minutes. Where plats state or surveys require accuracy in excess of one in 5,000, the angular direction shall be represented in degrees, minutes, and seconds. All angular direction shall be referenced to the principal meridian. 
13.  A statement shall be shown on the map or plat to indicate the type of equipment used to obtain the linear and angular measurements used in the preparation of the map or plat. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 212.2; Code 1991, § 16.12.420) 
CHAPTER 16.40. - PLAT SPECIFICATIONS 

 

16.40.010. - Plat requirements generally. 
Plats submitted to the county planning commission shall contain the following information as specified in this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 300; Code 1991, § 16.16.010) 
16.40.020. - Preliminary plat; contents. 
All applications for a certificate of preliminary plat approval for a subdivision shall be accompanied by copies of the plat setting forth the proposed design of such subdivision. The original copy of such plat shall be drawn on a transparent medium with either black ink or soft pencil. The scale of such plats shall be not less than 100 feet to the inch. Such plats shall contain the following information: 
A.  Proposed name of subdivision; 
B.  Name and address of the owner of record; 
C.  Name, address, telephone number, seal, and signature of the registered engineer, surveyor or landscape architect responsible for the construction plans and surveyor responsible for the boundary survey; 
D.  Name, address, and telephone number of the subdivider; 
E.  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plat drawing, and space for revision dates; 
F.  Natural features within the proposed subdivision, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant features. On all water courses leaving the tract, the direction of flow shall be shown; 
G.  Cultural features within the proposed subdivision, including right-of-way and pavement widths, and names of existing and platted streets adjoining or abutting the subdivision, all easements, city and county lines and other significant information. Location and dimensions of bridges, utility lines and structures, buildings, culverts, cemeteries, and other features should also be indicated; 
H.  Location (land district and land lot) and acreage; 
I.  Location sketch locating the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as major thoroughfares, railroads or others. Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch; 
J.  Name of former subdivision, and the plat book and page numbers where it was recorded, of any or all of the preliminary plat that has been previously subdivided; 
K.  The location and specifications of proposed streets, including right-of-way lines, proposed roadbed type, roadbed width, and proposed grades; 
L.  Exact boundary lines of the tract indicated by a heavy line giving lengths and bearings; 
M.  Proposed layout, including lot lines with rough dimensions, lot numbers, block letters, street lines with letter designations for proposed street names, right-of-way widths, and sites reserved through covenants, easements, dedication or otherwise for public uses, for single family dwellings, for nonresidential uses, and for multifamily dwellings; 
N.  Contour lines based on sea level datum. These shall be drawn at intervals of five feet for hilly terrain (slopes greater than ten percent), two feet for rolling terrain (two percent to ten percent) and one foot for flat terrain (slopes less than two percent). Contour lines shall be based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods for aerial photographs. The basis for the topographic contour shown shall be specified. Topographic data based on geological survey maps which have been adjusted by field survey data may be accepted if the director of engineering determines that such data will be adequate to evaluate the layout of lots and streets, drainage and other service requirements; 
O.  The preliminary plan of any existing and proposed water lines, sanitary sewers and storm sewers. Such plans shall include the proposed size of the pipe to be installed and the proposed percent grades of the lines of all sewers; 
P.  The distance and direction to public water lines and sanitary sewer lines; 
[Q.  Reserved;] 
R.  Location of drainage easements for all storm drain facilities, outlets, and subsequent drainage ways, streams and at other locations as required; 
S.  Proposed unit division or stage development, if any, as proposed by the subdivider; 
T.  Location and results of percolation tests for lots which will not be served by a public or community sanitary sewer system, as required by the health department; 
U.  Location or statement of flood hazard areas; 
V.  Such other information as may be required by the health department and planning commission to determine whether or not the proposed design of the subdivision will conform to the design requirements of these regulations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 301; Code 1991, § 16.16.020) 
16.40.030. - Preliminary plat; supplemental information. 
The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by the following information when same is not shown on or evident from the preliminary plat: 
A.  A written summary of the proposal giving information as to the overall development plan, giving type of structure, number of dwelling units, and types of business and industry, so that the effects of the development can be determined by the planning commission; 
B.  Source of water supply; 
C.  Statement of provision for sewage disposal and drainage; 
D.  Drainage information: 
1.  Location and size of all proposed drainage structures; 
2.  Acreage of drainage area; 
3.  Location of land subject to flooding; 
E.  Engineering data as listed below: 
1.  A ground run profile of proposed streets shall show original centerline elevations. The profile shall be drawn on standard plan and profile sheets with the plan section showing street layout, curvature and drainage required; 
2.  Where sanitary or storm sewers are to be installed, size of pipe and location of manholes shall be indicated on the street profile; 
3.  Profiles of streets that are extensions of existing streets shall include elevations at 50-foot intervals for a minimum distance of 200 feet back of beginning point and forward of ending, or such additional distance as may be required by the engineering department; 
4.  The above plans shall be drawn to a scale no less than as follows: a horizontal scale of one inch to 100 feet, and a vertical scale of one inch to ten feet; 
5.  Cross-sections at all cross drain locations extending 25 feet beyond the pipe: a horizontal scale of one inch to ten feet, and a vertical scale of one inch to ten feet; 
6.  Where a proposed street construction limits [or] abuts the plat boundary, cross-sections and the necessary slope easement shall be submitted. A slope easement shall also be submitted under such other conditions as may be required by the director of engineering; 
7.  Municipal, county, or land lot lines tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse the subdivision; 
8.  Exact locations, widths, and names of all streets within and immediately adjoining the plat; 
9.  Street centerlines showing stations and standard curve data of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature; 
10.  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest foot, and minimum lot area; 
11.  Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically; 
12.  Name of each street; 
13.  Minimum setback lines on all lots and other sites; 
14.  Location and description of monuments; 
15.  Names of recorded owners of adjoining unplatted land; 
16.  Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record name, data, and number, when known; 
17.  Certification by a surveyor certifying to accuracy of the survey and plat; 
18.  Militia district and, when applicable, the land lot number; 
19.  When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at angles other than 90 degrees, the lot width at the building line shall be shown; 
20.  When the subdivided property abuts Buford Dam Reservoir property or easement, the 1,071-foot contour line shall be shown and designated "Lake Sidney Lanier—Normal Lake Level" and the 1,085-foot contour line shall be shown and designated "Lake Sidney Lanier—Maximum Lake Level"; 
21.  Location, dimension and purpose of all drainage structures and of any easements, including slope easements, if required, and public utility right-of-way lines, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use of sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purpose and limitations; and of any areas to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners; 
22.  Places for certificates and statements specified in sections 16.40.060 and 16.40.070; 
23.  Plans must show clearly the elevation and/or contour of the 100-year floodplain of any stream or backwater area on the site. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 5, 6(Exh. C)) 
Editor's note— Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 5, 6(Exh. C), deleted the former § 16.40.030, and enacted a new § 16.40.030 as set out herein. The former § 16.40.030 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
16.40.040. - Contents of final plat. 
All applications for a recording permit shall be accompanied by electronic plans (CAD) and paper copies of the final plat of the subdivision to be recorded. The submitted prints of such final plat shall be not greater than 17 inches by 23 inches at a scale of not less than 200 feet to the inch. Where necessary, the final plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. The final plat shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name of the subdivision; 
B.  Name and address of owner of record; 
C.  Name and address of subdivider; 
D.  Date of plat drawing, graphic scale, north point, and notation as to the reference of bearings to magnetic, true north, or grid north; 
E.  Location of tract (militia district, land district and land lot), giving the area of each individual lot; 
F.  Primary control point to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on the plat shall be referred; 
G.  Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other right-of-way and property lines of all lots with accurate dimensions; bearings or deflection angles, radii arcs, and central angles of all curves; 
H.  Name of each street; 
I.  Minimum setback lines on all lots and other sites; 
J.  Location and description of monuments; 
K.  Names of recorded owners of adjoining unplatted land; 
L.  Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record name, date, and number, when known; 
M.  Certification by surveyor as to accuracy of the survey and plat; 
N.  Lot lines with dimensions and lot area; 
O.  When the tract of land to be subdivided abuts on U.S. government property, then the final plat of the subdivided land shall show a tie or ties of land lot lines conforming to U.S. government take line descriptions; 
P.  When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at angles other than 90 degrees, the lot width at the building line shall be shown; 
Q.  Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. In general, all lots should be numbered in numerical sequence without using block letters; 
R.  When the subdivided property abuts Buford Dam Reservoir property or easement, the 1,071-foot contour line shall be shown and designated "Lake Sidney Lanier—Normal Lake Level" and the 1,085-foot contour line shall be shown and designated "Lake Sidney Lanier—Maximum Lake Level"; 
S.  Location, dimensions and purpose of entire drainage, sewerage, water and public utilities systems and of any easements, including slope easements, if required, and public utility right-of-way lines, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use of sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purpose and limitations, and of any areas to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners; 
T.  Places for certificates and statements specified in section 16.40.070. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 7, 8(Exh. D)) 
Editor's note— Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 7, 8(Exh. D), deleted the former § 16.40.040, and enacted a new § 16.40.040 as set out herein. The former § 16.40.040 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
16.40.050. - Conformity of final and preliminary plat. 
The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the staging established in preliminary plat procedure and to the requirements of these rules and regulations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 304; Code 1991, § 16.16.050) 
16.40.060. - Preliminary plat certificates. 
Each preliminary plat submitted to the planning commission shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped thereon substantially as follows: 
A.  Preliminary engineering certificate. 
I hereby certify that this proposed Development Plat correctly represents construction plans completed by me on ________, 19___. 
By ___________, Registered P.E., Surveyor or Landscape Architect 
Number _____ 
Date ________ 
B.  Certificate of preliminary plat approval. 
All requirements of the county subdivision regulations relative to the preparation and submittal of a Preliminary Plat having been fulfilled, approval of this plat is hereby granted, subject to further provisions of said regulations. This Certificate shall expire ________. 
Name  _____ Chairman, Planning Commission 
Date ________ 
C.  Development Plat—Not to be Recorded. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 305.1; Code 1991, § 16.16.060) 
16.40.070. - Final plat certificates. 
Each final plat submitted to the planning director for approval shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped thereon substantially as follows: 
A.  Surveyor's certificate. 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "Future," and their location, size, type, and material are correctly shown; and that all relevant requirements of the Hall County Zoning and Subdivision Regulations have been met. 
By ;hg; _____ Registered Ga. Land Surveyor 
Number _____ 
Date ________ 
B.  Owner's dedication certificate (when appropriate). 
(STATE OF GEORGIA) or (COUNTY OF HALL) 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed thereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey and dedicates to the use of the public forever, all streets, parks, drains, easements, and public grounds thereon shown, which comprise a total of _____ acres, for the purposes therein expressed. 
Owner ___________ 
Date ________ 
C.  Place for approval of director of engineering. 
D.  Place for approval of the county health department. 
E.  Place for approval of the county planning director as follows: 
Pursuant to the Hall County Subdivision Regulations, this plat is given final approval by the Hall County Planning Director. All of the conditions of approval having been completed, this document is hereby accepted and this approval granted under the authority of said Regulations. 
Name ___________  Planning Director 
Date ________ 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 305; Code 1991, § 16.16.070) 
16.40.080. - Planned development. 
A.  The standards and requirements of this title may be modified in the case of a plan and program for a community or neighborhood unit or planned development which is not divided into customary lots, blocks and streets, which in the judgment of the planning commission provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated, provided density standards for the entire tract are not exceeded, and which also provides such covenants or other legal procedures as will assure conformity to the achievement of the plan. Plans for such development shall be submitted to and approved by the planning commission and board of commissioners whether or not such plat is to be recorded, and no building permit shall be issued until such approval has been given. 
B.  Prior to processing such a planned development, the developer shall indicate his willingness to increase the processing time specified. However, in no case shall the planning commission authorize a use prohibited in the district in which the project is to be located, or a smaller lot area per dwelling unit than the minimum required in such district. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 306; Code 1991, § 16.16.080) 
Cross reference— Zoning regulations, tit. 17; planned development district, ch. 17.180. 
CHAPTER 16.50. - GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

 

16.50.010. - Minimum design standards. 
All subdivisions hereafter established shall be developed in accordance with the minimum design standards and requirements set forth in this title. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 400; Code 1991, § 16.20.010) 
16.50.020. - Suitability of land. 
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, or erosion, or which is for topographical, geological or other reasons unsuitable for residential use, shall not be platted for residential use or for any other uses that will continue to increase the danger to health, safety, or property destruction, unless the hazards can be corrected. Determination will be made by study of topographic maps, inspecting of the subdivision and/or discussion in a regular meeting of the planning commission. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 401; Code 1991, § 16.20.020) 
16.50.030. - Name of subdivision. 
The name of the subdivision must have the approval of the commission. The name shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 402; Code 1991, § 16.20.030) 
16.50.040. - Access. 
Access to every subdivision lot shall be provided over a public road or over a common access driveway which meets the standards set forth in the driveway regulations. The planning commission may control access to freeway, expressway, arterial, and collector roads by requiring all buildings to face and have access to only minor roads. (See planning department for guidelines.) In any subdivision not involving the construction of new roads and in any minor subdivision (as defined by the Hall County zoning regulations), all new lots accessing a road designated as an arterial or collector shall have a minimum frontage of 150 feet. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 403; Res. of 3-22-93, § 1; Code 1991, § 16.20.040) 
Cross reference— Driveway construction, ch. 12.40; approved street access required for all lots, § 16.30.060; lot area and setback requirements, ch. 17.240. 
16.50.050. - Through traffic. 
Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 404; Code 1991, § 16.20.050) 
16.50.060. - Continuation of existing street pattern. 
Whenever topography, ownership, and design objectives will permit, the street pattern within a subdivision shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of the existing street pattern in the section of the county involved. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 405; Code 1991, § 16.20.060) 
16.50.070. - Conformance to comprehensive plan. 
All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the comprehensive plan and development policies in effect at the time of submission. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 406.1; Code 1991, § 16.20.070) 
16.50.080. - Reservation of public spaces; required. 
Where features of the comprehensive plan such as school sites, parks, streets, other than local subdivision streets, or other public spaces are located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, or when these features have not been anticipated by the comprehensive plan and planning policy, but are considered essential by the planning director, such features may be dedicated, or in lieu of dedication shall be reserved by the subdivider. Whenever such reserved land, or any portion thereof, is not acquired, optioned, or condemned by the appropriate public agency within a six-month period from the date of recording the subdivision or by the next budget year, whichever is the longer period of time, the subdivider may claim the original reservation, or portion thereof, and cause it to be subdivided in a manner suitable to the subdivider, subject to the provisions of these rules and regulations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 406.2; Code 1991, § 16.20.080) 
16.50.090. - Reservation of public spaces; waiver. 
The planning director may waive the platting and reservation requirements whenever the public body responsible for land acquisition executes a written release stating that such a planned feature is not being acquired. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 406.3; Code 1991, § 16.20.090) 
16.50.100. - Reservation of public spaces; denial of plat. 
The planning director shall disapprove plats when such planned features, as specified by the comprehensive plan, are not incorporated into the plat. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 406.4; Code 1991, § 16.20.100) 
16.50.110. - Suitability of land dedicated for public use. 
Whenever the plat proposes the dedication of land to public use and the planning director or the appropriate agency finds that such land is not required or suitable for public use, the planning director may either refuse to approve said plat or he may require the rearrangement of lots to include such land. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 406.5; Code 1991, § 16.20.110) 
16.50.120. - Most restrictive standards apply. 
Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions required herein and those contained in zoning regulations, the building code, or other official regulations or resolutions, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 407; Code 1991, § 16.20.120) 
16.50.130. - Subdivisions adjacent to or containing dams. 
The subdividing of land, any portion of which is or will be adjacent to a proposed or existing dam, shall be such that: 
A.  Subdivision lots shall have a minimum of 50 feet frontage on a street dedicated to public use which meets the requirements for acceptance into, or which is part of, the county road maintenance system. 
B.  Such lots shall be accessible by streets which meet the requirements for acceptance into, or which are currently part of, the county road maintenance system. 
C.  There shall be no lots which are accessible only by use of a street or streets which cross a proposed or existing dam. 
D.  No lot shall be allowed on any portion of an entire street which crosses a proposed or existing dam unless such lot fronts on a street which meets the requirements for acceptance into, or which is part of, the county road maintenance system. 
E.  There shall be no dwellings or other buildings designed for human occupancy below any dam within the breach floodway of the dam. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 408; Code 1991, § 16.20.130) 
16.50.140. - Construction of streets on railroad rights-of-way. 
The subdivider shall be responsible for obtaining all permits and paying all costs associated with the construction of a subdivision street on railroad rights-of-way. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 409; Code 1991, § 16.20.140) 
16.50.150. - Alternate design standards. 
Alternate design standards for subdivision streets shall be considered only in planned residential developments. Each alternate design must be justified in writing by the registered engineer, surveyor or landscape architect. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 410; Code 1991, § 16.20.150) 
CHAPTER 16.60. - STREETS AND OTHER RIGHTS-OF-WAY[3] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and public places, tit. 12; county road system, ch. 12.20; minimum rights-of-way, ch. 12.30. 

16.60.010. - Continuation of existing streets. 
All proposed streets must connect to a state or county maintained road, and have a uniform cross-section for the entire length of the proposed street. Existing streets shall be continued at the same cross-section as required by these regulations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 500.1; Code 1991, § 16.24.010) 
16.60.020. - Connections with future subdivisions. 
Streets may be reserved at strategic locations to provide for future access to adjoining properties which may be subdivided in the future. Each street connection shall intersect property lines at a 90-degree angle through the adjacent lot if streets are reserved. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 500.2; Code 1991, § 16.24.020) 
16.60.030. - Street names. 
Street names shall require the approval of the planning director. Streets that are obviously in alignment with streets already in existence and already named shall be given the name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing streets. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 500.3; Code 1991, § 16.24.030) 
16.60.040. - Development along major street, limited-access highway or railroad right-of-way. 
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an expressway, freeway, arterial or collector street, or a railroad right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way either as a marginal access street, or at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of intervening land, with a nonaccess reservation, suitably planted. Due regard should be given requirements for approach grades and future grade separations in determining distances. Lots shall have no access to expressways, freeways, or arterial streets, but only to an accessible street, in which case the planning commission may require double-frontage lots. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 500.4; Code 1991, § 16.24.040) 
16.60.050. - Reserve strips. 
Reserve strips controlling the access to streets shall be permitted except in situations where the planning commission determines that the reserve strip prohibits an adjoining property owner from having adequate and safe access to an existing county road or that the reserve strip would prevent proper design of a road system for the adjoining property. Reserve strips must be combined with a lot or lots within the subdivision. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 501; Code 1991, § 16.24.050) 
16.60.060. - Additional width on existing street. 
Subdivisions that abut existing county-maintained streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way if needed to meet the minimum street right-of-way width requirements set forth below. Subdivisions that abut existing non-county maintained ways are exempt from the right-of-way dedication requirement. 
A.  The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the existing streets. 
B.  When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way, measured from the centerline of the existing roadway, shall be provided. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 502; Code 1991, § 16.24.060; Res. of 3-6-2018(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
16.60.070. - Street jogs. 
Street jogs or centerline offsets in the horizontal alignment of streets across intersections of less than 200 feet shall be prohibited. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 503; Code 1991, § 16.24.070; Res. of 1-11-01, § 2) 
16.60.080. - Angle of intersection. 
Whenever feasible, streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. No street shall intersect with any other street at an angle of less than 75 degrees or at a grade of greater than three percent. This angle and grade must be implemented for a distance of no less than 50 feet, measured from the edge of pavement of the intersecting road. The angle of intersection shall be measured at the intersection of street centerlines. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 504.1; Code 1991, § 16.24.080; Res. of 1-11-01, § 3) 
16.60.090. - Intersection sight distance. 
This is the sight distance available to a stopped vehicle entering the intersecting roadway. Where necessary, back slopes shall be flattened and horizontal or vertical curves lengthened to provide the minimum required intersection sight distance. Intersection sight distance must meet current AASHTO design standards. 
Intersection sight distance for a passenger vehicle is measured assuming a driver's eye height of three and one-half feet above the roadway surface 14½ feet from the travel way to an object three and one-half feet above the intersecting road surface in the appropriate approach lane. (Plate 14—[codified at the end of this title and on file in the office of the county clerk.]) 
If there is no posted speed limit then the 85th percentile speed shall be used in determining the minimum required intersection sight distance. 
PASSENGER VEHICLE INTERSECTION SIGHT DISTANCE TABLE: 

 
Note: The above table is for roadways with two lanes and grades of three percent or less. If the geometric configuration differs or if the development is commercial in nature, adjustment factors must be applied, as approved by the Hall County Traffic Engineer. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 9, 10(Exh. E)) 
Editor's note— Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 9, 10(Exh. E), deleted the former § 16.60.090, and enacted a new § 16.60.090 as set out herein. The former § 16.60.090 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
16.60.095. - Stopping sight distance. 
This sight distance is the length of the roadway ahead that is visible to a driver and shall be sufficient to enable an approaching vehicle traveling at or near the design speed to stop before reaching a stationary object in its path. Minimum stopping sight distance shall be provided to account for vehicles waiting to turn from the existing roadway into the proposed roadway and along all portions of the proposed roadway. Stopping sight distance must meet current AASHTO design standards. 
STOPPING SIGHT DISTANCE TABLE: 

 
Note: In computing and measuring the stopping sight distance, the height of the driver's eye is three and one-half feet and the height of an object to be seen by the driver is two feet. If there is no posted speed limit then the 85th percentile speed shall be used (Plate 15—[codified at the end of this title and on file in the office of the county clerk.]). 
(Res. of 1-8-09(4), § 11(Exh. F)) 
16.60.100. - Property lines at intersections. 
Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of 30 feet or miter of not less than 30 feet from the projected corner of the intersecting right-of-way lines. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 505; Code 1991, § 16.24.100) 
16.60.110. - Temporary dead-end streets. 
Temporary dead-end streets shall be provided with a temporary turn around area which shall meet the construction requirements for design (sidewalks, curb and gutter not required), maintenance, and removal. If the absence of curb and gutter on a temporary cul-de-sac creates a drainage problem, the developer will be required to install appropriate stormwater conveyance devices with concurrence from Hall County Engineering. No lots shall be subdivided off any radius of a temporary turnaround. A performance bond is required, and the cul-de-sac must either be removed and the new phase of construction final platted, or the cul-de-sac must be completed (including sidewalks, and curb and gutter) within 15 months or 75 percent buildout, whichever occurs last, from time of final platting. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 12, 13(Exh. G)) 
Editor's note— Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 12, 13(Exh. G), deleted the former § 16.60.110, and enacted a new § 16.60.110 as set out herein. The former § 16.60.110 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
16.60.120. - Median design. 
Median width and length proposed by the developer shall be to county specifications. Minimum curb radius shall be three feet. No median shall be approved which contains less than 100 square feet inside the back of curb. Median breaks shall be required at intervals specified by the director of engineering. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 507.1; Code 1991, § 16.24.120) 
16.60.130. - Minimum sight clearance. 
Median curb shall be not less than 14 feet from pavement or back of curb of an intersecting street. The median shall not encroach into right-of-way of an intersecting street. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 507.2; Code 1991, § 16.24.130) 
16.60.140. - Pavement width. 
Pavement width at the median section shall be 14 feet for residential and commercial streets, both with nine-foot shoulders. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 507.3; Code 1991, § 16.24.140) 
16.60.150. - Street tapering around median. 
Pavement edge shall have a minimum curve of 20-foot radius. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 507.4; Code 1991, § 16.24.150) 
16.60.160. - Width of right-of-way. 
A.  Curbed streets. The right-of-way shall be a minimum of 13 feet from the back-of-curb, and the total width shall be evenly divisible by ten feet with a variable width taper. 
B.  Noncurbed streets. The right-of-way shall be a minimum of 17 feet from the edge-of-pavement, and the total width shall be evenly divisible by ten feet with a variable width taper. 
C.  Standard culs-de-sac. The right-of-way shall extend to a minimum 60-foot radius measured from the center of the cul-de-sac, and the total width shall be evenly divisible by ten feet. 
D.  Island cul-de-sac, design number 1. The outside right-of-way shall be a minimum of 13 feet from the back of curb, and the total width shall be evenly divisible by ten feet with a variable width taper. The land inside the cul-de-sac island will be entirely county right-of way. 
E.  Island cul-de-sac, design number 2. The right-of-way shall be a minimum of 13 feet from the back-of-curb, and the total width shall be evenly divisible by ten feet with a variable width taper. The right-of-way will extend this distance outward from the outside curb and toward the center of the island as measured from the interior curb. The remaining land on the interior of the island will be "common land" as defined in section 16.20.110. 
F.  Roundabouts. The right-of-way shall extend to a minimum 80-foot radius measured from the center of the roundabout, and the total width shall be evenly divisible by ten feet. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 14, 15(Exh. H)) 
Editor's note— Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 14, 15(Exh. H), deleted the former § 16.60.160, and enacted a new § 16.60.160 as set out herein. The former § 16.60.160 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
16.60.170. - Structures over street. 
Structures over the street are not permitted. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 507.6; Code 1991, § 16.24.170) 
16.60.180. - Planting materials. 
Plants and shrubbery shall be low maintenance, disease-resistant materials with branching habits such that plants shall not interfere with vehicular movement. Trees planted in medians, island cul-de-sacs, and street rights-of-way must be approved by Hall County Engineering prior to installation. Hall County may remove median plantings at any time in the future if the plantings pose a traffic or safety problem. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 507.7; Code 1991, § 16.24.180; Res. of 1-11-01, § 6) 
16.60.190. - Maintenance. 
Maintenance shall be the responsibility of the subdivider or a homeowners' association. The completed covenants for the subdivision and any documents establishing a property owners' association shall be submitted for review. These documents shall include a provision that would assure maintenance of the median. These documents shall be recorded simultaneously with the final plat and/or prior to the sale of any lots within the subdivision. If the median ceases to be maintained for any reason, the county shall have the option of removing same without notification. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 507.8; Code 1991, § 16.24.190) 
_____
16.60.200. - Design standards for streets. 
A.  Design standard chart. 

 
Note 1. Sag vertical curves located at stop condition intersections may be as short as 65 feet with Hall County Engineering approval for the purposes of minimizing cut. 
Note 2. Nonresidential design speed is to be determined by Hall County Traffic Engineering. 
B.  Island culs-de-sac. 
1.  Plates 8 and 9 depict two designs of acceptable island cul-de-sac designs. Alternative island cul-de-sac designs other than those depicted in the Plates are acceptable, with approval from Hall County Engineering and Traffic Engineering. Sufficient data must be provided to Hall County to show that emergency vehicles, school buses, and other vehicular traffic can safely circumnavigate the cul-de-sac. Hall County will also review drainage, sight distance, and other engineering aspects of the island cul-de-sac prior to permitting. 
2.  Islands inside the perimeter of the culs-de-sac may contain appropriate plantings, landscape berms, and sidewalks, provided all are shown on the preliminary subdivision plans for approval. Stormwater management facilities, such as constructed wetlands or ponds, may be located on the islands, provided the facility offers an aesthetic or recreational benefit to the community. No structures may be located on the island without prior approval by Hall County Engineering. 
3.  The maintenance of the land inside an island cul-de-sac (other than stormwater management facilities that have been accepted by Hall County) shall be the responsibility of the subdivider, homeowner's association, or property owners. 
C.  Roundabouts. Roundabout designs are acceptable, with approval from Hall County Engineering and Traffic Engineering. Sufficient data must be provided to Hall County to show that all vehicular traffic up to and including design vehicle WB-67. Hall County will also review drainage, sight distance, and other engineering aspects of the roundabout prior to permitting. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 16, 17(Exh. I)) 
Editor's note— Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 16, 17(Exh. I), deleted the former § 16.60.200, and enacted a new § 16.60.200 as set out herein. The former § 16.60.200 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
_____
16.60.210. - Utilities; general requirements. 
Applicants may locate all utility facilities underground throughout the subdivision. All existing and proposed utility easements outside of road rights-of-way shall be shown on the preliminary and final plats. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 509.1; Code 1991, § 16.24.210) 
Cross reference— Utility franchises and easements, ch. 12.50; water and sewer system requirements for subdivisions, ch. 16.80. 
16.60.220. - Utilities; location. 
All utilities shall be located in accordance with the standard detail drawing for utility location within the right-of-way of subdivisions as shown on Plate 4 and Plate 4A and shall be shown on the typical roadway section of the preliminary plans. Hall County strongly encourages the utilization of a joint trench for the power, telephone, fiber optic, and cable lines. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 509.2; Code 1991, § 16.24.220; Res. of 1-11-01, § 8) 
16.60.230. - Utilities; width of easements along rear or side lot lines. 
Utility easements for sewage lines, water lines, or other such utilities located along rear lot lines or side lot lines or passing through a lot shall be at least 20 feet wide, ten feet on each lot, and more if necessary. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 509.3; Code 1991, § 16.24.230) 
16.60.240. - Streets to connect to publicly maintained road. 
All subdivision streets must connect to a city, state or county-maintained public road. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 510; Code 1991, § 16.24.240) 
16.60.250. - Dams. 
The following regulations apply to dams and streets constructed on or near dams: 
A.  The county will not accept into the county road maintenance system any part of the entire street in which a section of the street crosses over a dam. 
B.  No street shall be designed or constructed below any dam within the breach floodway of the dam. 
C.  All dam design plans must be approved by the director of engineering and the department of natural resources in accordance with the Safe Dam Act. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 511; Code 1991, § 16.24.250) 
16.60.260. - One-way streets. 
One-way streets are allowed provided the centerline length is no greater than 400 feet and curve radii are no less than 82 feet. The one-way street must be constructed as a loop road that commences and terminates on the same road. 
Plate 10 depicts an acceptable example of a one-way loop road. Plates 1B and 4B show proper cross-sections and utility locations of one-way loop roads respectively. Other designs are acceptable with approval from Hall County Engineering and Hall County Traffic Engineering. 
Islands inside the perimeter of the one-way loop road may contain appropriate plantings, landscape berms, and sidewalks, provided all are shown on the preliminary subdivision plans for approval. Stormwater management facilities, such as constructed wetlands or ponds, may be located on the islands, provided the facility offers an aesthetic or recreational benefit to the community. No structures may be located on the island without the prior approval by Hall County Engineering. 
The maintenance of the land inside the one-way loop road (other than stormwater management facilities that have been accepted by Hall County) shall be the responsibility of the subdivider, homeowner's association, or property owners. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 512; Code 1991, § 16.24.260; Res. of 1-11-01, § 9) 
16.60.270. - Property monuments. 
All property monuments along the street right-of-way shall be set with a tolerance of 1.0 feet from the constructed street center line. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 513; Code 1991, § 16.24.270) 
16.60.280. - Utility easement required along certain streets. 
A five-foot perpetual utility easement shall be provided on both sides of residential streets and turnarounds where the right-of-way is 50 feet (see Plate 1 of the resolution codified in this section and on file in the office of the county clerk [and included at the end of this title]). 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 514; Code 1991, § 16.24.280) 
Cross reference— Utility franchises and easements, ch. 12.50. 
16.60.290. - Deceleration lanes and left-turn lanes. 
A.  Subdivisions with greater than 24 lots will be required to have a deceleration lane constructed in accordance with current Hall County Engineering and Traffic Engineering specifications (Plate 16—[codified at the end of this title and on file in the office of the county clerk.]). The Hall County Traffic Engineer may waive or require the installation of a deceleration lane for subdivisions regardless of lot number based upon traffic and safety considerations. 
B.  Left-turn lanes will be constructed in accordance with current Hall County Engineering and Traffic Engineering specifications (Plate 17—[codified at the end of this title and on file in the office of the county clerk.]) when warranted by the following table: 

 
C.  The Hall County Traffic Engineer may waive or require the installation of a left-turn lane, regardless of average daily traffic (ADT) or number of lots, based upon traffic and safety considerations. 
D.  For those developments that a turn lane is required and the development is proposed in phases, construction of the turn lane is required prior to platting 100 lots or more. 
E.  Additional right-of-way and/or easements necessary for the installation of decel and/or left-turn lanes will be acquired by and will be the financial responsibility of the developer. 
F.  A signed and recorded frontage and/or radius encroachment agreement with applicable property owners will be required if any portion of the access extends beyond the development's road frontage. 
Note— Plates 14—17 are not set out herein and can be found on file with the county clerk. 
(Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 18, 19(Exh. J)) 
Editor's note— Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 18, 19(Exh. J), deleted the former § 16.60.290, and enacted a new § 16.60.290 as set out herein. The former § 16.60.290 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
CHAPTER 16.70. - STREET CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and public places, tit. 12; county road system, ch. 12.20; driveway construction, ch. 12.40; mobile home and travel trailer parks, ch. 17.310. 

16.70.010. - Minimum construction standards generally. 
The subdivision regulations and mobile home and travel trailer park regulations require that all streets be built to minimum standards of material and construction. Several optional materials and types of construction may be used, as set out in this chapter. (For the specific cross section design, see Plates 1 and 2 of the resolution codified in this section and on file in the office of the county clerk [and included at the end of this title].) 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A100; Code 1991, § 16.28.010) 
16.70.020. - Minimum construction standards; clearing and grubbing operations. 
Clearing and grubbing operations shall remove all vegetative materials within the construction limits. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A200.1; Code 1991, § 16.28.020) 
16.70.030. - Minimum construction standards; subsurface drainage installations. 
Subsurface drainage installations may be required by the director of engineering to provide a stable subsurface and base for fills and base course construction over wet weather springs, soft spots, swamps and other unsuitable soils. The director of engineering may request the owner to have a soil analysis and drainage design performed by an engineering firm. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A200.2; Code 1991, § 16.28.030) 
16.70.040. - Minimum construction standards; street grading. 
Street grading shall be accomplished according to section 16.70.170. The director of engineering may vary the required slope. Cut and fills shall be extended beyond the right-of-way as required. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A200.3; Code 1991, § 16.28.040) 
16.70.050. - Minimum construction standards; drainage generally. 
Drainage shall be accomplished according to sections 16.70.180 through 16.70.220. The minimum cross drain shall be no less than 18 inches in diameter. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A200.4; Code 1991, § 16.28.050) 
16.70.060. - Minimum construction standards; subbase stabilization. 
Subbase stabilization may be required by the director of engineering, according to sections 16.70.230 through 16.70.270, if necessary to allow convenient access of construction vehicles and equipment. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A200.5; Code 1991, § 16.28.060) 
16.70.070. - Minimum construction standards; shaping and backfilling of shoulders, ditches and slopes. 
Shaping and backfilling of shoulders, ditches and slopes shall be accomplished to final grade lines following the installation of underground utilities by the owner. Care shall be taken to fill settled or eroded areas. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A200.6; Code 1991, § 16.28.070) 
16.70.080. - Minimum construction standards; vegetative cover. 
Grassing of all cleared portions of the shoulders and slopes shall be accomplished immediately following the achievement of final grade lines. If limitations require the application of temporary vegetative cover, the owner shall make contractual provisions for regrassing with permanent cover. Requirements for grass species, mixture, fertilizer and application methods in each individual subdivision shall be in accordance with the Soil Conservation Service standards for critical areas. Bermuda grass shall be required during the season from May through September. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A200.7; Code 1991, § 16.28.080) 
16.70.090. - Minimum construction standards; concrete curbs and gutters. 
Concrete curb and gutter is required in accordance with the designs set out in this chapter and section 16.70.290. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A200.8; Code 1991, § 16.28.090) 
16.70.100. - Minimum construction standards; application of base course. 
The base course consisting of graded aggregate shall be applied according to sections 16.70.230 through 16.70.270. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A200.9; Code 1991, § 16.28.100) 
16.70.110. - Minimum construction standards; base course shaping. 
The base course shall be shaped and compacted as set out in sections 16.70.230 through 16.70.270. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A200.10; Code 1991, § 16.28.110) 
16.70.120. - Minimum construction standards; paving. 
Paving shall be bituminous plant mix only. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A200.11; Code 1991, § 16.28.120) 
16.70.130. - Minimum construction standards; backfilling of shoulders. 
Shoulders shall be sloped and backfilled as necessary following paving and curb and gutter installation as required by the director of engineering. All curbs and gutters shall be backfilled according to the design in this chapter. All eroded areas shall be reconstructed to the original final grade. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A200.12; Code 1991, § 16.28.130) 
16.70.140. - Minimum construction standards; replanting. 
Regrassing shall be required for bare spots, areas of insufficient stand and reconstructed areas. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A200.13; Code 1991, § 16.28.140) 
16.70.150. - Minimum construction standards; sign installation. 
Except as provided for under the provisions for custom sign poles, sign installation shall be accomplished by the county. When required, sign payment by the developer shall be made in advance. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A200.14; Code 1991, § 16.28.150; Res. of 8-22-96, § 1) 
16.70.160. - Minimum construction standards; conformance to state standards. 
All materials and construction shall conform to the current Georgia Department of Transportation (D.O.T.) specifications. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A200.15; Code 1991, § 16.28.160) 
16.70.170. - Cuts, fills, and subgrade. 
Cuts, fills, and subgrades shall be subject to the approval of the director of engineering. The director of engineering shall specify any improvements which he feels necessary to protect community assets and to reduce the potential undue deterioration of street improvements. The developer will be guided by the following general requirements: 
A.  Slope maximums shall be at a ratio of two feet horizontal distance to one foot rise; 
B.  All slopes shall be adequately planted with approved vegetation. A suitable mulch of straw, hay, etc., shall be used; 
C.  The developer shall be responsible for any erosion that might occur until the streets are accepted into the county road maintenance system; 
D.  Compaction shall be 98 percent by Proctor Density Test; 
E.  Trees that have one foot of fill or less on the trunk and are off the county right-of-way may remain until the 45-day inspection. At the time of the 45-day inspection, trees that show signs of distress will need to be removed at the discretion of Hall County Engineering. All other organic materials shall be removed from cuts, fills, and subgrade. 
F.  Backfill behind curbs shall be free of organic material, stone, broken concrete, etc. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A300; Code 1991, § 16.28.170; Res. of 1-11-01, § 11) 
16.70.180. - Culverts and storm sewers; materials. 
All culverts and storm sewers shall be constructed of the following materials and meet Georgia Department of Transportation (D.O.T.) specifications. These specifications are also required of those culvert and storm sewer installations that are connected to the county storm sewer system: 
A.  Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP), D.O.T. approved Class III or better. RCP is required in dams; 
B.  Corrugated metal pipe, D.O.T. approved, type II aluminized steel. This material is prohibited in applications under streets and is prohibited in all live stream applications; 
C.  High density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe, D.O.T. approved, dual walled; 
D.  Other alternative culvert and storm sewer materials such as aluminum and bottomless designs with approval from the county engineer; and 
E.  Storm sewer manhole covers must be locking and be engraved with the phrase "Hall County Storm Sewer". Manhole cover designs must meet county engineer's approval. 
(Res. of 2-23-12, § 2(Exh. B); Res. of 9-26-13(2), § 2(Exh. B)) 
Editor's note— Res. of 2-23-12, § 2(Exh. B), repealed former § 16.70.180, and enacted a new § 16.70.180 as set out herein. Former § 16.70.180 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 20, 21(Exh. K), as well as other ordinances of which can be located on the Code Comparative Table of this Code of Ordinances. 
16.70.190. - Culverts and storm sewers; pipe sizes. 
All pipe sizes shall be approved by the director of engineering to meet the drainage requirements of the watershed and area of the potential runoff. The minimum cross drain diameter shall be 18 inches. Minimum cover shall be 12 inches. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A400.2; Code 1991, § 16.28.190) 
16.70.200. - Culverts and storm sewers; pipe construction. 
The gauge of pipe used shall be determined by acceptable methods using H-20 highway loading, and shall meet Georgia D.O.T. specifications. The engineering department shall inspect the pipe before installation to assure that it is free of cracks or damage. All damaged or used pipe shall be refused. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A400.3; Code 1991, § 16.28.200) 
16.70.210. - Culverts and storm sewers; endwalls. 
All culverts 24 inches in diameter or larger shall have endwalls or flared end sections constructed in accordance with Georgia D.O.T. specifications. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A400.4; Code 1991, § 16.28.210) 
16.70.220. - Culverts and storm sewers; catch basins. 
All catch basins shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Georgia D.O.T. specifications and shall be Georgia D.O.T. Standard 1033D, 1034D, or 1019. The use of a Standard 1019 shall be excluded from turnarounds and the low point of sag vertical curves draining more than 300 feet of gutter. Drainage calculations and design data are required for the use of a Standard 1019. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A400.5; Code 1991, § 16.28.220) 
16.70.230. - Base course construction; general specifications. 
A.  Residential streets: The base course shall consist of graded aggregate of a minimum compacted thickness of eight inches placed on a stabilized subbase in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines, grade, and typical cross-section as shown on the drawings approved by the county. 
B.  Residential turn lanes and deceleration lanes: The base course shall consist of graded aggregate of a minimum compacted thickness of eight inches placed on a stabilized subbase in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines, grade, and typical cross-section as shown on the drawings approved by the county. 
C.  Nonresidential streets, turn lanes, and deceleration lanes: The base course shall consist of graded aggregate of a minimum compacted thickness of eight inches placed on a stabilized subbase in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines, grade, and typical cross-section as shown on the drawings approved by the county. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A500.1; Code 1991, § 16.28.230; Res. of 4-13-00, § 6; Res. of 4-13-00; Res. of 11-12-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
16.70.240. - Base course construction; materials. 
All materials shall be secured from Georgia Department of Transportation approved sources: 
A.  Graded aggregate shall consist of hard, durable particles of fragments of stone, and stone mortar, and shall be graded as follows: 

 
[B.  Reserved.] 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A500.2; Code 1991, § 16.28.240) 
16.70.250. - Base course construction; preparation of subgrade. 
All boulders, organic material, soft clay, spongy material and any other objectionable material shall be removed and replaced with approved material. The subgrade shall be properly shaped, rolled and uniformly compacted to conform with the lines, grades and typical cross-sections as shown on the drawings approved by the county. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A500.3(a); Code 1991, § 16.28.250) 
16.70.260. - Base course construction; placing and rolling aggregate. 
All base course material shall be deposited and spread by means of spreader boxes, or approved mechanical equipment, or from moving vehicles equipped to distribute the material in a uniform layer. Each layer shall be not more than two inches in thickness after compaction and shall be constructed as follows: 
A.  Immediately following the spreading of the coarse aggregate, all material placed shall be compacted to the full width by rolling with a smooth wheel power roller weighing seven to ten tons, or an equivalent sheepsfoot packer. Rolling shall progress gradually from the sides to the center, parallel with the centerline of the street and lapping uniformly each preceding track by one-half the width of such track, and shall continue until all the surface has been rolled and has been thoroughly keyed, and the interstices of the stone reduced to a minimum, and until it ceases to creep or wave ahead of the roller. 
B.  Any irregularities or depressions that develop under such rolling shall be corrected by loosening the material at these places and adding or removing material until the surface is smooth and uniform. 
C.  After the coarse aggregate has been thoroughly keyed and set by the rolling described above, screenings in an amount that will completely fill the interstices shall be applied gradually over the surface and rolling shall be continued while the screenings are being spread, so that the jarring effect of the roller will cause the screenings to settle into the voids of the coarse aggregate. 
D.  The screenings shall not be dumped in piles on the coarse aggregate but shall be spread in thin layers, either by spreading motion with hand shovels, by mechanical spreading or directly from trucks. 
E.  In no case shall the screening be applied so fast or thickly as to cake or bridge on the surface in such manner as to prevent the filling of all voids or prevent the direct bearing of the roller on the coarse aggregate. 
F.  Hand brooms shall be used to sweep the screenings into unfilled voids and to distribute the stone where needed. The spreading, sweeping and rolling shall continue until no more screenings can be forced into the void. 
G.  Shaping and rolling shall be performed alternately as required to maintain a uniform compacted base until a surface or treatment has been applied to the base. 
H.  Along curbs, headers and walls and at all places not accessible to the roller, the base course material shall be tamped thoroughly with mechanical tampers or approved hand tampers. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A500.3(b); Code 1991, § 16.28.260) 
16.70.270. - Base course construction; seasonal limits on construction. 
No base material shall be deposited or shaped when the subgrade is frozen or thawing or during unfavorable weather conditions. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A500.3(c); Code 1991, § 16.28.270) 
16.70.280. - Bituminous plant mix paving. 
A.  Residential streets: Bituminous plant mix paving shall consist of a minimum of one and one-quarter inch asphaltic concrete "F" mix placed on top of a minimum of two-inch asphaltic concrete binder ("B" mix). The one and one-quarter inch layer of asphalt on publicly maintained residential streets may be placed before final platting or up to one year after final plat approval or at 75 percent build-out. The one and one-quarter inch layer of asphalt on privately maintained residential streets may be placed before final platting or up to one year after final plat approval. All asphalt will require a 12-month warranty period and a warranty bond equal to 100 percent of the cost of the one and one-quarter inch "F" mix asphalt topping. 
B.  Residential turn lanes and deceleration lanes: Bituminous plant mix paving shall consist of a minimum of one and one-quarter inch asphaltic concrete "F" mix placed on top of a minimum of four-inch asphaltic concrete binder ("B" mix). The one and one-quarter inch layer of asphalt on residential turn lanes and deceleration lanes may be placed before final platting or up to one year after final plat approval or at 75 percent build-out. All asphalt will require a 12-month warranty period and a warranty bond equal to 100 percent of the cost of the one and one-quarter inch "F" mix asphalt topping. 
C.  Nonresidential streets, turn lanes, deceleration lanes, and residential streets built to industrial standards (depths of base and asphalt only): Bituminous plant mix paving shall consist of a minimum of two-inch asphaltic concrete "E" mix placed on top of a minimum of four-inch asphaltic concrete binder ("B" mix). 
(Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 22, 23(Exh. L); Res. of 11-12-15(1), § 2(Exh. B)) 
Editor's note— Res. of 1-8-09(4), §§ 22, 23(Exh. L), deleted the former § 16.70.280, and enacted a new § 16.70.280 as set out herein. The former § 16.70.280 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
16.70.290. - Curb and gutter requirements generally. 
Curb and gutter is a requirement of the subdivision regulations. Reference is herein made to section 16.70.300 and to section 16.70.010 as to specifications, street widths and materials that can be used. (For details, see Plates 1 and 3 of the resolution codified in this section and on file in the office of the county clerk [and included at the end of this title].) 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A700; Code 1991, § 16.28.290) 
16.70.300. - Curb and gutter requirements; construction standards. 
Construction shall be of 2,200 P.S.I. concrete 24 inches wide (see Plate 3 of the resolution codified in this section and on file in the office of the county clerk [and included at the end of this title]). The curb and gutter shall be so constructed as to present a smooth, even line both vertically and horizontally, in accordance with the Georgia D.O.T. standards. There shall be one-half inch expansion joints placed every 50 feet and preshaped contraction joints every ten feet along the curb and gutter. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A700; Code 1991, § 16.28.300) 
16.70.310. - Curb and gutter requirements. 
All new street construction within permitted subdivisions shall have curb and gutter. Curb and gutter shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the plates as set forth in this chapter. Existing non-curb and gutter streets that are utilized for proposed subdivisions may be required to be upgraded to a curb and gutter section at the discretion of the Hall County Board of Commissioners as conditions of zoning. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, 5101.2(b); Code 1991, § 16.28.310; Res. of 7-28-16(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— Exhibit A to § 1 of a resolution adopted July 28, 2016, amended the catchline of § 16.70.310 to read as herein set out. Said catchline formerly read "Curb and gutter requirements; exemptions." 
16.70.320. - Installation of utilities. 
A.  Underground utilities, including sewer services, all water lines and any cable conduits under the pavement, shall be placed in the ground before the base material is in place. 
B.  All trenches shall be thoroughly compacted in six-inch layers with mechanical compacting equipment. 
C.  All fire hydrants, utility poles, street lights, transformer boxes and pedestals shall be set at a distance not less than six feet from the back of the curb. 
D.  The subgrade shall be scarified to a depth of six inches and compacted to 98 percent maximum dry density immediately prior to the placing of the base material. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § A800; Code 1991, § 16.28.320) 
16.70.330. - Sidewalk installation options. 
All residential subdivisions will have sidewalks with one exception: Those subdivisions in which average lot size is equal to, or greater than, 1.25 acres shall be exempt from the sidewalk requirement. Developers will be required to construct sidewalks in accordance with Option 1, Option 2, or Option 3: 
Option 1: Install all sidewalks as a unit prior to final platting. 
A.  Installation of entire sidewalk system will be completed prior to final plat approval. Sidewalks to be constructed as one unit. 
B.  Sidewalk inspections will be performed by county engineering. Developer will be required to notify county engineering to inspect formwork and subgrade prior to pouring and again after pouring and finishing. 
Option 2: Install sidewalks on a lot-by-lot basis after final platting. 
A.  Sidewalks are constructed in concurrence with the development of each lot and are poured in conjunction with the pouring of the driveways. Upon the elapsing of two years after final platting, any incomplete areas of the sidewalk system will need to be constructed as one unit. 
B.  Sidewalks poured during the year on a lot-by-lot basis will be inspected by the county building inspection department in concurrence with other inspections. The certificate of occupancy will not be issued until a properly constructed sidewalk is in place on the lot. 
C.  The sidewalks that are poured as one unit at the end of the two-year period will be inspected by county engineering. Developer will be required to notify county engineering to inspect formwork and subgrade prior to pouring and again after pouring and finishing. 
D.  The following items will need to be shown on the final plat: 
1.  The construction details of sidewalks as shown in Plate 3A of the county subdivision regulations. 
2.  The typical road section for residential streets with sidewalks as shown on the plates as set forth in this chapter. Plate 1A shall be utilized for the final plat in subdivisions that will have sidewalks on both sides of the street, and Plate 1C shall be utilized for the final plat in subdivisions that will have sidewalks on a single side of the street. 
3.  A note that reads as follows: 
"This development will utilize a sidewalk system throughout the project. The sidewalks will be installed on a lot-by-lot basis. Therefore, property owners of parcels shown on this plat are required to construct sidewalks along the road frontage of their property. Said sidewalks will comply with the Hall County Subdivision Regulations. The entire sidewalk system must be completed prior to release of the maintenance bond and/or before the elapsing of two years." 
Option 3: Install all sidewalks as a unit within two years after final platting. 
A.  Upon the elapsing of two years after final platting the entire sidewalk system will need to be constructed as one unit. 
B.  Sidewalk inspections will be performed by county engineering. Developer will be required to notify county engineering to inspect formwork and subgrade prior to pouring and again after pouring and finishing. 
C.  The following items will need to be shown on the final plat: 
1.  The construction details of sidewalks as shown in Plate 3A of the county subdivision regulations. 
2.  The typical road section for residential streets with sidewalks as shown on the plates as set forth in this chapter. Plate 1A shall be utilized for the final plat in subdivisions that will have sidewalks on both sides of the street, and Plate 1C shall be utilized for the final plat in subdivisions that will have sidewalks on a single side of the street. 
3.  A note that reads as follows: 
"This development will utilize a sidewalk system throughout the project. The sidewalk system will be installed within two years after final plat approval. Said sidewalks will comply with the Hall County Subdivision Regulations. The entire sidewalk system must be completed prior to release of the maintenance bond." 
(Res. of 4-13-00, § 8; Res. of 4-13-00; Res. of 1-11-01, § 12; Res. of 7-28-16(1), § 2(Exh. B)) 
Editor's note— Exhibit B to § 2 of a resolution adopted July 28, 2016, amended the catchline of § 16.70.330 to read as herein set out. Said catchline formerly read "Sidewalks constructions requirements." See § 16.70.340 for provisions pertaining to sidewalk construction requirements as set forth in Exhibit C to § 3 of same resolution. 
16.70.340. - Sidewalk construction requirements. 
All sidewalks will conform to the following standards: 
A.  The preliminary engineering plans for sidewalk subdivisions will need to depict the necessary cross-section, shoulder width, and right-of-way to accommodate the sidewalks. 
B.  For sidewalk installation after final platting, the developer is responsible for ensuring that driveways and yards have the necessary slope to accommodate the approved sidewalk cross-section. Driveways poured incorrectly will need to be demolished and reconstructed. Yards that have been graded as to not permit the proper construction of the sidewalk cross-section will need to be regraded. 
C.  Upon receiving the 45-day punch-list letter, the developer will be required to complete the construction of the sidewalks and correct any problems with the sidewalks as noted within said notice letter. 
D.  Sidewalk system will be completed prior to release of maintenance bond. 
E.  All sidewalks shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Georgia Accessibility Code. 
F.  Once sidewalks are started in a development, sidewalks will be continued throughout the development. 
G.  Sidewalks may be constructed on one or both sides of the street. 
H.  When new sidewalks are placed next to existing sidewalks, a smooth transition will be required. 
I.  Expansion joint shall be placed between existing and new sidewalks. 
J.  Sidewalks shall not be used as part of the driveway. 
K.  Disturbed areas resulting from sidewalk construction will be back-filled, grassed, and mulched. 
L.  Overhead obstructions shall be removed prior to completion of sidewalk construction. 
M.  Handicap ramps will be installed by developer during curb and gutter installation prior to final plat approval. 
N.  Sidewalks along common areas must be placed to final plat approval. 
O.  Sidewalks will be: 
1.  Minimum four feet wide for streets with sidewalks on both sides and minimum five feet wide for streets with a sidewalk on one side of the street; 
2.  Four-inch thick minimum; 
3.  Compacted subgrade (95 percent Standard Proctor); 
4.  Class "A" concrete (3,000 psi); 
5.  ¾-inch grooved joint ten-foot O.C.; 
6.  Expansion joint (material) 40-foot maximum and at catch basins, driveways, roads, etc.; 
7.  Broom finish; 
8.  ¼-inch per foot cross slope in sidewalk. 
For specific construction requirements and utility locations for streets with sidewalks please see the plates as set forth in [chapter 16.180 of this Code]. 
(Res. of 4-13-00, § 8; Res. of 1-11-01, § 12; Res. of 7-28-16(1), § 3(Exh. C) 
Editor's note— Exhibit C to § 3 of a resolution adopted July 28, 2016, effectively repealed the former § 16.70.340 and enacted a new § 16.70.340 as set out herein. The former § 16.70.340 pertained to sidewalk repair and maintenance requirements and derived from § 13 of a resolution adopted Jan. 11, 2001. See § 16.70.350 for provisions pertaining to sidewalk repair and maintenance requirements as set forth in Exhibit D to § 4 of same resolution. 
16.70.350. - Sidewalk repair and maintenance requirements. 
Sidewalks on county right-of-way will be inspected by Hall County Engineering Division on a periodic basis, and as directed by citizen concern, to see that the sidewalks are in a safe and suitable condition for public use and travel. The Hall County Engineer will determine repair requirements for any damage observed to bring the sidewalk back to a safe and suitable condition. The repair of sidewalks due to damage caused by activities of a resident, their guests, or their contractors will be the responsibility of the landowner, and a notification letter will be sent indicating such. 
Upon receiving the notification letter, the landowner has three options in repairing the sidewalk: 
1.  The landowner may repair the sidewalk. Hall County Engineering will inspect the sidewalk repair work, and any inconsistencies with the sidewalk specifications will need to be corrected. Sidewalks not repaired within 60 days of receiving the notification letter will be repaired by Hall County as provided in section 16.70.350(3). 
2.  A subcontractor hired by the landowner may repair the sidewalk. Hall County Engineering will inspect the sidewalk repair work, and any inconsistencies with the sidewalk specifications will need to be repaired. Sidewalks not repaired within 60 days of receiving the notification letter will be repaired by Hall County as provided in section 16.70.350(3). 
3.  The landowner may choose to allow Hall County or its representatives to repair the sidewalk. Charges will be assessed to the landowner, and the cost of the repairs will be as per the most current Georgia Department of Transportation Item Mean Summary, or in accordance with actual Hall County contractual bid prices. 
(Res. of 1-11-01, § 13; Res. of 7-28-16(1), § 4(Exh. D)) 
Editor's note— Exhibit D to § 4 of a resolution adopted July 28, 2016, effectively repealed the former § 16.70.350 and enacted a new § 16.70.350 as set out herein. The former § 16.70.350 pertained to special tax district for sidewalk repair and maintenance and derived from § 14 of a resolution adopted Jan. 11, 2001. 
CHAPTER 16.80. - WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS[5] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Health and safety, tit. 8; utility franchises and easements, ch. 12.50; approval of proposed water lines and sewer lines, § 12.50.080; sewage collection and disposal, ch. 13.10; construction standards for water and wastewater systems, ch. 13.20; water and sewer installations to be completed prior to installation of base course, § 16.30.240; design standards for utility easements, §§ 16.60.210—16.60.230; mobile home and travel trailer parks, ch. 17.310. 

16.80.010. - Water system generally. 
Water systems in subdivisions shall meet the following requirements in sections 16.80.020 and 16.80.030. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 600; Code 1991, § 16.32.010) 
16.80.020. - Public water systems. 
Should the subdivider have installed a public (i.e., municipal- or county-owned) system, the design and flow characteristics of the owner of that system shall apply. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 600.1; Code 1991, § 16.32.020) 
16.80.030. - Community water systems. 
A.  All main lines of a community system shall be eight inches in diameter. Individual connection shall be made to each lot, and pipe sizes shall not be less than three-fourths of an inch in diameter. 
B.  Systems constructed in subdivisions shall have an average pressure of 30 pounds per square inch at each lot and shall meet the requirements of table 16.80.030, section 16.80.040 and the "Standard Construction Practices for Water and Wastewater Systems, Hall County, Georgia." 
C.  The system shall be designed by an engineer licensed in the State of Georgia. 
TABLE 16.80.030. INSTANTANEOUS  WATER DEMANDS FOR COMMUNITY  WATER SYSTEMS 

 
Source: Ameen, Joseph S., Community Water Systems Source Book, p. 50, Technical Proceeding, High Point, N.C., 1965. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, §§ 600.2, 601; Code 1991, § 16.32.030) 
16.80.040. - Fire hydrants and valves. 
Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions with water systems. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 1,000 feet apart and at least six feet behind the curb or ditch line. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves and all other water supply improvements, shall be installed before any base course application of a street shown on the subdivision plat. All fire hydrants shall be set plumb with outlets 18 inches above finished grade or 12 inches above a finished concrete surface. No valves shall be located within the pavement or curb area. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 602; Code 1991, § 16.32.040) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention code, ch. 15.70. 
16.80.050. - Sewer systems generally. 
Sewer systems in subdivisions shall meet the following requirements in sections 16.80.060 through 16.80.090. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 603; Code 1991, § 16.32.050) 
16.80.060. - Public sewer systems. 
Should the subdivider have installed a public (i.e., municipal- or county-owned) system, the design characteristics of the owners of that system shall apply. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 603.1; Code 1991, § 16.32.060) 
16.80.070. - Community sewer systems; construction standards. 
Community sewer systems shall be designed in accordance with the county "Standard Construction Practices for Water and Wastewater Systems" manual and approved by the director of engineering prior to obtaining approval from the department of natural resources. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 603.2(a); Code 1991, § 16.32.070) 
16.80.080. - Community sewer systems; approval of connections required. 
All connections to residences, mobile homes and commercial and industrial buildings shall be approved by the county health department. The home of the resident manager, recreational facilities (such as a clubhouse, swimming pool, etc.) and sanitary facilities in recreational developments shall be approved by the county health department. No connection shall be made to any structure other than those listed above without prior approval of the county health department. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 603.2(b); Code 1991, § 16.32.080) 
16.80.090. - Community sewer systems; design by licensed engineer required. 
Any sewer system shall be designed by an engineer licensed in the State of Georgia. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 603.2(c); Code 1991, § 16.32.090) 
16.80.100. - Water and sewer system design approval. 
All water and sewer system design plans shall be approved by both the department of public health, State of Georgia, and the county health department. A letter of approval from the department of public health shall be submitted with the final plat. The director of engineering shall approve the construction of all systems. No section or part of this chapter shall be construed to abrogate any existing law or regulation of the Georgia Department of Public Health or of the county health department. In cases of conflict, the stricter rule or regulation shall be applied. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 604; Code 1991, § 16.32.100) 
16.80.110. - Stormwater facilities; construction standards. 
A.  The stormwater drainage system and easements shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system and easement. 
B.  Storm sewer design hydrology shall be by the rational method for drainage areas of 500 acres or less, and by the Soil Conservation Service method for drainage areas exceeding 500 acres. Other methods require prior approval by the director of engineering. A copy of design computations for ten-year storms shall be submitted along with the construction plans. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried for a distance of more than 600 feet in the gutter. When calculations or street design indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point. All turnarounds shall require standard vertical curb section for negative grades. 
C.  When storm drain pipe is required, it shall extend along the right-of-way to a natural and adequate drainage way or otherwise along an easement to the rear property lot boundary, subdivision boundary, 200 feet from the right-of-way or 25 feet beyond the rear setback of the adjoining lot. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 605.1; Code 1991, § 16.32.110) 
Cross reference— Flood protection, ch. 15.80. 
16.80.120. - Stormwater facilities; drainage of springs or surface water. 
The applicant will be required to carry away by pipe any spring or surface water that may exist either previously to or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located or in perpetual unobstructed easements (minimum width 15 feet), and shall be constructed in accordance with the construction standards and specifications. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 605.2(a); Code 1991, § 16.32.120) 
16.80.130. - Stormwater facilities; accommodation of upstream drainage areas. 
A culvert, cross drain, or other drainage facility, other than storm sewers as defined, shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The director of engineering shall approve the necessary size of the facility which has been designed based on a 25-year storm and on the provisions of the construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential development density permitted by the zoning regulations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 605.2(b); Code 1991, § 16.32.130) 
16.80.140. - Stormwater facilities; effect on downstream drainage areas. 
A hydrologic study may be required to determine the effect of the subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the planning commission may withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for the improvement of said potential condition in such sum as the planning commission shall determine. 
No preliminary plans for subdivision streets shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate watercourse or facility. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 605.2(c); Code 1991, § 16.32.140) 
16.80.150. - Drainage easements required. 
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose. Whenever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel with grassed or landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 605.3(a); Code 1991, § 16.32.150) 
16.80.160. - Dedication of drainage easements. 
A.  Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width for such drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road lines and with satisfactory access to the road. Easements for all stormwater outlets shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the road through a natural or constructed watercourse or to other drainage facilities. 
B.  The applicant shall dedicate, by drainage or conservation easement of land on both sides of existing watercourses, for a distance of ten feet on each side or wider as determined by the director of engineering [sic]. 
C.  Low-lying land along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage ways. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 605.3(b); Code 1991, § 16.32.160) 
CHAPTER 16.90. - STREET LIGHTING POLICY[6] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of 3-27-02, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), repealed former Ch. 16.90, §§ 16.90.010—16.90.180, and enacted a new Ch. 16.90 as set out herein. Former Ch. 16.90 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Res. of 9-28-95, § 1(16.34.010) and Res. of 6-11-98, § 1. 

16.90.010. - Special tax district for street light program. 
A.  Ratification of existing district. The governing authority of Hall County, Georgia, does hereby ratify its action creating a special taxing district for the installation (if applicable), operation, maintenance, and repair of street lights and for collection of fees. The taxing district incorporates all of unincorporated Hall County, as shown by the records in the office of the Hall County Traffic Engineer, to which reference is hereby made for a full and complete description of the district hereinbefore created. 
B.  Existing subdivisions that currently have street lights and are in an individual special taxing district. It shall be mandatory that all subdivisions currently in an individual special taxing district shall be included in the countywide special tax district for street light operation, maintenance, and repair. This changeover will take effect on the effective date of this ordinance. The Hall County Traffic Engineer shall determine the appropriate boundaries of the designated area to be included within the street light special taxing district. 
C.  Addition to the special taxing district for operation, maintenance, and repair of street lights in subdivisions permitted on or after the effective date of this resolution. It shall be mandatory that all applicable subdivisions final-platted on or after the effective date of this resolution are added to the special tax district for street light operation, maintenance, and repair. The Hall County Traffic Engineer shall determine the appropriate boundaries of the designated area of the street light special taxing district. Notwithstanding, the developer(s) and/or property owner(s) may petition the Hall County Traffic Engineer to be excluded from the special taxing district. This petition must be presented prior to or concurrently with the final platting of the subdivision. 
D.  Petition for addition to the special taxing district for existing or desired street lights in subdivisions permitted before the effective date of this resolution. Any lot owner in an unincorporated area of Hall County may present a request to be added to the special taxing district to the Hall County Traffic Engineer. Upon receipt of the request, the Hall County Traffic Engineer shall determine the appropriate boundaries for addition to the street light special taxing district that will serve the lot owner presenting the request and neighboring lot owners. The Hall County Traffic Engineer shall then prepare a plat showing this area for addition to the street light special taxing district, and a petition for the addition to the special taxing district shall then be circulated among the lot owners in the proposed district. The completed petition must be returned to the Hall County Traffic Engineer, and application fees must be paid at that time. If 51 percent of the lot owners in the proposed district sign the petition in affirmation for the addition to the street light special taxing district for existing street lights, the petition shall be presented to the Hall County Board of Commissioners. If 75 percent of the lot owners in the proposed district sign the petition in affirmation for the addition to the street light special taxing district for new street lights, the petition shall be presented to the Hall County Board of Commissioners. The board of commissioners shall conduct two public hearings for the purpose of determining whether or not to add the proposed area to the street light special taxing district. Safety and economic factors shall be the prime consideration in making such determination. The public hearings shall be advertised one time in the official organ of Hall County, Georgia, giving notice of the hearings, at least 15 days before the public hearings. The Hall County Traffic Engineer will verify the signatures on the petition prior to advertising the public hearings. 
E.  Addition to district under special conditions. In areas where special conditions as to safety, security, land topography, economic and other factors may be involved, the board of commissioners may make additions to the special taxing district for street lights and provide for special street lighting under such terms and conditions as may be determined by the board of commissioners, any other provisions of this article [chapter] to the contrary notwithstanding; provided, however, that in such instances, two public hearings shall be held by the board of commissioners after advertisement in the official organ of the county one time at least 15 days before conducting such public hearings. 
F.  Removal from the special taxing district. Any lot owner in an unincorporated area of Hall County may present a request to be removed from the special taxing district to the Hall County Traffic Engineer. Upon receipt of the request, the Hall County Traffic Engineer shall determine the appropriate boundaries for removal from the street light special taxing district. The Hall County Traffic Engineer shall then prepare a plat showing this area for removal from the street light special taxing district, and a petition for the removal from the special taxing district shall then be circulated among the lot owners in the affected area. The completed petition must be returned to the Hall County Traffic Engineer. If 75 percent of the lot owners in the proposed district sign the petition in affirmation for removal from the street light special taxing district, the petition shall be presented to the Hall County Board of Commissioners. The board of commissioners shall conduct two public hearings for the purpose of determining whether or not to remove the area from the street light special taxing district. The public hearings shall be advertised one time in the official organ of Hall County, Georgia, giving notice of the hearings, at least 15 days before the public hearings. The Hall County Traffic Engineer will verify the signatures on the petition prior to advertising the public hearings. 
(Res. of 3-27-02, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
16.90.020. - Responsibility for costs; application and administrative fees; retirement of existing contracts. 
A.  The cost of providing and maintaining street light service in the existing street light district, and in the areas hereinafter designated as a part of the street light district, shall be borne by the residents, lot owners and property owners receiving that service. The charge therefore shall be a one-time application fee plus a pro-rata share of service costs charged to Hall County plus the retirement of any construction cost plus an annual fee for administrative costs. The application fee charged is established in Appendix "I" Hall County Plan Review and Inspection Fee Schedule. From time to time, upon the recommendation of the director of public works and utilities of Hall County, Georgia, and approval of the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, said schedule may be revised as deemed necessary. In the event of excessive vandalism to street lights within the district which results in Hall County being billed for repairs, Hall County may prorate those repair bills and add a pro-rata share of those bills to the charge. 
B.  In those districts in existence upon the effective date hereof, or which may hereafter be created in which there are construction costs, the same shall be retired as per agreement or contract with the public utility or other person to whom the indebtedness is owed, and shall be billed accordingly per "tax lot or parcel." 
(Res. of 3-27-02, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A); Res. of 8-22-13(3), § 3(Exh. C)) 
16.90.030. - Tax lot or parcel defined; costs for nonresidential lots. 
Tax lot or parcel is hereby defined as any single tract of land which falls within any of the zoning classifications, as defined by the zoning and planning ordinance of Hall County adopted on August 28, 1978, as amended, and as shown on the Hall County land lot maps; provided, however, that in areas zoned for purposes other than single-family residential, different criteria may be adopted by the board of commissioners for the payment of energy costs, application and administrative fees, and retirement of construction costs. 
(Res. of 3-27-02, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
16.90.040. - Payment date; delinquencies. 
The due date for the payment of street lighting assessment charges herein provided for shall be the same date of each year as tax bills are due to the Hall County Tax Commissioner. Failure to pay shall subject the responsible party to the same liens and penalties provided for failure to pay other real estate taxes and will result in the delinquency of the entire account and not be deemed paid until all real estate taxes are paid in full. 
(Res. of 3-27-02, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
16.90.050. - Responsibilities of revenue collections department. 
The billing, accounting, collecting, and receiving of the moneys herein provided for is hereby declared to be the responsibility of the finance and tax commissioners departments of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 3-27-02, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
16.90.060. - Conformance by subdivision developer; acceptance of public ways. 
A.  The owner, developer or other person developing a subdivision shall be required to conform to all of the standards herein provided for. 
B.  The Hall County Board of Commissioners may not accept any public streets or roads proposed to be dedicated until such time as the provisions hereof have been complied with. 
(Res. of 3-27-02, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
16.90.070. - Procedures to be followed by subdivision developers. 
Street lights shall be required to be provided by the developers of all new subdivisions involving new streets, unless waived by the Hall County Board of Commissioners on recommendation of the planning commission. Unless so waived, the developer, at the time of submission of the preliminary plat of the subdivision, shall present a street light layout prepared by the utility company which will provide the street light service in the subdivision. At the time of and as a requirement of the submission of the final plat, unless waived by the Hall County Board of Commissioners on recommendation of the planning commission as herein provided, the developer shall: 
A.  Submit a final street light layout prepared by the utility company which will provide the lighting service showing exact location of street lights within the subdivision. This drawing must be approved by the Hall County Traffic Engineer prior to obtaining any building permit within that subdivision. Said layout may be shown on the final plat. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the utility company which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities and Hall County. The fixtures shall be mounted a minimum of 16 feet above the ground, and shall have appropriate design to place the majority of the light output over the street. One light shall be located at each street intersection, and one light shall be located in each cul-de-sac within the subdivision. 
B.  Pay all costs for standards/poles, fixtures, and any other related items or materials necessary for the installation. 
C.  Submit proof of payment for complete installation to the Hall County Traffic Engineer. 
D.  Submit a copy of an executed agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all installations. 
Plan review comments: Street light requirements for new subdivisions involving new streets. 
1.  In accordance with the Hall County Street Lighting Policy, section 16.90.070, street lights are required to be provided by the developers of all new subdivisions. 
2.  The developer shall submit a street light layout prepared by the utility company which will provide the lighting service showing exact location of street lights within the subdivision. 
3.  The lighting layout must be approved by the Hall County Traffic Engineer. 
4.  The developer must pay all costs to the utility company for poles, fixtures, and any other related items or materials necessary for the installation. 
The above requirements must be met prior to obtaining any building permits for that subdivision and must be shown as a general note on the final plans. 
(Res. of 3-27-02, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
16.90.080. - Subdivisions with underground electric. 
In subdivisions utilizing underground cable for electrical service, the developer(s) shall be required to accomplish the same items listed in the preceding section hereof. 
(Res. of 3-27-02, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
16.90.090. - Lighting in areas other than single-family residential. 
Street lighting in districts other than single-family residential shall be permitted only: 
A.  With the approval of the Hall County Traffic Engineer subject to the safety, economic and other factors involved; and 
B.  Upon final approval by the board of commissioners of Hall County; and 
C.  Upon compliance with the standards hereinafter provided for. 
(Res. of 3-27-02, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
16.90.100. - Reserved. 
16.90.110. - Installation and operation standards adopted. 
In order to insure adequate illumination of public rights-of-way and promote safety and security, the "American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illuminating Engineering Society," as approved by the American National Standards Institute (1993), as amended, is hereby adopted as the standard for the installation and operation of lighting in the unincorporated areas of Hall County, and in addition thereto: 
A.  Lighting fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of street illumination shall comply with these standards. The minimum average horizontal footcandle illumination level by roadway classification shall be: 

 
The uniformity of illumination shall be such that the point of lowest illumination shall have at least one-third of the average horizontal footcandle required illumination level, except that on local or residential streets it may be not less than one-sixth of this average. In no case, unless extenuating circumstances exist, fixtures for residential street lighting shall be required to be closer than 200 feet together, nor fixtures for all other roadways be closer than 100-foot spacing. 
B.  Any party requesting permission to install or operate lighting fixtures within public rights-of-way shall furnish plans and specifications to the Hall County Traffic Engineer for approval showing how the proposed lighting meets the standards, and no lighting shall be installed or operated without this approval. Should the Hall County Traffic Engineer disapprove the request to install or operate lighting fixtures within any public right-of-way, he/she shall communicate the disapproval in writing to the party requesting approval. The written communication shall include the specific reasons for disapproval. Any disapproval of a light or lighting system by the Hall County Traffic Engineer may be appealed to the board of commissioners. If any party desires to appeal an adverse decision by the Hall County Traffic Engineer within 30 days from the date following the written notice of disapproval, it shall be the responsibility of the Hall County Traffic Engineer to transmit forthwith to the board of commissioners all papers and allied documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken, and to insure that the appeal is promptly placed upon the agenda of the board of commissioners for its determination. The board of commissioners may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify, the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed. 
C.  Roadway or street lighting luminaries or fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way as "security lights" or for the purpose of lighting areas other than the public streets should be mounted on the side of the pole opposite from the street, and shall be oriented in such a manner to insure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street and the vertical light distribution, at the initial light source, is perpendicular to the street, so as to protect the users of the street from objectionable glare. 
D.  Other lighting fixtures to be installed within or outside of public rights-of-way for whatever purpose shall be installed and operated in such a manner to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Res. of 3-27-02, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
16.90.120. - Authority to contract with public utilities. 
The board of commissioners may contract with public utilities for the purpose of carrying out the terms of this article [chapter]. 
(Res. of 3-27-02, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
16.90.130. - Exceptions to terms of article. 
The board of commissioners may grant exceptions to the literal terms of this article [chapter] where special conditions or hardships exist. 
(Res. of 3-27-02, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
16.90.140. - Federal, state laws to prevail in conflicts. 
If any provision of this article [chapter] is in conflict with any state or federal law, or with any rule, regulation or order of any state or federal agency having jurisdiction of the subject matter of this article [chapter], it is hereby deemed to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the state or federal laws or rule, regulation or order, as the case may be, shall prevail so that the remaining portion of this article [chapter] shall be deemed to be in full force and effect. 
(Res. of 3-27-02, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
16.90.150. - Right of appeal. 
Any person or agency dissatisfied with any decision or action of the Hall County Traffic Engineer shall have the right to appeal the decision to the board of commissioners of Hall County within 30 days from the date of such decision or action. 
(Res. of 3-27-02, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
16.90.160. - Copies, availability of provisions. 
A copy of this article [chapter] shall be spread upon the official minutes of the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, and the Hall County Traffic Engineer is hereby required to post a copy of the same in the office of the Hall County Traffic Engineer, and to provide copies thereof for persons desiring the same. 
(Res. of 3-27-02, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
CHAPTER 16.100. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

 

16.100.010. - Preliminary plat approval required before installation of improvements; minimum standards. 
No improvements may be made before the preliminary plat is accepted and approved by the planning commission. All improvements shall meet the minimum standards set forth in this title. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 700; Code 1991, § 16.36.010) 
16.100.020. - Street improvements; specific standards. 
Specific standards for street construction are contained in chapter 16.70. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 701.1; Code 1991, § 16.36.020) 
16.100.030. - Street improvements; on-site inspection. 
All construction may be tested following on-site inspection as determined necessary by the director of engineering, should the director of engineering determine that laboratory analysis and/or testing procedures are required to evaluate the quality and/or quantity of a particular improvement. The director of engineering shall be authorized to employ a recognized consultant or a recognized testing laboratory or testing service to conduct any necessary examinations. All reports shall be made in writing to the director of engineering, the owner of the subdivision and the planning commission. Following the collection of samples, the owner shall repair all damage. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 701.2; Code 1991, § 16.36.030) 
16.100.040. - Street improvements; inspection costs. 
The owner of the subdivision shall bear all expense of all testing or examination of street improvements. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 701.3; Code 1991, § 16.36.040) 
16.100.050. - Street improvements; delay of installation of paving. 
Paving shall be completed under one of the two options listed below: 
A.  Application of the bituminous plant mix surface may be completed before the filing of a final plat; 
B.  Application of the bituminous plant mix surface may be delayed because of unsuitable weather until no later than June 1 of the year following the filing of the final plat if the final plat is submitted for approval after October 1 of the first year; provided that all other required improvements, including grassing, shall be completed prior to approval of the final plat. In such case, the subdivider shall present to the director of engineering and the planning commission an improvement guarantee in the form of a signed contract with a known contractor for paving and a surety or escrow agreement payable to the county for the cost of the paving, not less in amount than the average county contract price for the paving established by the Georgia Department of Transportation or the contract price, whichever is greater. The director of engineering shall approve the amount and may increase the amount for increases due to normal inflation. The director of engineering may require that paving be completed at the first instance of suitable weather and availability of paving materials. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 701.4; Code 1991, § 16.36.050) 
16.100.060. - Water and sewer improvements; completion. 
All work on water and sewer systems except final individual service connections shall be completed prior to the filing of the final plat. All installations under the proposed pavement surface should be completed prior to the application of the base course. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 702.1; Code 1991, § 16.36.060) 
16.100.070. - Water and sewer improvements; certification. 
Certification from the department of natural resources, State of Georgia, in the form of an operator's permit, shall be filed with the final plat for each community water or sewer system. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 702.2; Code 1991, § 16.36.070) 
16.100.080. - Notification of utility owners prior to completion of street grading. 
All utility service shall be determined by the developer prior to the completion of street grading. The developer shall notify each affected utility owner of his contracted agreement so that the utility owners may coordinate their development schedules. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 703; Code 1991, § 16.36.080) 
16.100.090. - Lot specifications generally. 
All lots shall conform to the provisions of the county zoning regulations, specifically those provisions governing minimum area, frontage and setbacks. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with county regulations and in providing driveway access to buildings on such lots from an approved street. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 704; Code 1991, § 16.36.090) 
Cross reference— Area and setback requirements, ch. 17.240. 
16.100.100. - Lot dimensions. 
Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the zoning regulations. All lots approved under these regulations shall front on a publicly dedicated road. Where lots are more than double the minimum required area for the zoning district, the planning commission may require that such lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve such potential lots, all in compliance with the zoning regulations and these regulations. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule gives a better street or lot plan. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for construction of buildings, observing the minimum front-yard setback from both streets. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in the zoning regulations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 704.1; Code 1991, § 16.36.100) 
16.100.110. - Flag lots. 
The minimum required lot frontage as established by the county zoning regulations shall be maintained as the minimum lot width for all of that portion of the lot between the front property line (frontage) and the actual building site on the lot, even if the building site is a greater distance from the front property line than the minimum required front setback. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 704.2; Code 1991, § 16.36.110) 
Cross reference— Similar provisions, § 17.240.150. 
16.100.120. - Double-frontage lots. 
Double-frontage lots shall be prohibited except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from arterial thoroughfares or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. Double-frontage lots which are necessary shall be required to have a no-access easement across them, preventing access to arterial or collector streets. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 704.3; Code 1991, § 16.36.120) 
16.100.130. - Burying debris and waste under roadway or right-of-way. 
No cut trees, timbers, debris, rocks, stones, junk, rubbish, or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any area of the right-of-way or under any roadway fill sections. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 704.4; Code 1991, § 16.36.130) 
16.100.140. - Preservation of natural features, historic sites and other amenities. 
Existing features which would add value to residential development or to the county as a whole, such as watercourses and falls, historic sites, and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision. Any such historic sites must be listed on the National Historic Register. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 705; Code 1991, § 16.36.140) 
16.100.150. - Nonresidential subdivisions and planned development; general requirements. 
A.  If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes or is a planned development, the layout of the subdivision shall conform to these regulations. 
B.  A nonresidential subdivision or planned development shall also be subject to all the requirements of site plan approval set forth in the zoning regulations. Site plan approval and nonresidential subdivision plat approval may proceed simultaneously at the discretion of the planning commission. A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these regulations, as well as such additional standards required by the planning commission, and shall conform to the proposed land use and standards established in the land use plan and zoning regulations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 706.1; Code 1991, § 16.36.150) 
16.100.160. - Nonresidential subdivisions and planned development; specific standards. 
In addition to the principles and standards in these regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning commission that the street, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
A.  A preliminary plat of a planned development shall conform in all respects with the approved master development plan for the project and any conditions associated with the planned development zoning. 
B.  Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated. 
C.  Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon. 
D.  Special requirements may be imposed by the county with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction. 
E.  Special requirements may be imposed by the county with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and stormwater drainage. 
F.  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary. 
G.  Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 706.2; Code 1991, § 16.36.160) 
CHAPTER 16.110. - CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE 

 

16.110.010. - Prerequisites for beginning construction. 
No construction activity of any kind, including grading, installation of improvements, or building, shall begin on any land subject to these regulations without prior approval of the preliminary plat and construction plans. Also, a preconstruction meeting shall be required between the county and the developer after preliminary plat approval and prior to any construction activity. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 800; Code 1991, § 16.40.010) 
16.110.020. - Grading. 
Grading or land disturbing activities may commence only after the soil erosion permit is approved. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 801; Code 1991, § 16.40.020) 
16.110.030. - Utilities. 
Utility installation shall not occur until the engineering department has approved the rough grade of the street and shoulder preparation (see sections 16.30.250 through 16.30.290). 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 802; Code 1991, § 16.40.030) 
16.110.040. - Inspections. 
Periodic inspection during the installation of the required improvements in a subdivision shall be made by the engineering department to insure conformity with the approved plans and specifications. The subdivider shall notify the engineering department when each phase of the installation is completed and ready for inspection (see sections 16.30.250 through 16.30.290). 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 803; Code 1991, § 16.40.040) 
16.110.050. - Recording of final plat required prior to sale or transfer of lots. 
No lot or parcel of land shall be sold or transferred or a building permit issued until the final plat, of which said lot or parcel is a part, shall have been approved and recorded as provided for in these regulations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 804; Code 1991, § 16.40.050) 
16.110.060. - Recording of final plat required prior to issuance of building permits. 
The county building official shall not issue any permit for the construction of any building or structure to be located in any subdivision, a plat whereof is required to be recorded pursuant to the provisions of these regulations, until such plat shall have been approved and recorded as provided for in these regulations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 805; Code 1991, § 16.40.060) 
16.110.070. - Completion of improvements required prior to occupancy. 
Within each phase of development, no building may be occupied for dwelling or other purposes nor shall an occupancy permit be issued for any building until all streets and required utility installations, including the water supply and sanitary sewer systems, have been completed to the satisfaction of the director of engineering and the building official. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 806; Code 1991, § 16.40.070) 
CHAPTER 16.120. - AMENDMENTS 

 

16.120.010. - Adoption. 
The planning commission[, upon] referral from the board of commissioners, may from time to time recommend amendments to these subdivision regulations. Any amendment to this document shall be heard by the planning commission, who shall make a recommendation to the board of commissioners regarding approval or denial. Prior to acting on any proposed amendment, the board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the amendment, having first published a notice of the time and place of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 15 days prior to the hearing. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 108; Code 1991, § 16.44.010) 
CHAPTER 16.130. - APPEALS[7] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Powers and duties of planning commission, § 2.60.030. 

16.130.010. - Appeals on plat approval. 
Appeals from decisions of the planning director regarding preliminary plat approval and final plat approval shall be taken to the planning commission, and appeals from the planning commission shall be taken to the board of commissioners. All appeals shall be filed with the appropriate body within 30 days of a decision. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 111; Code 1991, § 16.48.010) 
CHAPTER 16.140. - MODIFICATION OF STANDARDS 

16.140.010. - Permitted modifications; criteria. 
Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations and/or the purposes of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve modifications to these subdivision regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such modification shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; and further provided that the planning commission shall not approve modifications unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that: 
A.  The granting of the modification will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property; 
B.  The conditions upon which the request for a modification is based are unique to the property for which the modification is sought and are not applicable generally to other property; 
C.  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations were carried out; 
D.  The modifications will not in any manner vary the provisions of the zoning regulations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 110.1; Code 1991, § 16.52.010) 
16.140.020. - Approval with conditions. 
In approving modifications, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 110.2; Code 1991, § 16.52.020) 
16.140.030. - Petition for modification. 
A petition for any such modification shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for the consideration of the planning commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner and be accompanied by a plat or plan showing the proposed modification. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 110.3; Code 1991, § 16.52.030) 
16.140.040. - Review by planning director. 
The planning director shall review the proposed modification and may request the review of any applicable agency. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 110.4; Code 1991, § 16.52.040) 
16.140.050. - Action by planning commission. 
The planning commission shall act upon the application in regular meeting, shall enter its action into its records and shall notify the applicant in writing. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 110.5; Code 1991, § 16.52.050) 
CHAPTER 16.150. - FEES 

16.150.010. - Preliminary plat. 
A fee as established in Appendix "I" Hall County Plan Review and Inspection Fee Schedule will be charged per linear foot of a new street proposed in addition to fees required by chapter 8.40, soil erosion and sedimentation control. From time to time, upon the recommendation of the director of public works and utilities of Hall County, Georgia, and approval of the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, said schedule may be revised as deemed necessary. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 113.1; Code 1991, § 16.56.010; Res. of 8-22-13(3), § 4(Exh. D)) 
16.150.020. - Final plat. 
A fee as established in Appendix "I" Hall County Plan Review and Inspection Fee Schedule will be charged. This review fee allows for an initial review of the final plat and associated stormwater as-builts and a second review to ensure that redlined comments are addressed, as well as an additional fee for final plats and associated stormwater as-builts that require third and subsequent reviews. From time to time, upon the recommendation of the director of public works and utilities of Hall County, Georgia, and approval of the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, said schedule may be revised as deemed necessary. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 113.2; Code 1991, § 16.56.020; Res. of 8-22-13(3), § 5(Exh. E)) 
16.150.030. - Extension of time limit on preliminary plat. 
A fee as established in Appendix "I" Hall County Plan Review and Inspection Fee Schedule will be charged for an extension of time limit on a preliminary plat per linear foot of a new street proposed. From time to time, upon the recommendation of the director of public works and utilities of Hall County, Georgia, and approval of the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, said schedule may be revised as deemed necessary. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 113.3; Code 1991, § 16.56.030; Res. of 8-22-13(3), § 6(Exh. F)) 
16.150.040. - Appeals. 
A fee as established in Appendix "I" Hall County Plan Review and Inspection Fee Schedule will be charged for appeals to the board of commissioners of any planning commission decision on the regulations of this chapter. From time to time, upon the recommendation of the director of public works and utilities of Hall County, Georgia, and approval of the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, said schedule may be revised as deemed necessary. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 113.4; Code 1991, § 16.56.040; Res. of 8-22-13(3), § 7(Exh. G)) 
CHAPTER 16.160. - ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATION; PENALTY 

16.160.010. - Enforcement official. 
It shall be the duty of the planning director, director of engineering, and building official to enforce these regulations and to bring to the attention of the county attorney any violations or lack of compliance herewith. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 112.1(a); Code 1991, § 16.60.010) 
16.160.020. - Unlawful transfer of title. 
No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in the subdivision proposed shall transfer title to any such parcel before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the planning commission, in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, and filed with the clerk of superior court. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 112.1(b); Code 1991, § 16.60.020) 
16.160.030. - Denial of building permit. 
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 112.1(c); Code 1991, § 16.60.030) 
16.160.040. - Civil enforcement. 
Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent unlawful construction to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, and these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described in this chapter. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 112.3; Code 1991, § 16.60.040) 
16.160.050. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this title as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this title as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 7-23-90, § 112.2; Code 1991, § 16.60.050; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 16.170. - INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF CUSTOM SUPPORT SIGNAGE ASSEMBLIES ON COUNTY RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

16.170.10. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to allow a duly constituted maintaining authority the privilege to install and maintain custom support traffic sign assemblies within the maintaining authority's designated subdivision. Permission shall be granted by the Hall County Department of Public Works. 
(Res. of 12-12-96, § 1) 
16.170.20. - Designation of maintaining authority. 
During residential subdivision construction and/or prior to the legal formation of a homeowners association, the developer will be the maintaining authority. 
(Res. of 12-12-96, § 1) 
16.170.30. - Responsibilities of maintaining authority. 
The maintaining authority will assume all costs associated with the installation and maintenance of custom support traffic sign assemblies within the maintaining authority's jurisdiction. 
(Res. of 12-12-96, § 1) 
16.170.40. - Liability. 
The maintaining authority willfully accepts any and all liability that may arise from the use of custom support traffic sign assemblies. The maintaining authority also agrees to hold harmless Hall County, Hall County Department of Public Works, and duly authorized representatives from any and all liability that may be incurred from the use of custom traffic sign assemblies. 
(Res. of 12-12-96, § 1) 
16.170.50. - Regulations for the installation of custom support traffic sign assemblies. 
A.  The restrictive covenants of the development must express the maintaining authority's responsibilities associated with the installation and maintenance of custom support traffic sign assemblies. 
B.  The final plat of the subdivision must contain a provision signed by the developer which notifies all property owners of their responsibility for the installation and maintenance of custom support traffic sign assemblies. 
C.  Street name signs must utilize the standard vane height of 6 ¾ inches be of fixed length with a maximum of 48 inches. Street name signs may be installed on top of the appropriate intersection traffic control signage. The three-eighths-inch white reflective stripe on top and on bottom must remain visible. 
D.  Sign poles or posts must be of "breakaway" or other design which meets the requirements of Section 7 of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), "Standard Specifications for Highway Signs, Luminaries, and Traffic Signals." A list of supports which meet these standards can be obtained by contacting the Atlanta office of the Federal Highway Administration. It is the responsibility of the maintaining authority to provide documentation to the Hall County Department of Public Works of the Federal Highway Administration's approval of the proposed signage supports. 
E.  A detailed plan for each sign assembly depicting typical installation, pole or post type, sign type and size, and FHWA approval must be provided to and approved by the Hall County Department of Public Works, Traffic Engineering Division, prior to installation. 
F.  All signs must meet the requirements outlined for construction and installation in the current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
G.  Prior to the installation of any signage assemblies, the locations must be marked by the maintaining authority and reviewed by the Hall County Department of Public Works, Traffic Engineering Division. Failure to have locations reviewed may result in signage relocation at the maintaining authority's expense. 
(Res. of 12-12-96, § 1) 
16.170.60. - Regulations for the maintenance of custom support traffic sign assemblies. 
A.  The maintaining authority understands that periodically signs are damaged, vandalized, stolen, or deteriorate. The following maintenance schedule must be followed: 
1.  Stop signs must be replaced within one day. 
2.  Other regulatory signs must be replaced within one week. 
3.  All other signs must be replaced within three weeks. 
B.  It is recommended by the Hall County Department of Public Works, Traffic Engineering Division, that the maintaining authority stock a supply of all utilized signs, especially "Stop" signs, and poles or posts to facilitate timely maintenance. 
(Res. of 12-12-96, § 1) 
16.170.70. - Inspections. 
Hall County will make periodic inspections for substandard signage assemblies. If found, the maintaining authority will be notified. If the maintaining authority fails to replace the defective signs and/or supports within the time constraints outlined in Section 16.170.60(A), Hall County will install county standard sign assemblies and bill the maintaining authority for materials and labor. 
(Res. of 12-12-96, § 1) 
16.170.80. - Failure to adequately maintain the signage assemblies. 
If the maintaining authority fails to adequately maintain the signage assemblies within its jurisdiction, Hall County may revoke the permit and assume maintenance of all affected signage. Once the permit has been revoked and Hall County has assumed maintenance, all custom support signage assemblies will be removed and replaced with standard signage assemblies. The cost for this process will be assessed to the maintaining authority. 
(Res. of 12-12-96, § 1) 
16.170.90. - Request to relinquish maintenance of custom supports and signage assemblies. 
If the maintaining authority wishes to relinquish maintenance of custom supports and signage assemblies, a written request with a petition signed by 70 percent of the maintaining authority's membership shall be provided to the director of the Hall County Public Works Department. The request will be evaluated and along with a recommendation forwarded to the Hall County Board of Commissioners for consideration. If approved, Hall County will remove all custom signage support assemblies and install Hall County standard signage assemblies. The cost for this process will be assessed to the maintaining authority. 
(Res. of 12-12-96, § 1) 
16.170.100. - Authorization to remove signage. 
Any signage that has been installed by Hall County may not be removed and/or replaced by the maintaining authority without authorization from the Hall County Traffic Engineer. 
(Res. of 12-12-96, § 1) 
16.170.110. - Responsible government agencies. 
The responsible government agencies and their locations are as follows: 
Hall County Department of Public Works and Utilities  Attn. Director  P.O. Drawer 1435  Hall County Government Center  2875 Browns Bridge Road, 3rd Floor  Gainesville, GA 30504 
Hall County Department of Public Works  Traffic Engineering Division  Attn. Traffic Engineer  P.O. Drawer 1435  Hall County Government Center  2875 Browns Bridge Road, 3rd Floor  Gainesville, GA 30504 
(Res. of 12-12-96, § 1; Res. of 1-11-01, § 16; Res. of 11-12-15(1), § 3(Exh. D)) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of a resolution adopted Nov. 12, 2015, deleted the plates and drawings previously included in § 16.170.110, and § 4 of said resolution set forth those same plates and drawings in a new Ch. 16.180. 
CHAPTER 16.180. - SUBDIVISION PLATES AND/OR DRAWINGS 

16.180.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide detailed drawings of construction requirements for subdivisions. 
(Res. of 11-12-15(1), § 4(Exh. C); Res. of 7-28-16(1), §§ 5(Exh. E)—11(Exh. K)) 


(Res. of 7-28-16(1), §5(Exh. E)) 

(Res. of 7-28-16(1), §6(Exh. F)) 

(Res. of 7-28-16(1), §7(Exh. G)) 



(Res. of 7-28-16(1), §8(Exh. H)) 


(Res. of 7-28-16(1), §9(Exh. I)) 

(Res. of 7-28-16(1), §10(Exh. J)) 

(Res. of 7-28-16(1), §11(Exh. K)) 







> 
(Res. of 1-8-09(4), Exh. M) 

(Res. of 1-8-09(4), Exh. N) 

> 
(Res. of 1-8-09(4), Exh. O) 

> 
(Res. of 1-8-09(4), Exh. P) 
APPENDIX I. - HALL COUNTY PLAN REVIEW AND INSPECTION FEE SCHEDULE 

 
(Res. 8-22-13(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Title 17 - ZONING REGULATIONS[1] 

 
This resolution [title] shall be known as the "Zoning Regulations of Hall County, Georgia," for the purpose of setting forth standards and permissible uses designed to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health, aesthetics, and general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements by dividing Hall County into districts of such size and shape as may be best suited to carry out the purposes of the legislative act and of this resolution. 
LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY 
Whereas, counties in the State of Georgia are authorized by article IX, section IV, paragraph II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia (section 2-6102 of the Code of Georgia) to exercise the powers of planning and zoning; and 
Whereas, it has been determined by the board of commissioners that it is necessary and desirable to abolish the present zoning regulations adopted under the authority of an Act of the General Assembly of 1957, chapter 69-12 of the Code of Georgia, and to replace them with zoning regulations adopted under the authority of the above-cited constitutional provisions, and to retain the other portions of the Land Development Resolution of Hall County, Georgia, which was originally adopted December 22, 1969, and readopted July 29, 1971; and 
Whereas, the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, is authorized by an Act of the General Assembly of 1977 (Georgia Law 1977, pages 4033—4036) to make the violation of certain of its resolutions a misdemeanor. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— It should be noted that § 1 of a resolution adopted Feb. 27, 2003, provides, "Title 17 entitled "Zoning Regulations" of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, is readopted in its entirety for the following purposes: to adopt a map or maps of any section or sections for zoning purposes of the unincorporated areas of Hall County; to authorize special exceptions and conditional uses; to provide for court review; to define certain terms used in said title; to create zone boundaries; to regulate the locations of trades, professions, businesses, industries, apartment houses and residences; to provide for zoning procedures; to define the area of lots; to fix the location and size of yards and the alignment of buildings; to establish setback lines; to provide for nonconforming uses; and to provide for the administration and enforcement thereof together with penalties for the violation of the provisions of Title 17. Said Title 17 is hereby readopted as set forth in Exhibit "A", a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part hereof as if Exhibit "A" were originally set forth in this Resolution." 
Cross reference— Zoning board of adjustment, ch. 2.40; planning commission, ch. 2.60; business licenses and regulations, tit. 5; minimum distance of adult entertainment establishments from certain uses, § 5.20.080; permitted districts for adult entertainment establishments, § 5.20.300; location of establishments dealing in malt beverages and wine, § 5.30.100; animals, tit. 6; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 8.40; private landfills, § 8.60.220; storage of junk, § 8.60.300; noise control, ch. 8.80; abatement of nuisances, ch. 8.140; deposit or storage of junk, § 8.140.020; streets, sidewalks and public places, tit. 12; driveway construction, ch. 12.40; disposal of wastewater by land application, ch. 13.30; buildings and construction, tit. 15; manufactured homes, § 15.10.120; subdivisions, tit. 16; planned development, § 16.40.080. 

CHAPTER 17.10. - METHOD OF REGULATION 

 

17.10.010. - Zoning regulations adopted; authority. 
The board of county commissioners for Hall County, Georgia, as authorized by article IX, section IV, paragraph II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, does hereby create a planning commission known as the Hall County Planning Commission, and a zoning board of adjustment known as the Hall County Zoning Board of Adjustment, and does hereby adopt zoning regulations for the following purposes: to define certain words used herein; to create zone boundaries; to regulate the locations of trades, professions, businesses, industries, apartment houses, and residences; to define the area of lots; to fix the location and size of yards and the alignment of buildings; to establish setback lines; to provide for nonconforming uses; to provide for the administration and enforcement thereof together with penalties for the violation of its provisions; to adopt a map or maps of any section or sections thereof for zoning purposes of the unincorporated areas of Hall County; to authorize special exceptions and conditional uses; and to provide for court review. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 2; Code 1991, § 17.10.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.20. - DEFINITIONS[2] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq.; airport zoning definitions, § 17.220.020; sign definitions, § 17.230.020; tree protection definitions, § 17.280.100. 

17.20.010. - Rules of construction. 
A.  For the purpose of this title, certain words in the singular number shall include the plural number and words in the plural number shall include the singular number unless the obvious construction of the wording indicates otherwise. 
B.  The word "shall" is mandatory. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally and at right angles to the line in relation to which the distance is specified. The word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "used" shall be deemed also to include "designed," "intended," or "arranged to be used"; the term "erected" shall be deemed also to include "constructed," "reconstructed," "altered," "placed," or "moved." The terms "land use" and "use of land" shall be deemed also to include "building use" and "use of building." The word "adjacent" means "nearby" and not necessarily "contiguous." 
C.  The word "county" shall mean Hall County, Georgia. The terms "county commission," "planning commission," "building official," "engineer," "planning director," "zoning board of adjustment," and "health officer" mean the respective boards, commissions, and officers of said county within their jurisdictions. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.20.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.020. - Adult establishments. 
"Adult establishments" means any adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau as defined by the Hall County Business License Code (section 5.20.020). 
(Res. of 11-4-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.015; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.030. - Agriculture or agricultural. 
"Agriculture" or "agricultural" means the bona fide use of a parcel of land of five acres or more for the cultivation of land, raising of farm animals or exotic animals or similar agrarian activity for gain or profit and the related buildings, structures, and appurtenances necessary to carry out the aforementioned activities. This does not include the raising of dangerous animals. (See also "animal, …" ["animal, dangerous," "animal, exotic," and "animal, farm"].) 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 5-11-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.040. - Airfield. 
"Airfield" means any area of land or water utilized for the landing or taking off of aircraft. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.040; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.050. - Airport. 
"Airport" means any area of land or water designed and set aside for the landing and taking off of aircraft and utilized or to be utilized in the public interest for such purposes. An airport shall include all runways, terminal buildings, hangers, and related facilities located on the airport premises. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.050; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.060. - Airport approach zone. 
"Airport approach zone" means the area so designated on an officially approved airport plan for the use of aircraft approaching the airport runway for landing purposes. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.060; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.070. - Alley. 
"Alley" means a private or public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to a building or property and [is] not intended for general traffic circulation. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.065; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.080. - Amenity. 
"Amenity" means an area and improvements to an area intended to create aesthetic features, provide desirable buffers, and provide recreation facilities for the pleasure and benefit of subdivision residents. The control, management and maintenance of amenities will be the responsibility of an association of all subdivision lot owners and will be for their exclusive use. Amenities will include, but not be limited to, swimming pools, tennis courts, picnic tables and pavilions, ball fields, basketball courts, fishing docks, shuffleboard courts, walking trails, landscaped areas, all with customary, accessory structures and entry signs. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 10-27-86; Code 1991, § 17.20.070; Res. of 3-27-97, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.090. - Animal, dangerous. 
"Dangerous animal" means any domestic, native or exotic mammal, reptile, fish, fowl, insect, spider or other creature that is considered inherently dangerous to human beings. This includes all such animals so identified by the department of natural resources, game and fish division. 
(Res. of 5-11-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.074; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.100. - Animal, exotic. 
"Exotic animal" means any animal not native to the United States or any large native animal not customarily kept in captivity outside zoological gardens. This would include but not be limited to large reptiles, predatory birds, toothless mammals, wild hoofed animals, elephants, wild cats, wild dogs, bears, musk bearing carnivores, marsupials, fowl, primates, hippopotamuses and rhinoceroses. 
(Res. of 5-11-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.075; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.110. - Animal, farm. 
"Farm animal" means any domestic fowl or hoofed mammals normally raised for some type of consumption, to include but not be limited to food, eggs, hide or fur. Farm animals include livestock and fowl raised for gain or profit on a farm. 
(Res. of 5-11-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.076; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.120. - Apartment building. 
"Apartment building" means a multi-family dwelling located on a parcel of land under a single ownership designed for use by three or more housekeeping units living independently of each other and doing their own cooking on the premises. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 4-15-93; Code 1991, § 17.20.080; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.130. - Apartment project. 
"Apartment project" means a group of two or more apartment buildings constructed in accordance with an approved comprehensive development plan. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.090; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.140. - Automobile sales lot. 
"Automobile sales lot" means open premises arranged, designed, or used for storage and display for sale of any motor vehicle or any type of trailer. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.100; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.150. - Bank. 
"Bank" means a business establishment in which money is accepted for deposit from the public and is invested or supplied for loans; e.g., a commercial bank, savings institution, or credit union. 
(Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.105; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.160. - Basement or cellar. 
"Basement" or "cellar" means that portion of a building below the first floor joists, the floor of which is more than one-half the clear ceiling height below the adjacent ground. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.110; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.161. - Multi-family dwelling unit. 
"Multi-family dwelling unit" means a residential building designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families in separate dwelling units living independently of each other. 
(Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.170. - Block. 
"Block" means a parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways, streets, alleys, railroads, rivers, streams, or U.S. government property, regardless of size or shape of such land or the number of lots thereon. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.120; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.180. - Boardinghouse. 
"Boardinghouse" means a dwelling in which, for compensation, lodging and meals are furnished to four or more but not exceeding nine guests. Such dwelling shall contain no more than five guest rooms. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.20.130; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.190. - Buffer, natural. 
A "natural buffer" means an undisturbed vegetation strip adjacent to the lot line, in the buffer area, consisting of the existing natural vegetation. The natural buffer strip shall be used to form a hardy screen dense enough to interrupt vision and noise. No removal of the vegetation is permitted other than as necessary due to natural causes or disease. Any such loss of vegetation, if severe enough to prevent the remaining vegetation to serve as a buffer, must be replaced by the property owner. 
(Res. of 4-15-93; Code 1991, § 17.20.135; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.200. - Buffer, vegetation. 
A "vegetation buffer" means a vegetation strip, typically ten feet in depth, planted along a lot line in the setback area and consisting of evergreen trees and/or shrubs which will normally attain a height of eight feet within five years. It is intended to shield the property from public view of the surrounding properties and, in some cases, the public right-of-way, to reduce noise emitting from the site and to protect the surrounding properties from impacts produced by the use. The vegetated buffer strip shall be used to form a hardy screen dense enough to interrupt vision and noise. The vegetation shall not encroach over the adjacent property lines and shall provide a complete screen during all months of the year. The buffer may include existing vegetation if that vegetation fits the requirements described above. 
(Res. of 4-15-93; Code 1991, § 17.20.136; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.210. - Building. 
"Building" means any structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering and designed, built or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, or property of any kind, including tents or awnings used for purposes of a building. Said definition of "building" shall include a structure as defined by section 17.20.1200 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, which may be permanently attached to the building. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 4-27-90; Code 1991, § 17.20.140; Res. of 1-24-02(2), § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.220. - Building line. 
"Building line" means a line beyond which the foundation wall and/or any roofed porch, vestibule or other such portion of a building shall not project. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.160; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.230. - Building official. 
"Building official" means the official or other designated authority charged by the county board of commissioners with the administration and enforcement of this title, or his duly appointed representative. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 9-7-88; Code 1991, § 17.20.170; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.240. - Building, accessory. 
"Accessory building" means a building detached from and subordinate to a main building or use on the same lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to the use of that property. Any agricultural use shall be deemed to be an accessory building whether situated on the same lot with the principal building or not. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.175; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.250. - Building, principal. 
A "principal building" means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which the structure is situated. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.180; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.260. - Business services. 
"Business services" means services rendered to business establishments, such as advertising, credit reporting, collection of claims, mailing, reproduction, computer programming, photocopying, duplicating, data processing, services to buildings, and help supply services. 
(Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.185; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.270. - Care home. 
"Care home" is a rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, home for the aged or similar use established and operated on a profit or non-profit basis to provide lodging and/or meals and/or domiciliary care for the aged, infirm, chronically ill or convalescent persons. The term "care home" shall include the term "extended care facility" as defined by Georgia law. (See also the definition of "community residence.") 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.190; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.280. - Caretaker or employee residence. 
"Caretaker or employee residence" means an accessory residence (including manufactured homes) placed on an occupied tract for use by a bona fide caretaker, employee or the owner himself and approved by the zoning board of adjustment in accordance with section 17.350.120. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.20.200; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.290. - Church, club or lodge. 
"Church, club or lodge" means buildings in which organized religious, fraternal, social or educational meetings are conducted on a regular non-profit basis. (See also the definitions of "fraternal lodge" and "fraternal organization.") Fraternal organizations and private clubs must occupy no less than two acres of land. Fraternal organizations must show that they have received recognition and sanction from a parent group or organization. A private club must show that its membership is limited by either: 
A.  The use and operation of an amateur athletic facility, including but not limited to golf courses, tennis courts, shooting ranges and/or swimming pools; or 
B.  Residency in a particular subdivision, condominium, apartment project or other residential development. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.210; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.291. - Class A—Dwelling units. 
"Class A—Dwelling units" means all single-family and two-family dwellings, including industrialized dwelling units, and manufactured homes that meet or exceed the standards for single-family and two-family dwellings under this Code. 
(Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.292. - Class B—Dwelling units. 
"Class B—Dwelling units" means all single-family and two-family dwellings including industrialized dwelling units and manufactured homes that do not meet the standards for single-family and two-family dwellings under this Code. 
(Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.300. - Community residence. 
"Community residence" means a single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively permanent basis in a family-like environment by a group of unrelated persons with disabilities plus paid professional support staff provided by a sponsoring agency, either living with the residents on a 24-hour basis, or present whenever residents with disabilities are present at the dwelling; and which complies with the zoning regulations for the district in which the site is located. (See also the definitions of "care home," "disability," "dwelling unit," and "family.") 
(Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.215; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.310. - Conditional use. 
"Conditional use" is a use which is not automatically permitted inherently but which may be permitted within a zoning district subject to meeting specific conditions contained in this regulation or required by the approving body. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.20.220; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.320. - Condominium. 
"Condominium" means a building or complex of multiple-unit dwellings in which a tenant holds full title to his unit and joint ownership in the common grounds. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.230; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.330. - Construction trailer. 
"Construction trailer" means a trailer designed for temporary office use by a contractor working on utility line installation or road improvements for a governmental unit or public utility company. For the purposes of this regulation, the term will also include any storage areas, parking areas or other accessory uses or structures normally associated with such contracts. 
(Res. of 12-23-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.235; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.340. - Cul-de-sac. 
"Cul-de-sac" means a local street with only one outlet, closed and terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.236; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.350. - Day care center. 
"Day care center" means any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group wherein are received for pay, for supervision and care for fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, 19 or more children under 18 years of age, and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. (See also "family day care home" and "group day care home.") 
(Res. of 10-14-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.240; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.360. - Disability. 
"Disability" means a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities, or impairs their ability to live independently, or a record of having such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current use of, or addiction to, a controlled substance. (See the definition of "community residence.") 
(Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.245; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.370. - Drive-in. 
"Drive-in" means a retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided to the consumer on the outside and/or inside of the principal building. The term "drive-in" includes drive-in restaurants and dairy bars, theaters, banks, laundries, food stores and/or car washes. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.250; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.380. - Dwelling unit. 
"Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for a family or for a community residence as a single housekeeping unit. A dwelling unit includes bathroom and kitchen facilities in addition to sleeping and living areas. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.260; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.390. - Dwelling unit, attached. 
"Attached dwelling unit" means one of two or more dwelling units having a common or party wall separating units. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.262; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.400. - Easement. 
"Easement" means a grant to a person or to the public by a property owner of a strip of his land for road right-of-way or other specified purposes. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.270; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.410. - Equestrian center. 
"Equestrian center" means a tract of land of five acres or more on which more than four adult horses, mules or burros are kept for the purpose of training, boarding, sales or breeding or where instruction pertaining to the same is given for a fee. For the purposes of this regulation this term also includes facilities for riding trails and rings, shows, competitive equestrian events and riding lessons. The raising of four or fewer adult horses, mules or burros would be inherently allowed in all residential zones that allow an equestrian center. 
(Res. of 7-8-91; Res. of 4-30-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.275; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.420. - Family. 
"Family" means one or more persons permanently occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood or marriage no such family shall contain over five persons, but further provided that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises or in an accessory building. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.280; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.430. - Family day care home. 
"Family day care home" means a private residence operated by any person who receives therein for pay, for supervision and care fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, three but not more than six children under 18 years of age who are not related to such person and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private residence. (See also "day care center" and "group day care home.") 
(Res. of 10-14-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.282; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.440. - Farm. 
"Farm" means a parcel of land five acres or more on which bona fide agricultural and related uses are conducted as specified in section 17.20.030. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.290; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.450. - Farm, small animal specialty. 
"Farm, small animal specialty," means the commercial production on less than five acres of land of small animals, to include but not be limited to rabbits, birds, fish, mink, bees, worms or other similar animals. This includes only the sale of the animals and a container to hold them. No sales of cages, feed in bags, or animal accessories shall be transacted. 
(Res. of 5-11-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.292; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.460. - Fraternal lodge. 
"Fraternal lodge" means a place for meetings and social activities of a fraternal organization. (See also the definition of "church, club or lodge.") 
(Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.295; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.470. - Fraternal organization. 
"Fraternal organization" means a non-profit membership organization based primarily on social affinity (as distinguished from a civic, economic, occupational, political, religious, or other basis for association). 
(Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.296; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.480. - Frontage. 
"Frontage" means that dimension of a lot measured along the front street line thereof, or, if the front street line is curved, along the chord of the arc. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.300; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.490. - Garage, private. 
"Private garage" means an accessory building or portion of a principal building used only for the private storage of motor vehicles as an accessory use. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.310; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.500. - Garage, public. 
"Public garage" means any garage other than a private garage which is used for storage, rental, servicing, washing, adjusting or equipping of automobiles or other motor vehicles. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.320; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.510. - Garage, repair. 
A "repair garage" means buildings and premises designed or used for the purpose of service and/or major commercial repair of motor vehicles, provided that the body work and painting shall be conducted within fully enclosed buildings, and provided further that the storage of junk, wrecked vehicles, dismantled parts or supplies shall not be visible beyond the premises except as provided for in section 17.260.010.D. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 7-11-88; Code 1991, § 17.20.330; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.520. - Group day care home. 
"Group day care home" means any place operated by any person(s), partnership, association or corporation wherein are received for pay, for supervision and care, not less than seven or more than 18 children under 18 years of age, for less than 24 hours, without transfer of legal custody, and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
(Res. of 10-14-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.338; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.530. - Group home. 
"Group home" means a residence under the ownership and supervision of a public educational, religious or governmental institution occupied or intended for occupancy by several unrelated persons or families but in which separate cooking facilities are not provided for such resident persons or families. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.340; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.540. - Guest house. 
"Guest house" means accessory living quarters situated within a detached or semi-detached site-built structure located on the same premises with the principal residence. Guest houses shall be limited to one such structure per lot and will not include mobile or modular structures. The size of the guest house shall be limited in that the total area of all structures (existing and proposed) shall not be more than 20 percent of the total lot area, if those structures include a guest house. The guest house shall: 
A.  Be located a minimum of 20 feet from the principal residence; 
B.  Be used by a bona fide non-paying guest or relative of the occupants of the premises; and 
C.  Not be rented or otherwise occupied as a principal residence. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 4-26-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.350; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.550. - Hardship mobile home. 
"Hardship mobile home" means a mobile home which has been approved by the zoning board of adjustment, placed on an occupied residential lot in compliance with section 17.350.110. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.20.360; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.560. - Home occupation. 
"Home occupation" means an occupation or profession conducted entirely within a dwelling and which is carried on by an occupant thereof and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. There is no access by the public. A home occupation is designed to be less restrictive than a home office but more restrictive than a residential business in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number of employees and types of business. Conditions for a home occupation are listed in chapter 17.210. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.370; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.570. - Home office. 
"Home office" means an office use conducted entirely within a dwelling which is carried on by the occupant thereof and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. There will be no changes which would alter the character of the dwelling or reveal from the exterior that the dwelling is being used in part for other than residential purposes. The office will be restricted to no more than one room of the dwelling and cannot exceed more than 300 square feet in area. Such office uses shall be limited to routine office clerical or bookkeeping procedures which can be conducted within a residence. Home offices shall not include any business which involves the sale, manufacture or repair of merchandise on the premises or the storage of inventory, raw materials or other materials to be used in the business. Home offices shall also not include any business requiring access by the public, including but not limited to customers, clients or vendors. No outside storage or display including signs is permitted, and no one other than family members who reside on the premises may be employed in the office. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 11-11-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.380; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.580. - Hospital. 
"Hospital" means any institution receiving inpatients and rendering medical care, including those wherein mentally retarded, mentally disturbed, epileptic, alcoholic, drug addicted, chronically ill and physically handicapped patients are treated or cared for. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.390; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.590. - Industrial park. 
"Industrial park" means a tract of land subdivided and developed according to a comprehensive development plan in a manner which provides a parklike setting for industrial establishments. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.400; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.591. - Industrialized dwelling unit. 
"Industrialized dwelling unit" means a dwelling or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation-site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof and which bear the insignia of approval issued by the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
(Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.600. - Inventory items. 
"Inventory items" means those items not designed or intended to function outdoors or independently, including but not limited to washing machines, clothes dryers, refrigerators, water heaters and other appliances and parts of automobiles, boats and other vehicles. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 9-7-88; Code 1991, § 17.20.410; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.610. - Junk yard. 
"Junk yard" means the use of any space whether inside or outside a building for the storage, keeping, salvage and/or sale of junk, scrap metals or other scrap materials, including the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of one or more automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.420; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.620. - Kennel, commercial. 
"Commercial kennel" means any place in or at which more than four adult dogs (or cats) are kept for the purpose of sale, boarding, care, breeding or training and for which any fee is charged. A commercial kennel shall be located on not less than five acres of land in the residential zoning districts. The raising of four or fewer adult dogs (or cats) would be inherently allowed in all residential zones that allow a commercial kennel. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 11-11-91; Res. of 4-30-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.430; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.630. - Laboratory. 
"Laboratory" means an establishment or premises where scientific services are provided, including testing or analysis of medical, chemical, physical, mechanical, electric or electronic nature or the calibration of instruments. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.440; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.640. - Lot. 
"Lot" means a parcel of land which is designated as a single unit of property. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.450; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.650. - Lot depth. 
"Lot depth" means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the general direction of the side lot lines. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.480; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.660. - Lot line, front. 
"Front lot line" means the front line of an interior lot separating the lot from the frontage street right-of-way. The front lot line of a corner lot shall be the lot line upon which the principal building entrance will front. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.500; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.670. - Lot line, rear. 
"Rear lot line" means the lot line [that] is generally opposite the lot line along the frontage of the lot. If the rear lot [line] is less than ten feet in length or if the lot comes to a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the front lot line not less than ten feet long lying wholly within the lot and farthest from the front lot line. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.510; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.680. - Lot of record. 
"Lot of record" means a lot or plat which has been legally recorded with the county clerk of superior court prior to the effective date of the resolution codified in this title and which actually exists as so shown or described. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.515; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.690. - Lot width. 
"Lot width" means the distance between the side lot lines measured at the front building line. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.520; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.700. - Lot, corner. 
"Corner lot" means a lot located at the junction of and abutting on two or more intersecting streets. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.523; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.710. - Lot, interior. 
"Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.526; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.711. - Manufactured home. 
"Manufactured home" means a dwelling fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying that it is constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq.), which first became effective on June 15, 1976. The term "manufactured home" includes a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein, except that such term includes any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirement and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq.). 
(Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.720. - Minor subdivisions. 
"Minor subdivision" means the subdivision of land into a total of two conforming lots, parcels, tracts or building sites during a 12-month period. The resultant lots must meet all of the requirements (lot size, frontage, access, etc.) of the zoning district in which they are classified and the requirements of the county subdivision regulations. Minor subdivisions which conform to the aforementioned standards may be created on any lot, tract or parcel which was recorded with the county clerk of superior court prior to January 1 of each calendar year, provided the subject lot and all resultant lots comply with the standards of the county zoning and subdivision regulations. Once any lot, tract or parcel meeting the aforementioned standards has been subdivided into a total of two lots, tracts, parcels or building sites, no further subdivision of either of the two lots is permitted inherently for the 12-month period after the land was subdivided. Any additional subdivision beyond two lots per 12-month period shall require consideration by the county planning commission as a use subject to planning commission approval. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 4-14-94; Code 1991, § 17.20.530; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.730. - Mobile home. 
"Mobile home" means a dwelling manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.540; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.740. - Manufactured home park. 
"Manufactured home park" means a parcel of land containing not less than five acres under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more manufactured homes or mobile homes for nontransient uses. Excepted from this definition are those parcels of land on which two or more manufactured homes or mobile homes existed prior to August, 1978, and are identified on public records maintained in the Hall County Planning Director's Office. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.550; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.750. - Modular home. 
"Modular home" means a detached single-family dwelling which is fabricated entirely or in part at some location other than its permanent site and which may be a complete unit or closed segments thereof. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.560; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.760. - Motel. 
"Motel" means a building or group of buildings containing guest rooms and having separate outside entrances for each guest room, to be used primarily for automobile transients, and including such terms as "auto court" and "motor lodge," but not "boarding house," as defined in this chapter. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.570; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.761. - Multi-family dwelling unit. 
"Multi-family dwelling unit" means a residential building designed and used exclusively for permanent rather than transient occupancy by three or more families in separate dwelling units living independently of each other. 
(Res. of 10-24-02, § 3; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.770. - Nonconforming use. 
"Nonconforming use" means any building or use which lawfully exists at the time of adoption of the resolution adopted in this chapter and which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.580; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.780. - Occupy. 
"Occupy" means to use land or buildings for any length of time for a purpose for which the land or a building or part thereof is used or is intended to be used. Any variation of the term "occupy" shall be encompassed by this definition. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 9-7-88; Code 1991, § 17.20.590; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.781. - Occupancy, permanent. 
"Permanent occupancy" means occupancy or use by an owner, or by a tenant for periods of 30 consecutive days or more. Such occupancy is characteristic of single-family, two-family and multiple-family dwelling units, including mobile homes, industrialized homes, manufactured homes, town homes and condominiums. The county commission may allow for transient occupancy of units permitted for permanent occupancy in the event of natural disasters or large community events that put a special burden on the local transient housing market. 
(Res. of 10-24-02, § 4; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.782. - Occupancy, transient. 
"Transient occupancy" means occupancy or use by a paying guest or tenant for a period of less than 30 consecutive days or by the offering or advertising of a residence as being available in whole or in part to be used for such occupancy. Such occupancy is characteristic of hotels, motels, boardinghouses and rooming houses. 
(Res. of 10-24-02, § 5; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.787. - Overlay District. 
A zoning district that encompasses one or more underlying traditional use districts or zones and that imposes additional requirements and/or allows additional permitted uses above those required or allowed by the underlying zone[s]. An overlay district can be coterminous with existing zoning districts or contain only parts of one or more such districts. Where an overlay district's principal purpose is to impose additional requirements on otherwise permitted land uses, it is customary for such a district to be created at the instance of the county. By contrast, where the principal purpose of an overlay district is to allow an additional use that would not otherwise be permitted in the underlying zone(s), then it will customarily be a private applicant who will institute the necessary map amendment process. 
(Res. of 3-25-04, § 1) 
17.20.790. - Park, community. 
"Community park" means a parcel of land owned by a unit of government or a private organization used or intended to be used for recreational or leisure time activities. Such parks may include food and/or recreational sales as accessory uses. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.600; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.800. - Planned unit development. 
"Planned unit development" means the development of a tract of land ten acres or more by which clustered housing and/or commercial, office or industrial development may be permitted without the customary subdivision of lots. A comprehensive development plan for such a project shall be submitted to the planning commission for their review and approval. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.610; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.810. - Plat. 
"Plat" means a sketch, map or survey of a lot, tract or parcel of land, including lot lines, street rights-of-way and easements, with the dimensions of these features inscribed thereon. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.620; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.820. - Plat, development. 
"Development plat" means a preliminary design which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to indicate its workability and conformation to the design requirements of the subdivision regulations in all aspects, but [which] is not in final form for recording and [on which] the details are not completely computed. The development plat shall be approved by the planning commission prior to any development. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.630; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.830. - Plat, final. 
"Final plat" means a finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information and certification necessary for recording. The final plat of a subdivision shall be approved by the planning commission and the streets shown on the plat shall be approved by the board of commissioners previous to recording. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.640; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.840. - Public use. 
"Public use" means a use conducted by a unit of government. 
(Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.648; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.850. - Public way. 
"Public way" means a street or road which has been dedicated for public use by deed, plat and/or prescription. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.650; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.860. - Recreational or cultural use of a commercial nature. 
"Recreational or cultural use of a commercial nature" means a building or use which provides entertainment, education, recreation and/or amusement for profit such as but not limited to a health spa, dance hall, bowling alley, skating rink, shooting range, fortune telling, amusement park, private zoo, sports stadium or arena, art gallery, concert hall, swimming pool or drive-in theater. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.660; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.870. - Residence. 
"Residence" means a building containing only dwelling units and which meets all the applicable requirements of the Standard Building Code for conventional construction. The term "residence" or any combination thereof shall not be deemed to include a hotel, boarding house, rooming house, motel or other accommodations used for transient occupancy, and shall not for the purpose of this chapter [title] include a mobile home or modular home. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.670; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.880. - Residence, duplex or two-family. 
"Duplex or two-family residence" means a detached residence designed for or occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.690; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.890. - Residence, multi-family. 
"Multi-family residence" means a detached residence designed for or occupied exclusively by three or more families living independently of each other. This includes, but is not limited to, townhouses and apartments. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 4-15-93; Code 1991, § 17.20.700; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.900. - Residence, single-family. 
"Single-family residence" means a detached residence other than a mobile home, modular home or travel trailer designed for or occupied by one family. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.705; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.910. - Restaurant. 
"Restaurant" means any establishment, however designated, at which food is sold for consumption on the premises. However, a snack bar or refreshment stand at a public or non-profit community swimming pool, playground, park or marina operated solely for the convenience of patrons of the facility shall not be deemed a restaurant. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.710; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.920. - Residential business. 
"Residential business" means an occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling, and which is carried on by an occupant thereof and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. The business may require access by the public. The residential business is designed to be less restrictive than a home office or home occupation but more restrictive than a rural business in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number of employees and types of business. Planning commission approval is required in accordance with the conditions outlined in section 17.350.130. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.20.720; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.930. - Resubdivision. 
"Resubdivision" means a legal subdivision which has been altered by changing of a line, bearing or other measurement which either reduces or enlarges the number of lots or size of lots originally created and which is subsequently platted and recorded in a legal manner. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.730; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.940. - Retail. 
"Retail" means the sale of merchandise for personal or household consumption, including processing incidental or subordinate to selling. 
(Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.735; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.950. - Right-of-way. 
"Right-of-way" means access over or across particularly described property for a specific purpose or purposes. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.740; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.960. - Rural business. 
"Rural business" means an occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling, an accessory structure or outside and which is carried on by a resident of that property and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property for residential dwelling purposes. The rural business is designed to be less restrictive than a home office, home occupation or residential business in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number of employees and types of business. Planning commission approval is required for a rural business in accordance with the conditions outlined in section 17.350.140. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.20.750; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.970. - School, nursery and kindergarten. 
"School, nursery and kindergarten" means a school designed to provide early childhood education for children ages three through six. Such schools shall provide at least 100 square feet of outdoor play area for each child; such play areas shall be enclosed by a fence of at least three feet six inches in height. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.760; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.980. - Scrap materials. 
"Scrap materials" means any items normally considered as salvage, scrap, junk, or as useless or worthless materials. This includes, but is not limited to, pieces, fragments, and parts of items no longer usable as originally intended, materials left over from fabricating, leftover bits of food and empty containers. 
(Res. of 8-12-93; Code 1991, § 17.20.765; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.990. - Service station, automobile. 
"Automobile service station" means a building and/or lot where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and other automobile accessories may be dispensed at retail and where the business of general motor vehicle service and minor repair is conducted but where no part of the premises is used for the storage of dismantled or wrecked vehicle parts. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.770; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1000. - Setback. 
"Setback" means the minimum horizontal distance between the street, rear or side lines of the lot and the front, rear or side lines of the building or structure attached thereto. The term "required setback" means a line beyond which a building or structure attached thereto is not permitted to extend under the provisions of this title establishing minimum depth and width of yards. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.780; Res. of 1-24-02(2), § 2; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1010. - Shopping center. 
"Shopping center" means a group of commercial establishments planned, developed and owned or managed as a unit with on-site parking and of similar architectural characteristics. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.790; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1020. - Sign. 
"Sign" means every billboard, poster panel, free-standing ground sign, roof sign, projecting sign, pylon sign, illuminated sign, and sign painted on a wall, window, marquee, awning or canopy and shall include any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, ribbon, banner, illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any person when the same is placed in view of the general public. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 9-10-90; Code 1991, § 17.20.800; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1030. - Sign area. 
"Sign area" means the actual face or advertising area of a sign on one side only. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.810; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1040. - Sign, billboard. 
"Billboard sign" means a free-standing or attached outdoor advertising structure promoting any business, product, service, industry or use other than that performed on the property on which the sign is placed. The billboard may or may not be illuminated and may be any size up to the maximum size permitted by these regulations. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.820; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1050. - Sign, business. 
"Business sign" means a sign directing attention to a business, commodity, service or other activity conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.830; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1051. - Single-family detached dwelling unit. 
"Single-family detached dwelling unit" means a residential building, whether site-built or a manufactured home or an industrialized building, designed and used exclusively for permanent rather than transient occupancy by one family. 
(Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 1; Res. of 10-24-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1052. - Site-built single-family detached dwelling unit. 
"Site-built single-family detached dwelling unit" means a single-family detached dwelling constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site, and which is constructed in accordance with all requirements of the Building Code as adopted by Hall County. 
(Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1053. - Site-built two-family dwelling unit. 
"Site-built two-family dwelling unit" means a two-family dwelling constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site and which is constructed in accordance with all requirements of the building codes as adopted by Hall County. 
(Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1060. - Slow rate land treatment system. 
"Slow rate land treatment system" means a system for wastewater treatment by spray irrigation (land application). The term refers to the advanced treatment of wastewater by irrigation onto land to support vegetative growth. When properly sited, designed and operated as defined by state and local regulations, there is no direct discharge to surface waters. The irrigated wastewater evaporates and transpires to the atmosphere or enters the groundwater through percolation. Organic constituents in the wastewater are stabilized by soil bacteria. Organic and ammonia nitrogen are taken up by plants, nitrified by soil bacteria, lost to the atmosphere through denitrification, and leached into the groundwater. Phosphorus and other constituents are adsorbed in the soil profile and taken up by plants. Properly sited, designed and operated wastewater irrigation systems produce a percolate water of high quality and thus protect ground and surface water resources. For purposes of this regulation, the use may include ponds (lagoons) for the temporary storage of the treated wastewater before application to the spray fields. The treated wastewater stored in the lagoons must have been treated to a level that could be sprayed without further treatment. These ponds shall have liners to prevent seepage. This land use is permitted only with the approval of the county commission after a recommendation by the planning commission. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 1-14-91; Res. of 4-26-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.835; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1070. - Stable, commercial. 
"Commercial stable" means any place established for gain or profit at which more than four adult horses are kept for the purpose of training, boarding, sale or breeding or where instruction pertaining to the same is given for a fee. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.836; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1080. - Storage facility, self-service. 
"Storage facility, self-service," means a building consisting of multiple small self-contained stalls or lockers that are leased or owned for the storage of customers' goods or wares. 
(Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.20.838; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1090. - Street. 
"Street" means a public or dedicated thoroughfare or a private right-of-way or easement shown on a recorded plat and which has been approved by the planning commission. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.850; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1100. - Street right-of-way. 
"Street right-of-way" means a line defining the outer edges of a street boundary and separating the street from abutting property or lots or a proposed street line shown on any plan approved by the planning commission. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.853; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1110. - Street, arterial. 
"Street, arterial" means a major street, highway or state route with intersections at grade and direct access to abutting property, and on which geometric design and traffic control measures are used to expedite the safe movement of through traffic between major traffic generators. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 4-26-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.856; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1120. - Street, collector. 
"Collector street" means any street designed and located to collect traffic from intersecting minor streets while still giving access to abutting property, and to conduct such traffic to and from a variety of destinations outside a single subdivision, neighborhood or business district. See also "street, residential collector." 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.858; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1130. - Street, connector. 
"Connector street" means a street supplementary to the major state and U.S. highway systems running throughout the country and primarily a means of intercommunication between this system and smaller areas. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.860; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1140. - Street, local. 
"Local street" means a street intended solely to provide access to immediately adjacent land; in residential areas, a residential access or residential subcollector street. See also "street, residential access." 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.862; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1150. - Street, marginal access. 
"Marginal access street" means a special-purpose street provided parallel and adjacent to a collector or higher order street for safety, by providing access to abutting properties and separation from through traffic on the higher order street. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.863; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1160. - Street, minor. 
"Minor street" means a local street. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.864; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1170. - Street, residential access. 
"Residential access street" means the lowest order street in the hierarchy of streets; a street having the sole purpose of providing frontage for service and access to private lots. These streets carry only traffic having either destination or origin on the street itself. The elimination of through traffic and the geometric design of the street are means to promote safety and to create a desirable residential neighborhood. This street is designed to carry average daily traffic (ADT) of no more than 200 for each outlet to another street (e.g., a cul-de-sac or other single-access street will carry 200; a loop street will carry 200 per outlet, or 400). See also "street, local." 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.865; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1180. - Street, residential collector. 
"Residential collector street" means the next level above a residential subcollector street in the hierarchy of streets; a street which conducts and distributes traffic between other residential streets of lower order in the streets hierarchy and either higher order streets or major activity centers. This is the highest order of street appropriate to a residential neighborhood, and residential frontage along it is normally prohibited or severely restricted. This street is designed to carry average daily traffic (ADT) of no more than 3,000 at any point. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.866; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1190. - Street, residential subcollector. 
"Residential subcollector street" means the next level above a residential access street in the hierarchy of streets; an access street which provides frontage for residential lots and may carry a small amount of residential through traffic collected only from tributary residential access streets. This street is designed to carry average daily traffic (ADT) of no more than 500 for each outlet to another street (e.g., a cul-de-sac or other single-access street will carry 500; a loop street will carry 500 per outlet, or 1,000). 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.867; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1200. - Structure. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected the use of which requires permanent or semipermanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having permanent location on the ground. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.880; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1210. - Subdivision. 
"Subdivision" means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose of sale, legacy, a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision. Where appropriate to the context, subdivision also relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. The term shall also include the opening of a new street or road. The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots meet the standards of the county subdivision regulations is not included within this definition. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 1-11-82; Res. of 2-22-88; Code 1991, § 17.20.890; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1220. - Temporary sales office. 
"Temporary sales office" means a real estate office which is located within an approved recorded subdivision and is restricted in use to the sale of approved lots within the boundaries of that subdivision. The conditions applicable to the sales office are found in section 17.350.170 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.20.900; Res. of 3-27-97, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1230. - Townhouse. 
"Townhouse" means residential structures containing three or more attached single-family units designed as a single structure having common or party walls. Each unit shall have its own front door which opens to the outdoors, and the units shall have two floors, but without access between adjoining units. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 3-28-83; Code 1991, § 17.20.910; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1231. - Two-family dwelling unit. 
"Two-family dwelling unit" means a residential building designed and used exclusively for permanent rather than transient occupancy by two families in separate dwelling units living independently of each other. 
(Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 1; Res. of 10-24-02, § 2; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1240. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Res. of 3-11-99, § 2, repealed § 17.20.1240, which pertained to transmission towers and derived from Res. of 1-13-92 and Code 1991, § 17.20.915. 
17.20.1250. - Travel trailer. 
"Travel trailer" means a vehicular portable structure not over eight feet by 35 feet and designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, which may or may not have kitchen equipment, toilet, lavatory and bathing facilities, but, if such facilities are included, a sewage holding tank for sanitary waste is required. Any vehicle designed or converted to a design with plumbing connections for attachment to outside sewage systems shall not be included in this definition. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.920; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1260. - Travel trailer park. 
"Travel trailer park" means a parcel of land which has been planned and developed to accommodate two or more travel trailers, tents or other camping units for temporary occupancy of not over 60 days' duration. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.930; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1270. - Turnaround. 
"Turnaround" means the circular pavement paved area intended to facilitate turning around of vehicles at the end of a cul-de-sac. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.20.934; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1280. - Use, permitted. 
"Permitted use" means those uses specifically listed in this title as "uses permitted inherently," not to include uses herein defined as "nonconforming use." 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.940; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1290. - Use, principal. 
"Principal use" means the principal purpose for which a lot or building is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.950; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1300. - Uses subject to approval of the planning commission. 
"Uses subject to approval of the planning commission" or similar terms contained in this title mean that the use may be permitted in the zoning district upon the specific approval of the individual application by the planning commission. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.960; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1305. - Vacation home. 
Vacation home means any residential structure used for transient occupancy including but not limited to cabins, single-family dwellings and other such residential structures as permitted provided: 
a.  The owner has paid all required excise tax as per section 3.40.020 of this Code for all transient occupancy, 
b.  The owner has registered as per section 3.40.060 of this Code, 
c.  The owner has complied with all other applicable provisions of chapter 3.40 of this Code, 
d.  The owner has obtained a business license for said vacation home, 
e.  The owner has complied with all applicable provisions of title 5 of this Code for business licenses and regulations, and 
f.  Other than vehicles parked in garages or carports, all parking at the residence shall not exceed four vehicles which vehicles: 
(1)  Shall not be parked on the street; 
(2)  Shall be parked only on designated hard surfaced areas with gravel, concrete or asphalt surfacing; and 
(3)  Shall not be permitted outside such surfaced areas in paragraph a.f.(2) of this section (i.e., no parking in yards). 
(Ord. of 5-27-10, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— Ord. of May 27, 2010, § 1(Exh. A), repealed former § 17.20.1305, and enacted a new § 17.20.1305 as set out herein. Former § 17.20.1305 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
17.20.1310. - Variance. 
"Variance" means a modification of the strict terms of zoning regulations granted by the zoning board of adjustment where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing to conditions unique to the individual property on which the variance is sought and not as a result of any action on the part of the property owner, a literal enforcement of this resolution [title] would result in unnecessary and undue hardship; provided, however, that no variance shall be granted which shall authorize a land use not otherwise permitted in a particular district. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.20.970; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1320. - Vehicle. 
"Vehicle" means any device or contrivance for carrying or conveying persons or objects, said device being designed to be self-propelled by its own motor or power. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Res. of 4-27-90; Code 1991, § 17.20.975; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1330. - Water system. 
"Water system" means a potable water supply and treatment system other than individual or community water systems, owned by a unit of government. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.980; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1340. - Water system, community. 
"Community water system" means a potable water supply and treatment system other than an individual or public water system serving more than one building, residence or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. The system is one which is owned by a person or legal unit other than a unit of government. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.990; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1350. - Water system, individual. 
"Individual water system" means a potable water system other than a community or public water system serving a single building, residence or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.1000; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1360. - Yard. 
"Yard" means a required open space located on the same lot as the principal building, and which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except for tree or shrub growth and fences or walls, or where encroachments, utilities and accessory uses are expressly permitted. A yard requirement may also be referred to as a "setback." 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.1010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1370. - Yard sale. 
"Yard sale" means sales of used household belongings by an individual at his principal residence or by a group of individuals combining such items for a group yard sale at one of their principal residences. Such sales may be held no more than four times in a calendar year, with each individual sale lasting no more than three consecutive days. All merchandise must be the property of the person(s) holding the sale and not be purchased for the purpose of resale. The term also includes garage sales, basement sales, or other similar usage. Such sales are exempt from the screening requirements of section 17.260.010. All other sales of merchandise are considered retail sales, and the merchandise is considered as inventory subject to the screening requirements of section 17.260.010. 
(Res. of 8-12-93; Code 1991, § 17.20.1015; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1380. - Yard, front. 
"Front yard" means a yard situated between the front building line and the front [lot] line extending the full width of the lot. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.1020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1390. - Yard, rear. 
"Rear yard" means a yard situated between the rear building line and rear lot line and extending the full width of the lot. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.1030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.20.1400. - Yard, side. 
"Side yard" means a yard situated between a side building line and a side lot line and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 3; Code 1991, § 17.20.1040; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.30. - ZONING APPLICATION FEE 

 

17.30.010. - General provisions; fees established; refunds. 
A.  General provisions. 
1.  Fees for the administration of the zoning regulations shall be collected previous to action by any commission or board or final action by any administrative officer. An application shall not be considered complete until the required fee is paid. 
2.  Should the zoning board of adjustment find in favor of the appellant on an action of alleged error of an administrative official, the assessed fee shall be refunded. 
B.  Applications to planning commission. 
_____ 
1.  Rezoning application fee. 

 
2.  Conditional uses and uses permitted subject to the approval of the Planning Commission. 

 
_____ 
3.  Site plan review of mobile home parks, $0.10 per linear foot of new street proposed and $5.00 per mobile home space proposed. 
4.  Determination of unclassified use: None. 
C.  Applications to Hall County Planning Commission include: 
1.  Conditional uses. 
2.  Variance from the terms of this title. 
3.  Enlargement, change or continuance of nonconforming uses, or 
4.  Alleged error of an administrative official. 
5.  Applications to the Hall County Planning Commission in V-C, R-I, R-I-L, R-II, AR-III, and AR-IV zones: $350.00. 
6.  Applications to the Hall County Planning Commission in R-TF, R-MF, O-I, S-S, H-B, I-I, I-II, PRD, POD, PCD, PID, P-C, and MHP zones: $400.00. 
7.  Zoning certification letter: $25.00. 
D.  [ Appeals. ] Appeals to the county board of commissioners: $200.00. 
E.  Refund of application fees. (See also section 17.380.140.) 
1.  Rezoning and uses permitted subject to the approval of the county commissioners: 
a.  Withdrawal prior to notification of adjacent property owners by public advertisement: 50% of application fee. 
b.  Withdrawal after notification of adjacent property owners by public advertisement but prior to a planning commission decision: 25% of application fee. 
c.  Withdrawal after a planning commission decision: None. 
2.  Conditional uses and uses permitted subject to approval of the planning commission: 
a.  Withdrawal prior to notification of adjacent property owners by public advertisement: 50% of application fee. 
b.  Withdrawal after notification of adjacent property owners by public advertisement: None. 
3.  Applications to the zoning board of adjustment: 
a.  Withdrawal prior to notification of adjacent property owners by public advertisement: 50% of application fee. 
[b.  Reserved.] 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 4; Res. of 8-14-89; Code 1991, § 17.30.010; Res. of 11-11-98, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 3-25-04, § 2; Res. of 1-12-12(4), Exh. A) 
CHAPTER 17.40. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

 

17.40.010. - General provisions. 
No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located [and] without first obtaining an occupancy permit, except as provided for signs in this title. No building, structure or part thereof shall be constructed, erected, enlarged, altered, repaired, changed, converted, moved or demolished without first obtaining a building permit and other permits as may be required by law, except as hereinafter provided. In the enforcement of the provisions of this title, the building official may withhold building or occupancy permits until all provisions of this resolution [title] are complied with or his decision is appealed to and reversed by the zoning board of adjustment. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 5(D); Res. of 9-7-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 4-27-90; Res. of 8-26-91; Code 1991, § 17.40.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.40.020. - Use districts. 
For the purpose of these regulations, the area of jurisdiction within the county is divided into districts designated as follows: 

 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 5(A); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 12-28-87; Res. of 12-9-91; Code 1991, § 17.40.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 3-25-04, § 3) 
17.40.030. - Adoption of official zoning map and district boundaries. 
A.  The map maintained in electronic format by the Hall County Geographic Information System is adopted as the official zoning map of Hall County, Georgia, and incorporated herein by reference. 
1.  Copies of the map shall be printed and sold to the general public of the county, and the charges therefore being sufficient to cover the expense of printing the maps and the cost of distribution. 
2.  The official zoning map of Hall County, Georgia, will be in the custody and on file in the GIS office of the planning department of Hall County, Georgia for public inspection and review. 
3.  The boundaries of those districts are hereby established as shown on the map in electronic formatted map designated as the official zoning map, Hall County, Georgia, as amended from time to time. 
4.  If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the official zoning map in electronic format, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map in electronic format promptly after the Hall County Board of Commissioners has approved the amendment. 
5.  Such changes shall be the responsibility of the Hall County Planning Department and shall be made under the supervision of the Hall County Planning Director or his designee within the Hall County Planning Department. 
6.  In the event that an official zoning map of Hall County becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions thereon, the Hall County Board of Commissioners may by resolution adopt one or more new official zoning maps which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map or maps may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map or maps, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or maps, and said map or maps shall be identified by the signature of the Hall County Planning Director who shall certify that the official zoning map or maps supersedes and replaces the previous official zoning map adopted as a part of the resolution of Hall County, Georgia. Unless the previous official zoning map or maps has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or maps or any significant remaining parts thereof, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
B.  Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets or highways or railroad right-of-way lines or such lines extended, such center lines or railroad right-of-way lines or such lines extended shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
2.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the county line or the corporate limit line of any incorporated place or the militia district line of any militia district or the land lot line of any land lot, such county line, corporate limit line, militia district line or land lot line shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
3.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately parallel to the center lines of streets or highways, such district boundaries unless otherwise specifically indicated shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at a distance of 300, 500 or 1,000 feet from the center line of such streets and highways, each above district boundary being shown at scale on the official zoning map of the county. 
4.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center line of stream beds or river beds, such center lines or such lines extended shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
5.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately parallel to the shoreline of the Buford Dam Reservoir, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at a distance of 500 feet from the nearest point of the 1070 contour line unless otherwise indicated 
(Res. of 3-11-10, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— Res. of March 11, 2010, § 1(Exh. A), deleted former § 17.40.030, and enacted a new § 17.40.030 as set out herein. Former § 17.40.030 pertained to district boundaries and derived from Res. of 8-28-78, § 5(B); Code 1991, § 17.40.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1 and Res. of 2-27-03(2), § 1). 
17.40.040. - District boundary lines dividing lot of single ownership. 
Where a district boundary line as appearing on the zoning map divides a lot in single ownership at the time of the enactment of these regulations, the requirements for the district in which the greater portion of the lot lines [lies] shall be extended to the balance of the lot, provided that such extension will not include any part of such lot more than 35 feet beyond the district boundary line, and provided further that this provision shall not apply to a through lot. In the case of a through lot, the restrictions of the district applying to the adjoining lots which front on the same street as the proposed use of the lot shall apply, a through lot being a lot that runs from street to street. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 5(C); Code 1991, § 17.40.040; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.40.050. - Standards for single-family and two-family dwelling units 
Except as specifically excepted by this resolution, all single-family and two-family dwellings, including site-built dwelling units, industrialized dwelling units, and manufactured homes, shall meet or exceed the following requirements in order to be constructed, assembled, moved into, or relocated within Hall County. 
A.  Foundation. 
1.  The dwelling shall be attached to a permanent foundation constructed in accordance with the Building Code or State regulations, as applicable. 
2.  Upon placement, wheels, axles, and hitches, shall be removed. 
3.  The area beneath the ground floor of the dwelling shall either be a slab foundation or shall be enclosed around the exterior of the dwelling with a foundation wall or a curtain wall constructed of masonry at least 4 inches thick, penetrated by openings only for installed vents and access doors. 
B.  Exterior siding. Exterior siding materials shall consist of any combination of wood, brick, stone, stucco, or similar materials, or lap siding of hardboard, vinyl, vinyl-covered or painted metal, or similar materials. 
C.  Roofs. 
1.  All roof surfaces shall have a minimum pitch of 4:12 (four inches of rise for every 12 inches of run), except that mansard and gambrel roofs must meet this requirement only for those surfaces that rise from the eaves. 
2.  All roof surfaces exposed to view shall be covered with asphalt or fiberglass shingles, wood shakes or singles, standing seam (noncorrugated) metal, or corrugated metal that simulates standing seam or other architectural roof products, clay tiles, slate, or similar materials. 
3.  Minimum roof overhang shall be 6 inches, excluding gutters, along all sides of the dwelling. 
D.  Minimum dimensions. The exterior of a dwelling unit shall be greater than sixteen feet in length and in width. 
E.  Variances. The owner or other person interested in the property, may apply for a variance under the procedures provided by this resolution from the standards contained in this section for a single-family or two-family dwelling upon a finding that all of the following standards are met: 
1.  The materials to be utilized or the architectural style proposed for the dwelling unit will be compatible with and harmonious or superior to existing dwellings in the vicinity; and 
2.  Such variance will provide an adequate balance between the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the right to unfettered use of private property. 
F.  Compliance with Codes. All site-built dwelling units shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable requirements of the Building Code as adopted by Hall County. All manufactured homes shall meet the standards established by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401, et. seq.). All industrialized dwelling units shall comply with all applicable provisions of state law. 
(Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 2; Res. of 8-22-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.40.060. - Application of standards for single-family and two-family dwelling units. 
Except as specifically excepted by this section, the standards of section 17.40.050 will be applied to existing conditions as follows: 
A.  Existing registered manufactured home parks. Class B manufactured homes may be utilized in all existing manufactured home parks of 12 units or more that are designated as registered with the Hall County Planning Department, regardless of the underlying zoning of the existing manufactured home park. 
B.  Replacement of existing manufactured homes. Existing legally permitted manufactured homes in zoning districts that allow Class A manufactured homes, may be replaced with a Class B manufactured home that is no less conforming to the standards of section 17.40.050 than the existing home to be replaced. Determination of conformity to said standards includes minimum dimension, roof pitch, roof overhang, foundation, and roof and siding material. 
C.  Sale of existing inventory. A manufactured home, regardless of classification, that was in the documented inventory of a legally licensed new or used manufactured home dealer in Hall County as of June 17, 2002, may be permitted for installation on any site allowing for Class A or Class B manufactured homes, through December 31, 2002. 
(Res. of 8-22-02, § 2; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.50. - VACATION COTTAGE DISTRICT (V-C)[3] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Numerous referrals to the definitions section ("see chapter 17.20") have been removed. 

17.50.010. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the V-C [district] include: 
A.  Residences: 
1.  Site-built single-family detached dwelling units. 
2.  Class A industrialized dwelling units. 
3.  Transient occupancy of a vacation home provided all requirements of chapter 17.216 are met. 
B.  Noncommercial accessory residential uses including but not limited to a private garage, detached home workshop, swimming pool, or greenhouse, all of which shall be incidental to the use of the property as a residence. 
C.  Home offices. 
D.  Agricultural or horticultural uses. 
E.  Churches and other places of worship, but excluding cemeteries. 
F.  County uses including parks and playgrounds, but excluding cemeteries. 
G.  Subdivisions. 
H.  Substations for electrical transformers, gas regulators and telephone subscriber carrier sites, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
I.  Family day care home. 
J.  Community residences, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
K.  Home occupations, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
(Ord. of 5-27-10, § 1(Exh. A); Res. of 3-22-18(2), § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. of May 27, 2010, § 1(Exh. A), repealed former § 17.50.010, and enacted a new § 17.50.010 as set out herein. Former § 17.50.010 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
17.50.020. - Conditional uses subject to planning commission approval. 
In the V-C district conditional uses subject to planning commission approval (see chapter 17.350) with public hearing required are: 
A.  Residential businesses. 
B.  Subdivision amenities. 
C.  Temporary sales office located within an approved subdivision. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 6(B); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 4-26-91; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.50.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.50.030. - Conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval. 
In the V-C district conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval (see chapter 17.350) with a public hearing required include: additional parking on other than principal lot. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 6(C); Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.50.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.50.040. - Uses permitted subject to approval of county commission. 
In the V-C district uses permitted subject to approval by the county commission after review and recommendation by the planning commission with a public hearing required include: 
A.  Municipal, state and other public uses. 
B.  Fraternal organizations or private clubs (see chapter 17.20 for definition of church, club or lodge). 
C.  Cemeteries. 
D.  Slow rate land treatment systems. 
E.  Private directional signs for churches (defined under section 17.270.030) up to 36 square feet in area. 
F.  Re-establishment of a nonconforming use after a period of two years. 
G.  Group day care home. 
H.  Day care center. 
I.  Community residences that fail to meet all requirements for an administrative occupancy permit, excluding community residences denied a required local or state license. 
J.  Site-built dwelling units and Class A industrialized dwelling units more than seven years old being moved into Hall County for the purpose of permanent or temporary occupancy. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 6(D); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 1-14-91; Res. of 3-11-91; Res. of 5-28-91; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Code 1991, § 17.50.040; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 4; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.60. - RESIDENTIAL-I DISTRICT (R-I)[4] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Numerous referrals to the definitions section ("see chapter 17.20") have been removed. 

17.60.010. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the R-I district are: 
A.  Residences: 
1.  Site-built single-family detached dwelling units. 
2.  Class A single-family detached industrialized dwelling units. 
B.  Non-commercial accessory residential uses, including but not limited to a private garage, detached home workshop, swimming pool, or greenhouse, all of which shall be incidental to the use of the property as a residence. 
C.  Home offices. 
D.  Agricultural or horticultural uses. 
E.  Churches and other places of worship, but excluding cemeteries. 
F.  County uses including parks and playgrounds, but excluding cemeteries. 
G.  Subdivisions. 
H.  Substations for electrical transformers, gas regulators and telephone subscriber carrier sites, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
I.  Family day care home. 
J.  Community residences, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
K.  Home occupations, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 7(A); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.60.010; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 5; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.60.020. - Conditional uses subject to planning commission approval. 
In the R-I district conditional uses subject to planning commission approval (see chapter 17.350) with a public hearing required are: 
A.  Subdivision amenities. 
B.  Temporary sales office located within an approved subdivision. 
C.  Construction trailer, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
D.  Transient occupancy of a vacation home provided all requirements of chapter 17.216 are met and: 
1.  Any part of the parcel of land containing the vacation home is within 500 feet of the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers property line as of March 22, 2018, and 
2.  The parcel of land containing the vacation home is not within a recorded subdivision or is within a recorded subdivision of ten lots or less. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 7(B); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 4-27-90; Res. of 2-11-91; Res. of 4-26-91; Res. of 12-23-91; Res. of 2-10-92; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.60.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 3-22-18(2), § 2) 
17.60.030. - Conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval. 
In the R-I district conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval (see chapter 17.350) with a public hearing required are: additional parking on other than principal lot. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 7(C); Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.60.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.60.040. - Uses permitted subject to approval of county commission. 
In the R-I district uses permitted subject to approval of the county commission after review and recommendation by the planning commission with a public hearing required are: 
A.  Municipal, state and other public uses. 
B.  Cemeteries. 
C.  Slow rate land treatment systems. 
D.  Re-establishment of a nonconforming use after a period of two years. 
E.  Group day care home. 
F.  Day care center. 
G.  Community residences that fail to meet all requirements for an administrative occupancy permit, excluding community residences denied a required local or state license. 
H.  Transient occupancy of a vacation home provided all requirements of section 17.20.1305 are met and: 
1.  Any part of the parcel of land containing the vacation home is within 500 feet of the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers property line as of May 27, 2010, and 
2.  The parcel of land containing the vacation home is not within a recorded subdivision or is within a recorded subdivision of ten lots or less. 
(Ord. of 5-27-10, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— Ord. of May 27, 2010, § 1(Exh. A), repealed former § 17.60.040, and enacted a new § 17.60.040 as set out herein. Former § 17.60.040 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
CHAPTER 17.70. - RESIDENTIAL-I- LOW-DENSITY DISTRICT (R-I-L)[5] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Numerous referrals to the definitions section ("see chapter 17.20") have been removed. 

17.70.010. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the R-I-L district are: 
A.  Residences: 
1.  Site-built single-family detached dwelling units. 
2.  Class A single-family detached industrialized dwelling units. 
B.  Non-commercial accessory residential uses, including but not limited to a private garage, detached home workshop, swimming pool, or greenhouse, all of which shall be incidental to the use of the property as a residence. 
C.  Home offices. 
D.  Agricultural or horticultural uses. 
E.  Churches and other places of worship, but excluding cemeteries. 
F.  County uses including parks and playgrounds, but excluding cemeteries. 
G.  Subdivisions. 
H.  Substations for electrical transformers, gas regulators and telephone subscriber carrier sites, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
I.  Family day care home. 
J.  Community residences, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
K.  Home occupations, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 7(A); Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 12-9-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.70.010; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 6; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.70.020. - Conditional uses subject to planning commission approval. 
In the R-I-L district conditional uses subject to planning commission approval (see chapter 17.350) with a public hearing required are: 
A.  Subdivision amenities. 
B.  Temporary sales office located within an approved subdivision. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 7(B); Res. of 12-9-91; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.70.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.70.030. - Conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval. 
In the R-I-L district conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval (see chapter 17.350) with a public hearing required are: additional parking on other than principal lot. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 7(C); Res. of 12-9-91; Code 1991, § 17.70.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.70.040. - Uses permitted subject to approval of county commission. 
In the R-I-L district uses permitted subject to approval of the county commission after review and recommendation by the planning commission with a public hearing required are: 
A.  Municipal, state and other public uses. 
B.  Cemeteries. 
C.  Slow rate land treatment systems. 
D.  Re-establishment of a nonconforming use after a period of two years. 
E.  Group day care home. 
F.  Day care center. 
G.  Construction trailer, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
H.  Community residences that fail to meet all requirements for an administrative occupancy permit, excluding community residences denied a required local or state license. 
(Res. of 12-9-91; Res. of 12-23-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Code 1991, § 17.70.040; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.80. - RESIDENTIAL-II DISTRICT (R-II)[6] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Numerous referrals to the definitions section ("see chapter 17.20") have been removed. 

17.80.010. - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the R-II district include: 
A.  Residences: 
1.  Site-built single-family detached dwelling units. 
2.  Class A single-family detached industrialized dwelling units. 
3.  Class A single-family detached manufactured home. 
B.  Non-commercial accessory residential uses, including but not limited to a private garage, detached home workshop, swimming pool, or greenhouse, all of which shall be incidental to the use of the property as a residence. 
C.  Home offices. 
D.  Agricultural or horticultural uses. 
E.  Churches and other places of worship, but excluding cemeteries. 
F.  County uses including parks and playgrounds, but excluding cemeteries. 
G.  Subdivisions. 
H.  Substations for electrical transformers, gas regulators and telephone subscriber carrier sites, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
I.  Family day care home. 
J.  Construction trailer, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
K.  Community residences, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
L.  Home occupations, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 8(A); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 12-23-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.80.010; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 7; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.80.020. - Conditional uses subject to planning commission approval. 
In the R-II district conditional uses subject to planning commission approval (see chapter 17.350) with a required public hearing [include]: 
A.  Residential businesses. 
B.  Subdivision amenities. 
C.  Temporary sales office located within an approved subdivision. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 8(B); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 4-26-91; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.80.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.80.030. - Conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval. 
In the R-II district conditional uses subject to planning commission [zoning board of adjustment] approval (see chapter 17.350) with a required public hearing include: 
A.  Additional parking on other than principal lot. 
B.  Class A manufactured home on an occupied lot due to a hardship. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 8(C); Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.80.030; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 8; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.80.040. - Uses permitted subject to approval of county commission. 
In the R-II district, uses subject to approval of the county commission after review and recommendation by the planning commission after a required public hearing include: 
A.  Municipal, state or other public uses. 
B.  Fraternal organizations or private clubs (see chapter 17.20 definitions for church, club or lodge). 
C.  Nursery schools, kindergartens, day care centers. 
D.  Cemeteries. 
E.  Slow rate land treatment systems. 
F.  Private directional signs for churches (defined under section 17.270.030) up to 36 square feet in area. 
G.  Re-establishment of a nonconforming use after a period of two years. 
H.  Group day care home. 
I.  Day care center. 
J.  Community residences that fail to meet all requirements for an administrative occupancy permit, excluding community residences denied a required local or state license. 
K.  Site-built dwelling units, Class A manufactured homes and industrialized dwelling units more than seven years old being moved into Hall County for the purpose of permanent or temporary occupancy. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 8(D); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 1-14-91; Res. of 3-11-91; Res. of 5-28-91; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Code 1991, § 17.80.040; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 9; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.90. - RESIDENTIAL- TWO-FAMILY DISTRICT (R-TF)[7] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Numerous referrals to the definitions section ("see chapter 17.20") have been removed. 

17.90.010. - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the R-TF district include: 
A.  Residences: 
1.  Site-built single-family detached dwelling units. 
2.  Site-built two-family dwelling units. 
3.  Class A single-family manufactured home. 
4.  Class A single-family site-built or industrialized dwelling units. 
5.  Class A two-family manufactured home. 
6.  Class A two-family site-built or industrialized dwelling units. 
B.  Non-commercial accessory residential uses, including but not limited to a private garage, detached home workshop, swimming pool, or greenhouse, all of which shall be incidental to the use of the property as a residence. 
C.  Home offices. 
D.  Agricultural or horticultural uses. 
E.  Churches and other places of worship, but excluding cemeteries. 
F.  County uses including parks and playgrounds, but excluding cemeteries. 
G.  Subdivisions. 
H.  Substations for electrical transformers, gas regulators and telephone subscriber carrier sites, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
I.  Family day care home. 
J.  Community residences, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
K.  Home occupations, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 8.A(A); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.90.010; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 10; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.90.020. - Conditional uses subject to planning commission approval. 
In the R-TF district conditional uses subject to planning commission approval (see chapter 17.350) after a required public hearing include: 
A.  Residential businesses. 
B.  Subdivision amenities. 
C.  Temporary sales office located within an approved subdivision. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 8.A(B); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.90.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.90.030. - Conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval. 
In the R-TF district conditional uses subject to planning commission [zoning board of adjustment] approval (see chapter 17.350) after a required public hearing include: additional parking on other than principal lot. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 8.A(C); Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.90.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.90.040. - Uses permitted subject to approval of county commission. 
In the R-TF district, uses permitted subject to approval of the county commission after review and recommendation by the planning commission after a required public hearing include: 
A.  Municipal, state or other public uses. 
B.  Fraternal organizations or private clubs. 
C.  Nursery schools, kindergartens, day care centers. 
D.  Cemeteries. 
E.  Slow rate land treatment systems. 
F.  Private directional signs for churches (defined under section 17.270.030) up to 36 square feet in area. 
G.  Re-establishment of a nonconforming use after a period of two years. 
H.  Group day care home. 
I.  Day care center. 
J.  Community residences that fail to meet all requirements for an administrative occupancy permit, excluding community residences denied a required local or state license. 
K.  Site-built dwelling units, Class A manufactured homes, and Class A site built or industrialized dwelling units more than seven years old being moved into Hall County for the purpose of permanent or temporary occupancy. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 8.A(D); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 1-14-91; Res. of 3-11-91; Res. of 5-28-91; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Code 1991, § 17.90.040; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 11; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.100. - RESIDENTIAL- MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT (R-MF)[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Numerous referrals to the definitions section ("see chapter 17.20") have been removed. 

17.100.010. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the R-MF district include: 
A.  Residences: 
1.  Site-built single-family detached dwelling units. 
2.  Site-built two-family dwelling units. 
3.  Class A single-family manufactured home. 
4.  Class A single-family industrialized dwelling units. 
5.  Class A two-family manufactured home. 
6.  Class A two-family industrialized dwelling units. 
7.  Multi-family dwelling units. 
B.  Non-commercial accessory residential uses, including but not limited to a private garage, detached home workshop, swimming pool, or greenhouse, all of which shall be incidental to the use of the property as a residence. 
C.  Home offices. 
D.  Agricultural or horticultural uses. 
E.  Churches and other places of worship, but excluding cemeteries. 
F.  County uses including parks and playgrounds, but excluding cemeteries. 
G.  Subdivisions. 
H.  Substations for electrical transformers, gas regulators and telephone subscriber carrier sites, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
I.  Family day care home. 
J.  Group day care home as an accessory use. 
K.  Community residences, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
L.  Home occupations, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 8.B(A); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 4-26-91; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.100.010; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 12; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Editor's note— Code 1991, § 17.100.010, contained two subsections designated "J". The second "J" has been relettered as "K" and former subsection K was relettered as "L". 
17.100.020. - Conditional uses subject to planning commission approval. 
In the R-MF district, conditional uses subject to planning commission approval (see chapter 17.350) after a required public hearing include: 
A.  Residential businesses. 
B.  Subdivision amenities. 
C.  Temporary sales office located within an approved subdivision. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 8.B(B); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 4-26-91; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.100.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.100.030. - Conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval. 
In the R-MF district, conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval (see chapter 17.350) after a required public hearing include: additional parking on other than principal lot. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 8.B(C); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 4-26-91; Code 1991, § 17.100.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.100.040. - Uses permitted subject to approval of county commission. 
In the R-MF district, uses permitted subject to approval of the county commission after review and recommendation by the planning commission and after a required public hearing include: 
A.  Municipal, state or other public uses. 
B.  Fraternal organizations or private clubs (see chapter 17.20 definition for church, club or lodge). 
C.  Nursery schools, kindergartens, day care centers. 
D.  Cemeteries. 
E.  Slow rate land treatment systems. 
F.  Private directional signs for churches (defined under section 17.270.030) up to 36 square feet in area. 
G.  Re-establishment of a nonconforming use after a period of two years. 
H.  Group day care home. 
I.  Day care center. 
J.  Community residences that fail to meet all requirements for an administrative occupancy permit, excluding community residences denied a required local or state license. 
K.  Site-built and Class A site built dwelling units, Class A manufactured homes, and Class A industrialized dwelling units more than seven years old being moved into Hall County for the purpose of permanent or temporary occupancy. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 8.B(D); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 1-14-91; Res. of 3-11-91; Res. of 4-26-91; Res. of 5-28-91; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Code 1991, § 17.100.040; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 13; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.110. - AGRICULTURAL- RESIDENTIAL-III DISTRICT (AR-III)[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Numerous referrals to the definitions section ("see chapter 17.20") have been removed. 

17.110.010. - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the AR-III district include: 
A.  Agricultural, horticultural [uses] and/or farm winery. 
B.  Accessory farm uses including the sale of products grown on the premises and the keeping of livestock or poultry. 
C.  Residences: 
1.  Site-built single-family detached dwelling units. 
2.  Class A single-family manufactured home. 
3.  Class A single-family industrialized dwelling units. 
D.  Non-commercial accessory residential uses, including but not limited to a private garage, detached home workshop, swimming pool, or greenhouse, all of which shall be incidental to the use of the property as a residence. 
E.  Home offices. 
F.  Churches and other places of worship, but excluding cemeteries. 
G.  County uses including parks and playgrounds, but excluding cemeteries. 
H.  [Deleted 1-13-92.] 
I.  Substations for electrical transformers, gas regulators and telephone subscriber carrier sites, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
J.  Minor subdivisions. 
K.  Sawmills used to process timber grown and harvested on the property where it is processed, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
L.  Family day care home. 
M.  Construction trailer, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
N.  Community residences, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
O.  Home occupations, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 9(A); Res. of 5-11-87; Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 4-27-90; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 12-23-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.110.010; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 14; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 4-24-14(1), § 1) 
17.110.020. - Conditional uses subject to planning commission approval. 
In the AR-III district, conditional uses subject to planning commission approval (see chapter 17.350) after a required public hearing include: 
A.  Residential businesses (see chapter 17.350). 
B.  Rural businesses (see chapter 17.350). 
C.  Subdivision amenities. 
D.  Temporary sales office located within an approved subdivision (see chapter 17.350). 
E.  Transient occupancy of a vacation home provided all requirements of chapter 17.216 are met. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 9(B); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.110.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 3-22-18(2), § 3) 
17.110.030. - Conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval. 
In the AR-III district, conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval (see chapter 17.350) and a required public hearing include: 
A.  Additional parking on other than principal lot. 
B.  Class A and Class B single-family manufactured homes on an occupied lot due to a hardship. 
C.  Caretaker and/or employee residences. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 9(C); Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.110.030; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 15; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.110.040. - Uses permitted subject to approval of county commission. 
In the AR-III district, uses permitted subject to approval of the county commission after review and recommendation by the planning commission and required public hearing [include]: 
A.  Municipal, state and other public uses. 
B.  Fraternal organizations or private clubs (see chapter 17.20 definitions for church, club or lodge). 
C.  Nursery schools, kindergartens, day care centers. 
D.  Private airfields. 
E.  Subdivisions. 
F.  Cemeteries. 
G.  Slow rate land treatment systems. 
H.  Private directional signs for churches (defined under section 17.270.030) up to 36 square feet in area. 
I.  Re-establishment of a nonconforming use after a period of two years. 
J.  Equestrian centers. 
K.  Group day care home. 
L.  Day care center. 
M.  Commercial kennel. 
N.  Telecommunications facilities, provided the conditions of chapter 17.410 are met. 
O.  Community residences that fail to meet all requirements for an administrative occupancy permit, excluding community residences denied a required local or state license. 
P.  Site-built dwelling units, Class A manufactured homes, and Class A industrialized dwelling units more than seven years old being moved into Hall County for the purpose of permanent or temporary occupancy. 
Q.  Raising for gain or profit of dangerous animals. 
R.  Small animal specialty farms. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 9(D); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 1-14-91; Res. of 3-11-91; Res. of 5-28-91; Res. of 7-8-91; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 1-13-92; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Res. of 5-11-92; Code 1991, § 17.110.040; Res. of 3-11-99, § 3; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 16; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.120. - AGRICULTURAL- RESIDENTIAL-IV DISTRICT (AR-IV)[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Numerous referrals to the definitions section ("see chapter 17.20") have been removed. 

17.120.010. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the AR-IV district include: 
A.  Agricultural, horticultural [uses] and/or farm winery. 
B.  Accessory farm uses, including the sale of products grown on the premises and the keeping of livestock or poultry. 
C.  Sawmills used to process timber grown and harvested on the property where it is processed, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
D.  Residences: 
1.  Site-built single-family detached dwelling units. 
2.  Class A single-family manufactured home. 
3.  Class A single-family industrialized dwelling units. 
E.  Non-commercial accessory residential uses, including but not limited to a private garage, detached home workshop, swimming pool, or greenhouse, all of which shall be incidental to the use of the property as a residence. 
F.  Home offices. 
G.  Churches and other places of worship, but excluding cemeteries. 
H.  County uses including parks and playgrounds, but excluding cemeteries. 
I.  [Deleted 1-13-92.] 
J.  Substations for electrical transformers, gas regulators and telephone subscriber carrier sites, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
K.  Minor subdivisions. 
L.  Family day care home. 
M.  Construction trailer, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
N.  Community residences, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
O.  Home occupations, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 10(A); Res. of 5-11-87; Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 4-27-90; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 12-23-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.120.010; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 17; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 4-24-14(1), § 2) 
17.120.020. - Conditional uses subject to planning commission approval. 
In the AR-IV district, conditional uses subject to planning commission approval (see chapter 17.350) and a required public hearing include: 
A.  Residential businesses. 
B.  Rural businesses. 
C.  Subdivision amenities. 
D.  Temporary sales office located within an approved subdivision. 
E.  Transient occupancy of a vacation home provided all requirements of chapter 17.216 are met. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 10(B); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.120.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 3-22-18(2), § 4) 
17.120.030. - Conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval. 
In the AR-IV district, conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval (see chapter 17.350) and required public hearing include: 
A.  Additional parking on other than principal lot. 
B.  Class A and Class B single-family manufactured homes on an occupied lot due to a hardship. 
C.  Caretaker and/or employee residences. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 10(C); Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.120.030; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 18; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.120.040. - Uses permitted subject to approval of county commission. 
In the AR-IV district, uses permitted subject to approval of the county commission, after review and recommendation by the planning commission and a required public hearing, include: 
A.  Municipal, state and other public uses. 
B.  Fraternal organizations or private clubs (see definitions of church, club or lodge in chapter 17.20). 
C.  Nursery schools, kindergartens, day care centers. 
D.  Private airfields. 
E.  Subdivisions. 
F.  Buildings for storage and sale of agricultural, forestry, animal or poultry wastes. 
G.  Cemeteries. 
H.  Slow rate land treatment systems. 
I.  Private directional signs for churches (defined under section 17.270.030) up to 36 square feet in area. 
J.  Re-establishment of a nonconforming use after a period of two years. 
K.  Equestrian centers. 
L.  Group day care home. 
M.  Day care center. 
N.  Commercial kennel. 
O.  Telecommunications facilities, provided the conditions of chapter 17.410 are met. 
P.  Community residences that fail to meet all requirements for an administrative occupancy permit, excluding community residences denied a required local or state license. 
Q.  Site-built dwelling units, Class A manufactured homes, and Class A industrialized dwelling units more than seven years old being moved into Hall County for the purpose of permanent or temporary occupancy. 
R.  Raising for gain or profit of dangerous animals. 
S.  Small animal specialty farms. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 10(D); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 1-14-91; Res. of 3-11-91; Res. of 5-28-91; Res. of 7-8-91; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 1-13-92; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Res. of 5-11-92; Code 1991, § 17.120.040; Res. of 3-11-99, § 4; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 19; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.130. - OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT (O-I) 

17.130.010. - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this district is to establish and maintain areas which are generally in corridors along major limited access highways and which are adjacent to residentially zoned or residentially developed areas and which are so situated as to lend themselves to land uses and activities which may generate traffic and which may particularly benefit from proximity, accessibility or visibility from a major limited access highway but which are the least incompatible of non-residential uses with adjacent residentially zoned or developed areas. To this end development is limited to light business and institutional uses and certain residential types and public facilities. The restrictions set forth herein are designed to protect the district and adjacent or surrounding residential areas, to present an appearance of openness and uncluttered, orderly development and to establish such standards for intensity of use and character of development as are compatible with the purpose of the district. 
B.  Prior to rezoning in the O-I district, a site plan and a landscaping plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval, except those initiated by a governmental unit. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 11; Code 1991, § 17.130.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.130.020. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the O-I district include: 
A.  Advertising agencies. 
B.  Artist studios for arts, crafts, dance, drama, music and photography. 
C.  Banks. 
D.  Business services. 
E.  Day care centers. 
F.  Finance or credit offices. 
G.  Funeral homes. 
H.  Home occupations. 
I.  [Deleted.] 
J.  Institutional, except penal, including those of a religious, educational or philanthropic nature, such as museums, art galleries, libraries, schools. 
K.  Nursery schools or kindergartens. 
L.  Nursing home, convalescent home. 
M.  Offices, with a gross floor area not exceeding 25 percent of lot area. 
N.  [Deleted.] 
O.  Subdivisions. 
P.  County uses. 
Q.  Family day care home. 
R.  Group day care home. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 11(A); Res. of 5-10-82; Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-25-88; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 11-11-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.130.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.130.030. - Uses permitted subject to approval of planning commission. 
In the O-I district, uses permitted subject to the approval of the planning commission include: 
A.  Cluster developments. 
B.  Planned unit developments on a minimum of ten acres. 
C.  Townhouse developments. 
D.  Municipal and other public uses. 
E.  Veterinary clinics or animal hospitals, provided that all animals are housed within the clinic building, with exercise yards but no outside pens or runways, in a manner that eliminates any objectionable noise or order to adjacent properties. 
F.  Site-built single-family detached dwelling units. 
G.  Site-built two-family dwelling units. 
H.  Class A single-family manufactured home. 
I.  Class A single-family industrialized dwelling units. 
J.  Class A two-family manufactured home. 
K.  Class A two-family industrialized dwelling units. 
L.  Multi-family dwelling units. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 11(B); Res. of 7-25-88; Res. of 11-11-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.130.030; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 20; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.130.040. - Conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval. 
In the O-I district, conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval (see chapter 17.350) and required public hearing include: 
A.  Additional parking on other than principal lot. 
B.  Caretaker and/or employee residences. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 11(C); Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.130.040; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.130.050. - Uses permitted subject to approval of county commission. 
In the O-I district, uses permitted subject to approval of the county commission, after review and recommendation by the planning commission and required public hearing, include: 
A.  Slow rate land treatment systems. 
B.  Private directional signs for churches (defined under section 17.270.030) up to 36 square feet in area. 
C.  Re-establishment of a nonconforming use after a period of two years. 
D.  Day care center. 
E.  Hospitals. 
F.  Site-built dwelling units, Class A manufactured homes, and Class A industrialized dwelling units more than seven years old being moved into Hall County for the purpose of permanent or temporary occupancy. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 11(D); Res. of 1-14-91; Res. of 3-11-91; Res. of 5-28-91; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Code 1991, § 17.130.050; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 21; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.140. - SUBURBAN SHOPPING DISTRICT (S-S) 

 

17.140.010. - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the S-S District include: 
A.  Any retail or retail service establishment, including the making of articles sold at retail on the premises providing the conditions of Chapter 17.210 are met; 
B.  Churches and other places of worship; 
C.  Offices with gross floor area not exceeding 25 percent of lot area. 
D.  Radio and television studios; 
E.  [Deleted 1-13-92] 
F.  Service stations, provided the conditions of Chapter 17.210 are met; 
G.  Subdivisions; 
H.  County uses; 
I.  Family day care home; 
J.  Group day care home; 
K.  Construction trailer, provided the conditions of Chapter 17.210 are met; 
L.  Banks; 
M.  Restaurants. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 12(A); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-25-88; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 12-23-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Code 1991, § 17.140.010; Res. of 6-27-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.140.020. - Uses permitted subject to approval of planning commission. 
Uses permitted subject to the approval of the planning commission include: 
A.  Shopping centers. 
B.  Planned unit developments on a minimum of ten acres. 
C.  Municipal and other public uses. 
D.  Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics with exercise yards but no outside pens or runways. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 12(B); Res. of 7-25-88; Res. of 11-11-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.140.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.140.030. - Conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval. 
In the S-S district, conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval (see chapter 17.350) and a public hearing include: 
A.  Additional parking on other than principal lot. 
B.  Caretaker and/or employee residences. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 12(C); Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.140.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.140.040. - Uses permitted subject to approval of county commission. 
Uses permitted subject to the approval of the county commission and a required public hearing include: 
A.  Slow rate land treatment systems. 
B.  Private directional signs for churches ([see] section 17.270.030) up to 36 square feet in area. 
C.  Re-establishment of a nonconforming use after a period of two years. 
D.  Day care center. 
E.  Telecommunications facilities, provided the conditions of chapter 17.410 are met. 
(Res. of 1-14-91; Res. of 3-11-91; Res. of 5-28-91; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 1-13-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Code 1991, § 17.140.040; Res. of 3-11-99, § 5; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.150. - HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT (H-B) 

 

17.150.010. - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the H-B district include: 
A.  Any retail or retail service establishment, including the making of articles sold at retail on the premises providing the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
B.  Banks. 
C.  Bus stations. 
D.  Churches and other places of worship. 
E.  Drive-in theaters, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
F.  Motels, hotels. 
G.  County uses. 
H.  Offices, with a gross floor area not exceeding 25 percent of lot area. 
I.  Parks for leisure and scenic appeal. 
J.  Radio and television studios. 
K.  [Deleted.] 
L.  Restaurants. 
M.  Service stations, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
N.  Subdivisions. 
O.  Family day care home. 
P.  Group day care home. 
Q.  Construction trailer, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
R.  Adult establishments. 
S.  Dental laboratories. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 13(A); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-25-88; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 11-11-91; Res. of 12-23-91; Res. of 1-13-92; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Res. of 11-4-92; Res. of 10-27-94; Code 1991, § 17.150.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.150.020. - Uses permitted subject to approval of planning commission. 
Uses permitted subject to the approval of the planning commission include: 
A.  Automobile repair garages. 
B.  Shopping centers. 
C.  Junk yards. 
D.  Manufacturing and fabrication as inside uses which occupy no more than 1,000 square feet of floor area, provided all materials produced shall be sold on the premises. 
E.  Planned unit developments on a minimum of ten acres. 
F.  Recreational and/or cultural uses of a commercial nature. 
G.  Truck terminals, provided that the means of ingress and egress shall be onto a major artery, a public hearing being required. 
H.  Warehousing. 
I.  Veterinary clinics or animal hospitals, provided that all animals are housed within the clinic building, with exercise yards but no outside pens or runways, in a manner that eliminates any objectionable noise or odor to adjacent properties. 
J.  Commercial kennels with exercise yards but no outside pens or runways. 
K.  Municipal and other public uses. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 13(B); Res. of 6-13-83; Res. of 7-25-88; Res. of 11-11-91; Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.150.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.150.030. - Conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval. 
In the H-B district, conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval (see chapter 17.350) and a required public hearing include: 
A.  Additional parking on other than principal lot. 
B.  Caretaker and/or employee residences. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 13(C); Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.150.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.150.040. - Uses permitted subject to approval of county commission. 
Uses permitted in the H-B district subject to approval of the county commission after review and recommendation by the planning commission and a required public hearing include: 
A.  Slow rate land treatment systems. 
B.  Private directional signs for churches (defined under section 17.270.030) up to 36 square feet in area. 
C.  Re-establishment of a nonconforming use after a period of two years. 
D.  Day care center. 
E.  Telecommunications facilities, provided the conditions of chapter 17.410 are met. 
F.  Astrologers, clairvoyants, fortune tellers, palmists, phrenologists and related occupations to the list of occupations licensed by the board of commissioners in the Highway Business District (HB). 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 13(D); Res. of 1-14-91; Res. of 3-11-91; Res. of 5-28-91; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 1-13-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Code 1991, § 17.150.040; Res. of 3-11-99, § 6; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 2-8-07(5), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.160. - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-I) 

 

17.160.010. - Permitted uses. 
[Uses permitted in the I-I district include:] 
A.  Any industry which does not cause injurious or obnoxious noise, vibrations, smoke, gas, fumes, odors, dust, fire hazards or other objectionable conditions. Specifically excluded uses are acid manufacture, fertilizer manufacture, animal reduction, rendering plants and other industries that are found to be obnoxious by the planning commission. 
B.  Any retail or retail service establishments. 
C.  Automobile repair garages. 
D.  Bus stations. 
E.  Churches. 
F.  Drive-in theaters, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
G.  Hotels, motels or tourist courts. 
H.  Industrial parks. 
I.  Junk yards with site plan approval by the planning commission. 
J.  Laboratories. 
K.  County uses. 
L.  Offices and office buildings. 
M.  Planned unit developments on a minimum of ten acres. 
N.  Radio and television studios. 
O.  [Deleted 1-13-92.] 
P.  Service stations, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
Q.  Storage yards. 
R.  Truck terminals. 
S.  Wholesaling and warehousing. 
T.  Subdivisions. 
U.  Family day care home. 
V.  Group day care home. 
W.  Construction trailer, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
X.  Adult establishments. 
Y.  Astrologers, clairvoyants, fortune tellers, palmists, phrenologists and related occupations to the list of occupations licensed by the board of commissioners in the Light Industrial District (I I). 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 14(A); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-25-88; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 11-11-91; Res. of 12-23-91; Res. of 2-10-92; Res. of 11-4-92; Code 1991, § 17.160.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 2-8-07(5), § 2) 
17.160.020. - Uses permitted subject to approval of planning commission. 
Uses permitted in the I-I district [subject to the approval of the planning commission] include: 
A.  Asphalt emulsion (water based) plants, a public hearing being required. 
B.  Municipal, state and other public uses. 
C.  Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics with exercise yards but no outside pens or runways. 
D.  Commercial kennels with exercise yards but no outside pens or runways. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 14(B); Res. of 1-10-83; Res. of 7-25-88; Res. of 11-11-91; Code 1991, § 17.160.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.160.030. - Conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval. 
In the I-I district, conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval (see chapter 17.350) and a required public hearing include: 
A.  Additional parking on other than principal lot. 
B.  Caretaker and/or employee residences. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 14(C); Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.160.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.160.040. - Uses permitted subject to approval of county commission. 
Uses permitted subject to approval of the county commission, after review and recommendation by the planning commission and a required public hearing, include: 
A.  Slow rate land treatment systems. 
B.  Private directional signs for churches (defined under section 17.270.030) up to 36 square feet in area. 
C.  Re-establishment of a nonconforming use after a period of two years. 
D.  Day care center. 
E.  Telecommunications facilities, provided the conditions of chapter 17.410 are met. 
F.  Food processing plants involving the processing of vegetative products which would not be subject to section 17.170.020, number 30 ("Other similar uses…"). 
G.  Food processing plants involving animals or animal by-products where the processing is limited to the further processing of food previously processed at another location, to include but not be limited to such things as repackaging into smaller units, and which would not be subject to section 17.170.020, number 30 ("Other similar uses…"). 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 14(D); Res. of 1-14-91; Res. of 3-11-91; Res. of 5-28-91; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 1-13-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Res. of 2-24-92; Code 1991, § 17.160.040; Res. of 3-11-99, § 7; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.170. - HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-II) 

 

17.170.010. - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the I-II district include: 
A.  Any commercial use or industrial use which involves manufacturing, processing, or assembly operations or the storage and sale of heavy materials, products, or equipment, but not including uses which may cause injurious or obnoxious noise, vibrations, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard, or other objectionable conditions to nearby areas or those uses listed in section 17.170.020. 
B.  Agricultural or horticultural uses. 
C.  Automobile repair garage. 
D.  County uses. 
E.  Offices. 
F.  [Deleted 1-13-92.] 
G.  Retail or retail service establishments. 
H.  Service stations. 
I.  Outdoor storage of materials and inventory, not including uses as included in section 17.170.020. 
J.  Subdivisions (non-residential). 
K.  Truck terminals. 
L.  Wholesaling and warehousing. 
M.  Family day care home. 
N.  Group day care home as an accessory use. 
O.  Construction trailer, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
P.  Adult establishments. 
Q.  [ Reserved. ] 
R.  Astrologers, clairvoyants, fortune tellers, palmists, phrenologists and related occupations to the list of occupations licensed by the board of commissioners in the Heavy Industrial District (I II). 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15(A); Res. of 11-13-89; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 12-23-91; Res. of 2-10-92; Res. of 11-4-92; Code 1991, § 17.170.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 2-8-07(5), § 3) 
17.170.020. - Uses permitted subject to approval of county commission. 
In the I-II district, uses permitted subject to approval of the county commission, after review and recommendation by the planning commission and a required public hearing, include: 
1.  Airports and landing fields. 
2.  Animal or food processing plants, including but not limited to poultry, veal or beef. 
3.  Commercial incinerators, including but not limited to those handling garbage and medical waste. 
4.  Commercial slaughter of animals. 
5.  Distillation of bones, coal, petroleum, animal refuse, grain, tar and wood. 
6.  Fertilizer manufacture. 
7.  Foundry or forging of iron, steel, brass, copper and other metals, but not including the extrusion of metals. 
8.  Grain elevators or commercial feed mills. 
9.  Junk and salvage yards and scrap metal processor. 
10.  Land fills, including but not limited to sanitary landfills. 
11.  Manufacture or bulk storage of acid, including but not limited to hydrochloric, nitric and sulfuric. 
12.  Manufacture or refining of asphalt. 
13.  Manufacture of cement, cement products, concrete, clay products, lime, gypsum, brick, tile or plaster of Paris. 
14.  Manufacturing, processing or storage in bulk of chemical and pharmaceutical products. 
15.  Manufacture or storage in bulk quantities of explosives, including but not limited to fireworks. 
16.  Manufacture or storage of gas, including but not limited to butane, propane, chlorine or other toxic, noxious or pyrophoric gases. 
17.  Manufacture of glue or gelatin. 
18.  Manufacture of paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish. 
19.  Manufacture, storage or wholesaling of petroleum or its related products. 
20.  Mineral extraction, including but not limited to quarrying stone, crushing and mining. 
21.  Municipal, state and other public uses. 
22.  Paper and pulp mills. 
23.  Refining or manufacture of tallow, grease or lard from or of animal fat. 
24.  Rendering plants. 
25.  Rifle, pistol and skeet ranges. 
26.  Smelting of metal ores, including but not limited to tin, copper, zinc or iron. 
27.  Stock yards. 
28.  Tanning, curing or storage of raw hides or skins. 
29.  Slow rate land treatment systems. 
30.  Other similar uses which, due to their historical impact on air and water quality, use of hazardous materials, tendency to emit excessive levels of noise, vibration, odor, smoke, particulate matter, fumes, and/or radiations, and general threat to the community's living and working environment, are deemed by the planning commission, subject to appeal to the county commission, to be a significant risk to the public health, safety or welfare. 
31.  Private directional signs for churches (defined under section 17.270.030) up to 36 square feet in area. 
32.  Re-establishment of a nonconforming use after a period of two years. 
33.  Day care center as an accessory use. 
34.  Telecommunications facilities, provided the conditions of chapter 17.410 are met. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15(B); Res. of 11-13-89; Res. of 1-14-91; Res. of 3-11-91; Res. of 5-28-91; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 1-13-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Code 1991, § 17.170.020; Res. of 3-11-99, § 8; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.170.030. - Conditional uses subject to approval of zoning board of adjustment. 
In the I-II district, conditional uses subject to approval of the zoning board of adjustment include: 
A.  Additional parking on other than principal lot. 
B.  Caretaker and/or employee residence. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15(C); Res. of 11-13-89; Code 1991, § 17.170.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.180. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT[11] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning board of adjustment, ch. 2.40; subdivisions, tit. 16; modification of subdivision standards for planned developments, § 16.40.080. 

17.180.010. - Intent. 
A.  It is the intent of this district to permit and encourage the development of property which would: 
1.  Allow greater flexibility with respect to development standards and site planning considerations; 
2.  Be in the best interest of Hall County in terms of its long range development plans; and 
3.  Permit the establishment or mixture of uses which without proper design and planning might not be compatible with surrounding uses or zoning districts. 
B.  This district is to be utilized as a "floating zone" which shall mean that areas will not be pre-designated as planned development districts but rather each such designation shall result from a specific and separate application for amendment. Planned development districts are separate zoning districts and shall follow the same amendment procedures as other districts. Unless otherwise stated in this section, the development standards and the land uses which are presented with the application for amendment shall, if approved, become the standards for the subject property and shall become a part of the zoning regulations. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15.A; Res. of 11-12-79; Code 1991, § 17.180.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.180.020. - General conditions. 
An area may be considered for rezoning to a planned development district if any one of the following conditions exist: 
A.  More than one land use is proposed for development on a single parcel; 
B.  Separate land uses which would not otherwise be permitted to locate within the same zoning district are proposed for development on one or more adjacent parcels under single or separate ownership; 
C.  Exception or variation from the size, setback, frontage, density, uses or other standards which are required in the other conventional zoning districts are being proposed as part of a comprehensive development plan. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15.A; Res. of 11-12-79; Code 1991, § 17.180.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.180.030. - Special requirements. 
All proposed planned development district applications shall conform to the following specific requirements: 
A.  With the exception of the PCFD classification (see 17.180.060.A [17.180.100.A] for PCFD area requirements), the site proposed for planned development district classification must contain an area of five acres or more unless specifically approved by the county commission due to special and unusual circumstances. No tract of land shall be considered for a planned development classification which has an area less than one acre except when such tract abuts a nonresidential zoning district or abuts a district with the same zoning classification as that for which the application is filed. In no case shall the minimum tract size be less than the minimum lot area requirements for the comparable conventional district (see section 17.240.010 for area requirements) as specified for each planned development classification in this chapter. (Note: The comparable conventional zoning districts listed in the regulations are R-I for a PRD, O-I for a POD, S-S for a PCD and I-I for a PID.) 
B.  The site must abut a public street for a distance of at least 100 feet. 
C.  A suitable plan shall be prepared for the development, and this plan shall include the following elements where applicable: 
1.  A plot plan drawn to scale by a registered engineer, architect, land surveyor or landscape architect showing the exact dimensions of the parcel or parcels of land under consideration and including the following: 
a.  A site plan drawn to scale and indicating all property dimensions, platting and street systems, proposed building sites, sizes, types of use proposed for buildings, plans for protection of abutting properties, means of ingress and egress, access and circulation arrangements, off-street parking and loading facilities, proposed reservations or dedications for streets and other public facilities and, if requested, a contour map of the site; 
b.  The plan shall give the name of the developers and of the development (if any), a north arrow and scale; 
c.  If the proposal includes the subdivision of land for any purpose or for the provision of new public streets, a proposed lot and street layout shall be submitted as part of the application. Any proposed variation from the standards set forth in the subdivision regulations shall be listed and explained. If the plan is approved, a preliminary plat and final plat shall be submitted as provided by the subdivision regulations. 
2.  A written report shall also be submitted which will explain the type, nature, size, intent and characteristics of the proposed development. This report shall include, where applicable: 
a.  A general description of the proposed development and its location; 
b.  The proposed standards for development, including restrictions on the use of the property, density standards, yard (setback) requirements and any proposed restrictive covenants; 
c.  An explanation of why the proposed development standards are necessary if the above proposed standards vary from existing standards in the zoning regulations; 
d.  Plans for the provision of utilities, including water, sewer and drainage facilities; 
e.  Plans and methods for protection of abutting properties; 
f.  Data stating the total number of acres (or square feet) proposed for each type of land use, including public facilities, within the proposed development; 
g.  Additional relevant data as may be required by the planning commission. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15.A; Res. of 11-12-79; Res. of 1-28-91; Res. of 11-10-94; Code 1991, § 17.180.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Minimum tract size and frontage for zoning change, § 17.380.020. 
17.180.040. - Administrative procedures for planned development districts. 
A.  Any request pertaining to the establishment of a planned development district shall be considered an amendment to the zoning regulations and shall be administered and processed in accordance with the regulations set forth in chapter 17.380. 
B.  All data, plans and specifications presented as part of the planned development district shall, if approved, be adopted as an amendment to the zoning regulations and shall be the standards of development for that particular planned development. 
C.  All further development on the property shall conform to the standards adopted for the district regardless of any change in ownership. Any proposed changes to the approved standards shall be treated as amendments to the zoning regulations and must be considered in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 17.380. Appeals based upon hardship or an alleged misinterpretation of the ordinance [this title] by the building official shall be processed in accordance with procedures set forth in chapter 2.40. In no case shall the approved land uses be appealed. 
D.  The violation of any provision of the planned development standards as submitted and approved under the provisions herein shall constitute a violation of these regulations. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15.A; Res. of 11-12-79; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.180.040; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Zoning board of adjustment, ch. 2.40. 
17.180.050. - Planned development district classifications. 
The following shall be classified as planned development districts subject to the provisions of this article [chapter] and to the special provisions for each district: 
A.  PRD: Planned residential development; 
B.  POD: Planned office development; 
C.  PCD: Planned commercial development; 
D.  PID: Planned industrial development; 
E.  PCFD: Planned commercial farm development. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15.A; Res. of 11-12-79; Code 1991, § 17.180.050; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.180.060. - Planned residential development (PRD). 
A.  Characteristics. A planned residential development may allow for a more flexible placement, arrangement and orientation of residential structures, the accompanying flexibility in the subdivision of land and the grouping of open space and accessory facilities such as garages and parking. It may also provide for a mixture of housing types (single-family, two-family, multi-family, etc.) according to a carefully drawn plan. The proposed residential development should make maximum use of natural features and, through proper site planning measures, it should conform to the existing character and development pattern of the surrounding area. Every effort should be made to preserve and protect any existing residential uses from adverse impacts which might result from a higher density development. 
B.  Required plans. All of the general and special requirements for planned developments shall be provided. The following special items shall also be addressed: 
1.  The site plan shall indicate the proposed size, location, number of units and number of bedrooms of all residential structures. 
2.  All streets and common open spaces not proposed for dedication to the county shall have the proposed maintenance and ownership agreements explained in detail. 
3.  The architectural style and proposed siting of all multi-family structures or zero lot line attached single-family structures shall be indicated. 
4.  The development controls for the development shall be detailed (lot coverage, setbacks, building heights, lot sizes, etc.). If standards are not specifically proposed then the applicable standards in the residential-I (R-I) district shall apply. 
5.  Limited commercial uses may be included within the development, however, they shall be only of convenience neighborhood retail nature intended to serve the needs of the residents of the development unless otherwise specifically approved. Retail uses shall be specified as part of the proposal and limited to 10,000 square feet of floor area. Such uses shall be permitted only in planned residential developments of five acres or larger. 
6.  A proposed development schedule [is] required, [and] development and a listing of proposed uses shall be provided. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15.A(1); Res. of 11-12-79; Code 1991, § 17.180.060; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.180.070. - Planned office development (POD). 
A.  Characteristics. A planned office development should contain orderly, well-designed office and institutional uses upon a site that results in minimum impact upon the surrounding area. The site plans and building designs should produce a development that can be constructed to achieve maximum utilization of space while maintaining a low-intensity office character protected from more intensive commercial and industrial development and protecting any nearby residential uses. Such a development may also include a limited number of residential and commercial uses. 
B.  Required plans. All of the general and special requirements for planned developments shall be provided. The following special items shall also be addressed: 
1.  The site plan shall indicate the proposed size, location, number of stories and estimated number of employees in each office building. 
2.  The development controls for the district shall be detailed (lot coverage, setbacks, building heights, lot sizes, etc.). If standards are not specifically proposed, then the applicable standards in the office institutional districts (O-I) together with screening and buffer requirements shall apply. 
3.  If residential uses are proposed in conjunction with the planned office development, then the applicable requirements of the planned residential development district or planned commercial development district shall be provided. 
4.  A proposed development schedule and a listing of proposed uses shall be provided. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15.A(2); Res. of 11-12-79; Code 1991, § 17.180.070; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.180.080. - Planned commercial development (PCD). 
A.  Characteristics. A planned commercial development shall provide for the maximum attainable commercial usage of property while employing the best aspects of prior site planning and development controls to insure: 
1.  Protection of surrounding residential uses; 
2.  Safe access by motorists; 
3.  Minimum traffic congestion; and 
4.  A development which is consistent with long-range plans of the county. 
A limited number of carefully planned residential uses may also be included in a planned commercial development. 
B.  Required plans. All of the general and special requirements for planned developments shall be provided. The following special items shall also be addressed: 
1.  The site plan shall indicate the proposed size, location and number of stories of each commercial structure. 
2.  The entrances, exits and number and location of all parking spaces shall be shown in detail, together with all loading and no parking zones. 
3.  The proposed methods and location of all buffers shall be described. 
4.  The proposed exterior lighting shall be shown. 
5.  All proposed signs, advertising or identification graphics shall be indicated, showing their number, size, height and location. 
6.  The type and number of uses proposed for the commercial development shall be indicated. 
7.  The development controls for the district shall be stated (lot coverage, setbacks, building heights, lot sizes, etc.). If standards are not specifically proposed, then the applicable standards in the suburban shopping district (S-S) shall apply. 
8.  If residential uses are proposed in conjunction with the planned commercial development, then the applicable requirements of the planned residential development shall be provided. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15.A(3); Res. of 11-12-79; Code 1991, § 17.180.080; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.180.090. - Planned industrial development (PID). 
A.  Characteristics. A planned industrial development should consist of land which has been designated for a planned, organized and controlled industrial use or for multiple but compatible industrial uses in a planned industrial park. The standards employed should be designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a compatible environment for the planned industrial uses and the surrounding land uses. Carefully planned office and commercial uses may be incorporated as part of a planned industrial development. 
B.  Required plans. All of the general and special requirements for planned developments shall be provided. The following specific items shall also be addressed: 
1.  A site plan indicating the proposed site preparation and grading, streets and parking areas, loading zones, outdoor storage areas, rail facilities, storm drainage, water, gas and sewage systems and all buffer areas. 
2.  The development controls for the district shall be detailed (lot coverage, setbacks, building heights, lot sizes, etc.). If standards are not specifically proposed, then the applicable standards in the light industrial (I-I) district, together with the screening and buffer requirements, shall apply. 
3.  If office or commercial uses are proposed in conjunction with the planned industrial development, then the applicable requirements in the planned office development or the planned commercial development [district] shall be provided. 
4.  A proposed development schedule and listing of proposed uses shall be provided. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15.A(4); Res. of 11-12-79; Code 1991, § 17.180.090; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.180.100. - Planned commercial farm district (PCFD). 
A.  Characteristics and intent. 
1.  The land within the county designated as planned commercial farm district (PCFD) shall be represented by large district areas of at least 35 acres or more that are devoted to intensive agricultural production in the areas of food crops, fiber crops, animal feed, poultry, livestock and commercial timber production. Individual farms within the district area cannot be smaller than five acres. Areas within this zone are not intended to be used for small-scale farming, gardening, small poultry operation or idle pasture land that are more appropriately located in the agricultural-residential or other zoning districts. The land should be in use for good faith farming or agricultural uses worthy of protection and preservation. 
2.  The use of areas designated as PCFD may result in odors, dust, noise or other effects that may not be compatible with single-lot residential development. Specific setback and buffer requirements designed for PCFDs shall apply just as they do within commercial and industrial districts to minimize the adverse effects of the farm uses. 
3.  In order for a parcel to be considered for rezoning to PCFD, the parcel must have qualified for and be under House Bill 230, the Preferential Agricultural Assessment. 
4.  If, after a tract is rezoned to PCFD, the land is not actively used for intensive commercial agricultural purposes, the county may, at its discretion, initiate procedures for a zoning review and possible rezoning of the property. An automatic review of the zoning will occur at the end of the first year after the date of the original zoning to PCFD. 
B.  Uses permitted. The uses which may be included in this district which do not require specific site plans or specific approval for expansion are as follows: 
1.  Active agricultural uses, including but not limited to the raising of food crops, animal feed crops, fiber crops, poultry and livestock; 
2.  One site-built single-family detached dwelling unit. 
3.  Accessory residential structures and barns, poultry houses and similar buildings, provided that they are directly related to and necessary for the residential or agricultural use of the property; 
4.  Wholesale and retail sales of agricultural products raised on the property; 
5.  The replacement of poultry houses and/or barns, including nonconforming ones, provided the replacement structure is built on the exact same location and is no larger than the original structure. 
C.  Uses requiring specific approval. Any other use not listed above would require specific approval in the initial zoning or through specified process. The types of uses anticipated within this district and the applicable standards are as follows: 
1.  Uses requiring approval by planning commission. 
a.  Home occupations; 
b.  Residential businesses; 
c.  Rural businesses. 
2.  Uses requiring approval by zoning board of adjustment. 
a.  Caretaker or employee residence, one per five acres of land, each dwelling requiring review by the zoning board of adjustment. If approved, at least one of the occupants must be employed on the premises or their presence must be necessary and essential for the orderly operation of the farm; 
b.  Hardship Class A or Class B manufactured homes. 
3.  Uses requiring plan amendments. Any other use not listed as permitted inherently or [in] subparagraph 1 of this subdivision of this subsection. 
D.  Lot size, setbacks, etc. 
1.  [ District size. ] The minimum district area for rezoning shall be 35 acres. The minimum individual parcel size within the district shall be five acres. A district may contain one or more contiguous parcels totaling 35 acres. Parcels directly across from each other but divided by a public road right-of-way shall be considered contiguous. 
2.  [ Area and frontage. ] Unless otherwise approved, the following standards shall apply to areas zoned PCFD, with the exception of the minimum lot size and frontage for the primary and secondary tracts, which shall not be reduced. Any other standards should be shown on the site plan and justification for the alternate standards should be given. 
a.  Minimum district area, 35 acres. 
b.  Minimum lot size, five acres. 
c.  Minimum frontage, 100 feet. 
d.  Requirements apply to any new tract created by the subdivision of a farm and do not apply to lots of record. 
3.  Setbacks. 
a.  Front: 65 feet from the center line of the road or 40 feet from the front property line, including barns and poultry houses. 
b.  Side: 15 feet for residences and accessory structures.* 
c.  Rear: 25 feet for residences and accessory structures.* 
*Except barns, poultry houses, composting operations and structures for the storage of organic waste, for which the setback shall be as follows: 

 
*A change in zoning of adjacent property after the PCFD is established on the adjacent property will not increase the required setback, but may reduce the setback when applicable. 
E.  Buffers. Buffers may be required where PCFD boundaries are adjacent to areas zoned R-I, R-II, V-C or PRD. They may be required upon later request for amendment to the PCFD if the above-referenced zones have been established adjacent to the PCFD. 
F.  Required plans. All of the special requirements of planned developments shall apply except that no detailed site plan will be required if only inherently permitted uses are proposed for the property. An appropriate written report will be the minimum required. The written report shall list all existing and proposed uses and structures on the principal and secondary tracts. If farming uses or structures other than those listed as permitted inherently are proposed, then a site plan as described in the special requirements of section 17.180.040 [17.180.030] shall be provided. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15.A(5); Res. of 11-12-79; Res. of 3-10-86; Res. of 7-7-86; Res. of 12-8-86; Res. of 9-24-90; Res. of 10-14-91; Code 1991, § 17.180.100; Res. of 3-27-97, § 1; Res. of 6-17-02(2), §§ 22, 23; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.190. - PARKWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (P-C) 

 

17.190.010. - Intent. 
This district is primarily intended to provide commercial areas along divided highways that are major arterials or thoroughfares within the county. The uses are to be of such a character or designed so that they will not reduce the safety or transportation function of the roadway upon which they front. The commercial uses shall provide retail businesses and services that cater to the traveling public and/or to serve the needs of the immediate area. The design and development of commercial areas shall be accomplished so as to maintain the aesthetic quality of the environment created by such divided thoroughfares or parkways. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15.B; Res. of 5-11-81; Code 1991, § 17.190.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.190.020. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the P-C district include: 
A.  Any retail or retail service establishment, including the making of articles sold at retail on the premises providing the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
B.  Banks. 
C.  Bus stations. 
D.  Churches and other places of worship. 
E.  Motels, hotels. 
F.  County uses. 
G.  Offices. 
H.  Radio and television studios. 
I.  [Deleted 1-13-92.] 
J.  Restaurants. 
K.  Service stations, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
L.  Subdivisions. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15.B(A); Res. of 5-11-81; Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-25-88; Res. of 1-27-92; Res. of 2-10-92; Code 1991, § 17.190.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.190.030. - Uses permitted subject to approval of planning commission. 
In the P-C district, uses permitted subject to approval of the planning commission include: 
A.  Manufacturing and fabrication as inside uses which occupy no more than 1,000 square feet of floor area, provided all materials produced shall be sold on the premises. 
B.  Recreational and/or cultural uses of a commercial nature. 
C.  Truck terminals. 
D.  Storage facilities, self-service, with not more than 10,000 square feet of total inside storage area. 
E.  Municipal and other public uses. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15.B(B); Res. of 5-11-81; Res. of 7-25-88; Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.190.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.190.040. - Conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval. 
In the P-C district, conditional uses subject to zoning board of adjustment approval (see chapter 17.350) and a required public hearing include: 
A.  Additional parking on other than principal lot. 
B.  Caretaker and/or employee residences. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15.B(C); Res. of 5-11-81; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.190.040; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.190.050. - Development standards. 
A.  Uses within the P-C district shall have a minimum frontage of 300 feet on the divided highway if access is directly from the four-lane divided highway and a minimum of 100 feet if access is from an intersecting road or access road and not from the divided highway. 
B.  No more than one access point per use shall be permitted onto the divided highway. 
C.  Access points upon the divided highway shall have a minimum sight distance of 500 feet in the direction of oncoming traffic. 
D.  Minimum lot size shall be one acre. Setback shall be the same as for the highway business district. 
E.  Chapter 17.260 shall apply to property zoned P-C. 
F.  Only business signs advertising the principal use of or business conducted on the property shall be permitted. These may be roof signs, provided that no more than one sign shall be placed on the roof of any structure and that a sign face shall not exceed six feet in height, 40 feet in length or 240 square feet in area. Free-standing signs shall not be larger than 32 square feet on each sign face. Further, only one free-standing sign shall be permitted per use and any combination of signs shall not exceed 64 square feet per sign face. All such signs shall conform to section 17.270.030. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15.B(D); Res. of 5-11-81; Code 1991, § 17.190.050; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.190.060. - Uses permitted subject to approval of county commission. 
In the P-C district, uses permitted subject to approval of the county commission, after review and recommendation by the planning commission and a required public hearing, include: 
A.  Slow rate land treatment systems. 
B.  Private directional signs for churches ([see] section 17.270.030) up to 36 square feet in area. 
C.  Re-establishment of a nonconforming use after a period of two years. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 15.B(E); Res. of 5-11-81; Res. of 1-14-91; Res. of 3-11-91; Res. of 5-28-91; Code 1991, § 17.190.060; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.200. - MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT (MHP)[12] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of June 17, 2002(2), § 24, repealed former Ch. 17.200, §§ 17.200.010—17.200.040, which pertained to mobile home park district (MHP) and enacted provisions designated as a new Ch. 17.200, §§ 17.200.010—17.200.040, to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Mobile homes, § 15.10.110; standards for manufactured home and travel trailer parks, ch. 17.310. 

17.200.010. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the MHP district include: 
A.  Manufactured home parks containing Class A and Class B manufactured homes with site plan approved by the planning commission. (See Chapter 17.310 for development standards. 
B.  Site-built single-family detached dwelling units on individual lots of five acres or more with 50 feet of road frontage. 
C.  Class A and Class B manufactured homes and industrialized dwelling units on individual lots of five acres or more with 50 feet of road frontage. 
D.  Accessory residential uses, including but not limited to a private garage, detached home workshop, swimming pool, or greenhouse, all of which shall be incidental to the use of the property as a residence. 
E.  Agricultural or horticultural uses. 
F.  Accessory farm uses, including the sale of products grown on the premises and the keeping of livestock and poultry. 
G.  Churches and other places of worship. 
H.  County uses, including cemeteries, parks and playgrounds. 
I.  Substations for electrical transformers, gas regulators and telephone subscriber carrier sites, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
J.  Home offices. 
K.  Family day care home. 
L.  Group day care home as an accessory use. 
M.  Home occupations, provided the conditions of chapter 17.210 are met. 
(Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 24; Res. of 8-22-02, § 3; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.200.020. - Uses permitted subject to planning commission approval. 
In the MHP district, uses permitted subject to planning commission approval include: 
A.  Nursery schools, kindergartens day care centers. 
B.  Travel trailer parks. 
C.  Municipal, state and other public uses. 
(Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 24; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.200.030. - Uses requiring site plan review. 
In the MHP district, uses requiring site plan review include manufactured home parks (see chapter 17.310 for development standards). 
(Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 24; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.200.040. - Uses permitted subject to approval of Hall County Commission. 
In the MHP district, uses permitted subject to approval of the county commission after review and recommendation by the planning commission and a public hearing include: 
A.  Slow rate land treatment systems. 
B.  Private directional signs for churches (defined under section 17.270.030) up to 36 square feet in area. 
C.  Re-establishment of a nonconforming use after a period of two years. 
D.  Group day care home. 
E.  Day care center. 
F.  Site-built dwelling units, Class A and Class B manufactured homes, and Class A and Class B industrialized dwelling units more than seven years old being moved into Hall County for the purpose of permanent or temporary occupancy. 
(Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 24; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.205. - POWER TRANSMISSION LINE OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT (PTL-OD) 

 

17.205.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose and intent of this overlay zone is to create a vehicle whereby electric power utility companies may obtain proper overlay zoning approval from Hall County for high power transmission lines by unilateral application without first obtaining the consent of the landowners within the preferred route so as not to unduly disturb the expectation of existing land owners created by the existing zoning ordinance and so as to allow Hall County to exercise reasonable zoning regulatory authority over the siting of high power transmission lines without first requiring the utility to go to the possible wasteful expense of acquiring ownership of its preferred route before obtaining final zoning approval therefor. Obviously, for most purposes the existing zoning provisions may properly regulate the relevant district in general, but the more specific and targeted provisions contained in this overlay district are needed to accommodate the competing interest of landowner and utility company and to accomplish pressing land use objectives related to the conservation of the county's valuable natural, human, and economic resources. 
(Res. of 3-25-04, § 4) 
17.205.020. - Definitions. 
The terms as defined in this section apply only to Chapter 17.205 and do not apply to any other chapter of the county's zoning resolution: 
(1)  "Applicant" means any electric utility that applies for a rezoning pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  "Construction" means activities such as actual clearing of land, excavation, or other action that would adversely affect the natural environment, including view shed, in proximity to any transmission facility and associated corridors, but not including preliminary surveying or testing or similar activities to the extent necessary for the electric utility to select is preferred corridor. 
(3)  "Corridor" means the proposed area within which a transmission right-of-way is to be located. The width of the corridor proposed for a rezoning by an applicant may be the width of the transmission right-of-way, or a wider boundary, not to exceed a width of 1,000 feet so as to allow for possible realignment of the final right-of-way as part of the rezoning process. 
(4)  "Electric utility" means a person whether organized under the laws of this state or under the laws of any other state or country, engaged in producing, generating, transmitting, delivering, or furnishing electricity for private or public use within the state, including but not limited to electric membership corporations and public and private corporations. 
(5)  "Person" means an individual, partnership, joint venture, private or public corporation, association, firm, public service company, political subdivision, municipal corporation, government agency, public utility district, or any other entity, public or private, however organized. 
(6)  "Transmission facility" means that portion of any electrical transmission line or related substation or any physically-connected component parts thereof (including but not limited to towers, poles, guy wires, ducts, underground conduit, and transformers) that extends across or occupies any part of Hall County, Georgia, and that is capable of transmitting or handling at 115 kilovolts ("kv") or more. A transmission facility does not include the following: 
A.  Maintenance and access roads; and 
B.  Construction equipment sites and staging areas. 
(7)  "Transmission right-of-way" means land necessary for the construction and maintenance of a transmission facility. A future right-of-way must be located within that portion of the corridor approved as a PTL-OD. 
(Res. of 3-25-04, § 4) 
17.205.030. - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the PTL-OD District include: 
The construction, installation, and operation in Hall County of all or any part of a transmission facility. 
(Res. of 3-25-04, § 4) 
17.205.040. - Development Standards. 
In acting upon the rezoning application, the planning commission and board of commissioners shall consider the following in addition to the criteria or lines of inquiry contained in section 17.380.060: 
(1)  The detrimental impacts of the proposed transmission facility and any associated corridor on: 
A.  Historical and cultural sites; 
B.  Property values. 
C.  The zoning and present use of properties near the proposed transmission right-of-way. 
(2)  Whether the proposed transmission right-of-way can be cost-effectively realigned to follow existing rights-of-way for utility infrastructure or existing roadways, i.e., "co-location," so as to mitigate the aforesaid negative community impacts. 
(3)  Whether all or any portion of the proposed transmission line can be cost-effectively constructed underground and/or in a surface or partially submerged duct, including but not limited to the use of gas-insulated transmission line technology, so as to mitigate the aforesaid negative community impacts. 
(4)  Whether other route or site modifications (including but not limited to so-called "underbuilding" or "doublestacking" of multiple lines on a single support structure) that would help mitigate negative community impacts on a cost-effective basis are possible. 
(5)  Whether or not the applicant has already sought or obtained similar local regulatory approval, if required, from the contiguous jurisdiction(s) where the applicant indicates that the proposed transmission facility will "enter" and/or "exit" Hall County, so as to ensure continuity of the proposed transmission line where it crosses jurisdictional boundaries. 
(Res. of 3-25-04, § 4) 
17.205.050. - Map amendment procedures. 
The regular map amendment procedures contained in Chapter 17.380 of this title shall apply for amendment requests to create a new PTL-OD district-provided that: 
(1)  Any electric utility shall be entitled to seek a PTL-OD rezoning on land, despite no ownership or contractual interest therein, where it enjoys the power of eminent domain and has determined on good faith that it is prepared to exercise the power of eminent domain, as necessary, to acquire all or a portion of the proposed corridor in order to locate a transmission right-of-way therein. 
(2)  The land in question need have no "minimum road frontage" or "acreage." 
(3)  The applicant shall include with its application (i) a detailed description of the transmission facility that includes a topographical map of the proposed corridor identifying inter alia the location and use of all structures, public parks and playgrounds, and recognized historic sites within the proposed corridor or within 500 feet thereof and the distance between the proposed lines and those features and that includes its proposed or existing connecting substations and/or power plants outside the county, including whether or not it has already received all necessary local regulatory approvals, if any, from neighboring jurisdictions for the transmission facility to "enter" and/or "exit" Hall County at the locations indicated; (ii) a reasonable good faith schedule for completing construction of the transmission facility (provided that the board will always for good cause shown grant an extension of time for completing the project); and (iii) an economic analysis of the internal corporate and external civic costs and benefits within Hall County of the proposed transmission facility that focuses on the possible cost-effectiveness of putting as much as possible of the transmission facility underground and/or utilizing gas-insulated transmission lines in surface or partially submerged ducts, either open or closed, with or without concrete covers and with or without camouflage, which analysis should include a calculation of the cost savings associated with the possible smaller right-of-way required for an underground or gas-insulated installation, as well as some reasonable effort to quantify the expected diminution of third-party land values, if any, from the proposed transmission facility, including consequential damages to the remainder of the parcels in question, as well as any "consequential damages" to adjacent parcels that is otherwise non-compensable under applicable Georgia eminent domain jurisprudence; and to quantify any "external" benefits to Hall County from the proposed siting of the transmission facility. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the lines of inquiry suggested by section 17.380.060 and the provision in section 17.380.130(D) to the effect that any applicant shall have the burden of proof, the planning commission and the board of commissioners of Hall County shall work cooperatively with any electric utility proposing a transmission facility to ensure that an appropriate right-of-way corridor is rezoned to PTL-OD, subject to appropriate rezoning conditions governing the construction, operation, and maintenance of the transmission line in question. 
(5)  If PTL-OD rezoning for all or any portion of a proposed corridor is denied, such denial shall not trigger the provisions of section 17.380.130(E)(9), which would otherwise prohibit the property owner from filing another zoning application for at least six months immediately following the date of denial. 
(6)  Given the necessity of there being continuity of the proposed transmission line as it crosses jurisdictional boundaries, Hall County shall consider itself bound to honor pre-established "exit" and "entry" points out of and into the county where the applicant has already obtained local regulatory approval for such routes from contiguous jurisdictions or otherwise has a vested right to such an "exit" or "entry" point under Georgia law; provided that Hall County would respectfully encourage its neighboring jurisdictions to consult with it in advance before approving power transmission line routes that would predetermine such "entry" and "exit" points into and out of Hall County; and in that context Hall County hereby establishes a notification procedure similar to that normally required for developments that trigger the developments of regional impact thresholds promulgated by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs pursuant to O.C.G.A. §50-8-7.1(b)(3) when application for a PTL-OD classification does not otherwise trigger "DRI" review for notifying the contiguous jurisdictions at any proposed "entry" and "exit" points into and out of Hall County of such proposed high power transmission line within ten days of the filing of the application; provided that it shall be the duty of the applying electric utility to supply the director of the planning and zoning department or analogous official within each such jurisdiction with a copy of the PTL-OD application filed with Hall County within such ten-day period, together with a cover letter indicating when the application was filed and when the public hearings are scheduled to be held and calling the official's attention to the fact that representatives from such jurisdiction are welcome (by virtue of this section 17.205.050(6) of the Official Code of Hall County) to participate in any Hall County public hearings with respect to the propriety of the proposed "entry" and "exit" points insofar as those points impact the planning and land use concerns of such contiguous jurisdiction. 
(7)  In order to cover the actual cost to Hall County of obtaining expert opinion and studies to evaluate any application by an electric utility, fees in addition to those established in section 17.30.010 are established for power transmission lines requiring county commission approval. An initial deposit of $1,000.00 per linear mile of proposed corridor within Hall County shall be paid to Hall County to review the application upon submission. If the actual cost to Hall County is greater than this deposit, the applicant shall be billed for the difference and payment shall be made prior to the hearing before the county commission. In no case shall the maximum total charge exceed $2,000.00 per linear mile of proposed corridor within Hall County. If the actual cost is less than the initial deposit, the difference will be refunded to the applicant within 20 days following the county commission hearing. 
(Res. of 3-25-04, § 4) 
CHAPTER 17.210. - CONDITIONS APPLIED TO SPECIFIC USES 

 

17.210.010. - Purpose. 
This chapter provides a single location for descriptions of conditions applied to specific permitted uses. These conditions apply only to uses that (a) are listed in the permitted uses of the zoning districts and (b) reference this chapter. 
(Res. of 2-10-92; Code 1991, § 17.210.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.210.020. - Descriptions of conditions. 
Any retail or retail service establishment including the making of articles sold at retail on the premises shall meet the following conditions: 
1.  Such manufacturing shall be incidental to the retail business or service, occupy less than 40 percent of the floor area, and employ no more than five operators. 
2.  Automobile repair garages and tire recapping facilities shall be prohibited. 
Community residences shall meet conditions such that no certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless: 
1.  The community residence is located at least 800 feet (except 2,000 feet in the AR-III or AR-IV districts) from any existing community residence, as measured from lot line to lot line; and 
2.  The applicant demonstrates that it has either obtained or is eligible for state or local licensing or certification to operate the proposed community residence, or that the proposed community residence is licensed or certified or eligible for licensing or certification. 
The building official may revoke a certificate of occupancy for a community residence if its license or certification or the operator's license or certification to operate community residences is revoked. A certificate of occupancy is not transferable to another operator or to another location. 
Construction trailers shall meet the following conditions: 
1.  Trailers must meet all building code requirements for such use. 
2.  Trailers and storage areas cannot be located within 200 feet of a residence. 
3.  Trailers and all accessory structures must meet all setback requirements for the zoning district in which they are located and may not be located on public right-of-way in any circumstances. 
4.  Such trailers will be considered a temporary structure and not a principal structure under the regulations. 
5.  No signs are permitted except a non-illuminated, single wall-mounted sign of a maximum of 32 square feet, identifying the construction company. 
6.  No outside lighting is permitted except security lighting designed in a manner so as not to be directly cast into any residential district or roadway. 
7.  Parking will be provided in accord with the requirements of Hall County. 
8.  Driveways serving the trailer and/or storage area will be constructed in a manner to meet the requirements of the "Rules and Regulations for Driveway Construction in Unincorporated Hall County" [chapter 12.40]. 
9.  The trailer, accessory structures and all storage areas will be removed from the site and the site returned to its original condition within one week of acceptance of the contracted improvements by the contracting body. 
10.  In the AR-III, AR-IV, S-S, H-B, I-I, and I-II districts: 
a.  Trailers are allowed up to three months with no screening requirement; 
b.  Trailers are allowed up to 12 months, provided that all outside storage must be done in a manner so as not to be visible to surrounding property or roads; and 
c.  Planning commission approval is required for more than 12 months (approved before being located on the site). 
Drive-in theaters shall meet the following conditions: 
1.  There shall be not less than 200 feet of sight distance at any exit to a major artery or collector route. 
2.  There shall be off-street storage space to accommodate waiting automobiles at the ratio of one space for each three theater accommodations. 
Home occupations shall meet the following conditions: 
1.  Home occupations shall not include the repair and/or maintenance of motor vehicles, large scale manufacturing or any use which will create noise, noxious odors or any hazard that may endanger the health, safety or welfare of the neighborhood. 
2.  The home occupation shall not allow customers or the public to come to the premises. 
3.  The occupation or profession must be conducted entirely within the dwelling. 
4.  The dwelling must be the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner at the time of the application and, if approved, the home occupation shall be valid only as long as the original principal practitioner resides in the dwelling, is conducting the business and has a current business license. 
5.  Home occupations shall be limited to no more than 25 percent of the total heated floor area of the residence or 500 square feet, whichever is less. The proposed size of the home occupation shall be specified at the time of application. 
6.  Any additions or alterations to the residence which will be used for the home occupation must be of an architectural style in keeping with the surrounding residential and agricultural development. 
7.  The portion of the residence in which the business is conducted shall be completely enclosed in a manner that the business is not visible from the surrounding property. 
8.  No employees other than family members residing on the premises shall be permitted. 
9.  There shall be no exterior evidence of a business being conducted on the premises. No outside storage or display, including signs, shall be allowed. 
10.  No more than one home occupation, residential business or rural business is allowed in a residence at one time. 
11.  No use that creates noise, dust, vibration, odor, smoke, glare, or electrical interference that would be detectable beyond the dwelling unit is permitted. 
12.  One business vehicle used exclusively by the resident is permitted. The vehicle shall be no larger in size than a pick-up truck, panel truck or van and is limited in size to one-ton carrying capacity. The vehicle shall not have business identification (signs) on it when it is parked at the premises and will not have any equipment used in the business left on the vehicle in a manner that can be seen from the surrounding property. 
13.  Pickups from and deliveries to the site in regard to the business shall be restricted to vehicles having no more than two axles and shall be restricted to no more than two pickups or deliveries per day. 
Sawmills used to process timber grown and harvested on the property where it is processed shall meet the following conditions: 
1.  The sawmill is located at least 200 feet from the nearest residence on any adjacent property; 
2.  No sale of any of the products resulting from the sawmill is to occur on the property; 
3.  Hours of operation are restricted to 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
Service stations shall meet the following conditions: 
1.  All structures and buildings, including underground storage tanks, shall be placed not less than 25 feet from any property line. 
2.  If on a corner lot the means of ingress and egress shall be provided not less than 15 feet from the intersections. 
3.  Tire recapping facilities shall not be included. 
Substations for electrical transformers, gas regulators and telephone subscriber carrier sites shall meet the following conditions: 
1.  Exterior lighting shall be of the type which prevents direct view of the light source from adjacent residences. 
2.  The substation shall be screened in a manner to hide it from view from the adjacent property. The screening material shall be a vegetative buffer as provided for in section 17.260.020 or a masonry wall (brick or finished block). 
3.  The equipment contained on the site shall be enclosed by a locked security fence of a minimum height of six feet. A masonry wall used for screening may also serve as the security fence. 
(Res. of 4-26-91; Res. of 2-10-92; Res. of 8-10-92; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.210.020; Res. of 3-11-99, § 9; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.215. - AGRI-ENTERTAINMENT EVENTS WITHIN THE AR-III AND AR-IV ZONING DISTRICTS 

 

17.215.010. - Definition. 
Agri-entertainment is defined as the gathering of individuals for social, celebratory or entertainment purposes at an agricultural location (venue) located in an agricultural district, wherein a fee is charged by the owner or representative of the property for the use of the venue. 
(Res. of 7-11-13, § 2(Exh. A)) 
17.215.020. - Uses subject to commission approval. 
Within the AR-III or AR-IV Zoning District, county commission approval is required to determine that the specific site (venue) is suitable for the purpose or purposes intended without creating significant negative impacts to adjoining and nearby residences. 
(Res. of 7-11-13, § 2(Exh. A)) 
17.215.030. - Types of events. 
A.  Events to be held include farm weddings, receptions, public gatherings or similar agri-entertainment uses as defined or as determined by the Hall County Planning Director. 
B.  Allowance for these types of events may be considered as provided, however they should not negatively impact neighboring properties. Negative impacts include, but are not limited to, environment, noise, odor, traffic, dust, lighting, trespassing, etc. 
(Res. of 7-11-13, § 2(Exh. A)) 
17.215.040. - Conditions and regulations for agri-entertainment. 
A.  A Hall County Business License shall be required if the zoning request is approved for the agri-entertainment events. 
B.  The property shall be used for the purpose of providing an agri-entertainment venue, as provided for in section 17.215.030(A). 
C.  The structure that will house the agri-entertainment event shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from any property lines of a different owner. 
D.  All parking for an agri-entertainment event shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any property lines of a different owner. 
E.  Parking shall be permitted on grass or gravel. 
F.  The agri-entertainment event barn or primary event structure shall be permitted to be constructed only on the property described. 
G.  The maximum number of attendees to occupy any agri-entertainment event barn or structure on the premises shall be regulated by the Hall County Fire Marshal. 
H.  The occupancy of the agri-entertainment event barn or primary event structure shall not exceed the occupancy load provisions of the Uniform Building Code and those occupancy load limits shall be posted on the premises by the Hall County Building Inspection Department. 
I.  The use of the premises for an agri-entertainment venue shall be permitted only after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Hall County Building Inspection Department. 
J.  Any improvements required to support the property as an agri-entertainment venue shall be made only after the issuance of a building permit by the Hall County Building Inspection Department. 
K.  Outdoor activities within the agri-entertainment event barn or primary event structure shall not involve the outside amplification of voice, music and/or instruments except during a wedding ceremony. 
L.  Agri-entertainment events shall commence no earlier than 9:00 a.m. and shall terminate no later than 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and no later than 12:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
1.  For [the] purpose of this section, termination shall mean the termination of food, drinks, service and entertainment with the understanding that attendees will need a reasonable amount of time after termination to exit the premises. 
M.  All agri-entertainment events shall be provided with adequate potable water and sanitary waste disposal systems as approved by the Hall County Environmental Health Department. 
N.  All agri-entertainment events shall provide for adequate access and egress for emergency vehicles as determined through the development review process. 
O.  All agri-entertainment events shall be provided with adequate personnel to assist with parking, emergency and other potential impacts of each event. 
P.  If the property being considered for agri-entertainment use is "bona-fide conservation use property" as defined under O.C.G.A. §§ 48-5-7.1 through 48-5-7.4, caution should be used to insure that the proposed agri-entertainment use of the property does not constitute a breach of the conservation covenants applicable to the property. 
(Res. of 7-11-13, § 2(Exh. A)) 
CHAPTER 17.216. - SHORT TERM RENTAL 

 

17.216.010. - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for short term rentals of privately owned residential structures used as vacation homes and rented to transient occupants, minimize adverse effects of short term rental uses on surrounding residential neighborhoods, and preserve the character of neighborhoods in which vacation home use occurs. 
B.  This chapter is not intended to regulate hotels, motels, inns, or non-vacation type rental arrangements including, but not limited to, boardinghouses, lodging houses, or rooming houses. 
(Res. of 3-22-18(1), § 5(Exh. A)) 
17.216.020. - Zoning districts. 
Permitted uses in the vacation-cottage (V-C) district shall include transient occupancy. Within the agricultural residential III (AR-III) and agricultural residential IV (AR-IV) districts, planning commission approval is required to determine that the specific residential structure to be used for transient occupancy. Within the residential-I (R-I), district planning commission approval is required to determine that the specific residential structure desiring to be used for transient occupancy provided the following requirements are met: 
1.  Any part of the parcel of land containing the vacation home is within 500 feet of the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers property line as of March 22, 2018, and 
2.  The parcel of land containing the vacation home is not within a recorded subdivision or if within a recorded subdivision of ten lots or less. 
(Res. of 3-22-18(1), § 5(Exh. A)) 
17.216.030. - Applicability. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any owner of any property within the unincorporated areas of Hall County to rent or operate a short term rental of residential property contrary to the procedures and regulations established in this chapter, other provisions of this Code, or any applicable state law. 
B.  The restrictions and obligations contained in this chapter shall apply to short term rentals at all times during which such vacation homes are marketed and used as short term rentals. 
C.  The allowance of short term rentals pursuant to this section shall not prevent enforcement of additional restrictions that may be contained in restrictive covenants or other private contractual agreements or arrangements. 
(Res. of 3-22-18(1), § 5(Exh. A)) 
17.216.040. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Managing agency or agent: A person, firm or agency representing an owner or owners of a short term rental. 
Noise regulations: Those regulations contained in the official Code of Hall County, Georgia, chapter 8.80, noise control. 
Officer of the county: means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. § § 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and by this chapter of the Official Code of Hall County to exercise the powers prescribed by such ordinances or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Owner: A person that holds legal and/or equitable title to private property. 
Private: Intended for or restricted to the occupants and/or guests of his or her short term rental; not for public use. 
Property: A residential legal lot of record on which a short term rental is located. 
Rental term: The period of time a responsible person rents or leases a short term rental. 
Short term rental: The transient occupancy of a vacation home, rented for the purpose of overnight lodging for a period of not less than two nights and not more than 30 consecutive nights. 
(Res. of 3-22-18(1), § 5(Exh. A)) 
17.216.050. - Property owners, local contact person, and responsible person. 
A.  Property owners. 
1.  The owner and/or local contact person shall use reasonably prudent business practices to ensure the short term rental is used in a manner that complies with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations pertaining to the use and occupancy of the subject vacation home, and shall further use reasonably prudent business practices to ensure the occupants and/or guests of the vacation home do not create noise in violation of the noise regulations of this Code or disturbances, engage in disorderly conduct, or violate any applicable law, rule or regulation pertaining to the use and occupancy of the subject vacation home. 
B.  Local contact person. 
1.  Each owner of a short term rental shall designate a local contact person who has access and authority to assume management of the short term rental and take remedial measures while the short term rental is being rented to an occupant and/or guest. An owner of a short term rental may designate himself or herself as the local contact person. 
2.  The local contact person shall be at least 21 years of age. 
3.  There shall only be one designated local contact person for a short term rental at any given time. 
4.  The local contact person shall be required to respond to the location of the short term rental 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and within one hour after being notified by Hall County of the existence of a violation of this chapter or any other provision of this Code, or any disturbance or complaint requiring immediate remedy or abatement regarding the condition, operation, or conduct of occupants of the short term rental. 
5.  An owner may retain a managing agent, managing agency, operator, or representative to serve as the local contact person to comply with the requirements of this section, including, without limitation, the licensing of the short term rental, the management of the short term rental, and the compliance with the conditions of the license. The owner of the short term rental is responsible for compliance with the provisions of this section and the failure of an agent, representative, or local contact person to comply with this section shall be deemed noncompliance by the owner. 
6.  The owner must immediately notify the Hall County Business License Department in writing upon a change of local contact person or the local contact person's telephone number. This notification will be on forms prescribed by the business license department. The new, revised business license, which will not extend the expiration date of the business license, will be issued for a fee of $25.00; must be posted in the vacation home within ten days of any change of local contact person information and before occupants can rent the short term rental; and updated notices mailed out to all residential neighbors per section 17.216.060 of this Code. 
C.  Responsible person. 
1.  Each rental party of the short term rental shall have an occupant designated to be the responsible person. 
2.  The responsible person must be at least 25 years of age. 
3.  The responsible person is legally responsible for ensuring that all occupants and/or guests of the short term rental comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the use and occupancy of the subject short term rental. 
(Res. of 3-22-18(1), § 5(Exh. A)) 
17.216.060. - Business license and tax, and transferability. 
A.  Business license and tax. 
1.  The owner shall pay all required excise tax per section 3.40.020 of this Code; 
2.  No owner or local contact person of a short term rental shall rent that vacation home without first applying for and registering the business per section 3.40.060 of this Code; 
3.  The owner shall comply with all other applicable provisions of chapter 3.40 of this Code; 
4.  The owner shall obtain a business license for said short term rental and comply with all applicable provisions of title 5 of this Code for business licenses and regulations; 
5.  A separate business license shall be required for each vacation home used for short term rental; 
6.  A business license application may be denied if the applicant has had a prior short term rental for the same vacation home revoked within any 12-month period; 
7.  Additional information required for a business license for a short term rental shall include: 
(a)  The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the local contact person for the short term rental; 
(b)  The number of bedrooms and approximate square footage in the short term rental, and the maximum number of overnight and daytime occupants; 
(c)  Acknowledgment that the owner and local contact person have read all regulations pertaining to the operation of a short term rental; 
B.  All business licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are subject to the following standard conditions: 
1.  The owner or local contact person shall, by written agreement with the responsible person, limit overnight occupancy of the short term rental to the specific number of overnight occupants designated in the business license application; 
2.  Prior to permitting occupancy of a short term rental by a transient occupant, the owner or the local contact person shall: 
(a)  Obtain the name, address, and a copy of a valid government identification of the responsible person; 
(b)  Provide information about the short term rental regulations to the responsible person; and 
(c)  Provide and require that such responsible person execute a formal acknowledgement that he or she is legally responsible for compliance by all occupants and/or guests of the vacation home with all applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the use and occupancy of the short term rental. 
3.  Parked vehicles: 
(a)  Shall not be parked on the county right-of-way or along any roadways at any time; and 
(b)  Shall be parked outdoors on the property only on designated hard surfaced areas with gravel, concrete or asphalt surfacing; and shall not be permitted outside such hard surfaced areas (i.e., no parking in yards or neighbors properties). 
4.  The owner and/or local contact person shall use best efforts to ensure that the occupants and/or guests of the short term rental do not violate the noise regulations set forth in title 8 of this Code by notifying the occupants of the rules regarding short term rentals and responding when notified that occupants are violating laws regarding their occupancy. It is not intended that the owner and/or local contact person act as a peace officer or place himself or herself in harm's way; 
5.  The owner and/or local contact person shall use best efforts to ensure that the occupants and/or guests of the short term rental do not violate the domestic animal regulations set forth in Title 4 of this Code by notifying the occupants of the rules regarding short term rentals and responding when notified that occupants are violating laws regarding their occupancy. It is not intended that the owner and/or local contact person act as a peace officer or place himself or herself in harm's way; 
6.  The owner and/or local contact person of the short term rental shall post a copy of the business license and a copy of the conditions set forth in this chapter in a conspicuous place within the short term rental; 
7.  All business licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid for no more than one year, beginning on the date of issuance and expiring on December 31st of that year; and 
8.  Upon the issuance of a new short term rental business license, or an updated local contact person, or a change in business license name, Hall County shall mail a notice to all residences within 500 feet of the property line of the short term rental notifying the neighbors that a short term rental business license has been issued and providing information regarding how to lodge complaints regarding the short term rental, if any. 
C.  Transferability. 
1.  No business license issued under this section shall be transferred or assigned or used by any person other than the owner or local contact person to whom it is issued, or at any location other than the one for which it is issued. 
(Res. of 3-22-18(1), § 5(Exh. A)) 
17.216.070. - Standard operational requirements and conditions. 
A.  Parked vehicles. All parked vehicles at the short term rental shall comply with all applicable provisions of section 17.216.060 of this Code. 
B.  Life safety and sanitation. 
1.  Short term rentals shall meet applicable International Building Code and International Fire Code regulations. For properties that are served by septic, short term rentals shall meet applicable environmental health regulations. 
2.  The owner and/or local contact person shall maintain a house number that is visible from the street at all times. 
(Res. of 3-22-18(1), § 5(Exh. A)) 
17.216.080. - Violation and penalties. 
A.  Violation. 
1.  The following conduct shall constitute a violation for which the penalties specified in paragraph D of this section 17.216.090 may be imposed, or the business license suspended or revoked: 
(a)  The owner or local contact person has violated any of the provisions of this chapter; or 
(b)  The owner or local contact person has violated any zoning, building, health or life safety provision; or 
(c)  The owner or local contact person has failed to comply with all applicable provisions of chapter 3.40 of this Code. 
2.  Any violation of the provisions of this section by occupants and/or guests of the short term rental shall be enforced pursuant to this section, and any other applicable Code sections. Enforcement actions may be brought against occupants and/or guests of a short term rental for violations of this section and any other provision of this Code notwithstanding that this section may also make the owner or local contact person of the short term rental responsible for the conduct constituting the violation. 
3.  Any advertising of the short term rental shall conform to information included in the short term rental business license and requirements of this section, and shall include notification of the maximum occupancy, maximum number of vehicles allowed, and provisions regulating noise. 
B.  Abandonment. The abandonment or failure to use a residence as a short term rental for a period of 12 consecutive months for any period shall be deemed an abandonment of the short term rental use and the owner shall be required to obtain a new business license for the property. 
C.  Complaints. 
1.  The complaining party shall first attempt to communicate with the owner or local contact person designated and describe the situation that is out of compliance with this Code; 
2.  If the complaint is not resolved with the owner or local contact person, then the complaining party may next provide a written complaint to the Hall County Marshal which shall include a description of the complaint, the attempts to resolve the complaint, and the complaining party's contact information. 
D.  Penalties. 
1.  The penalties for violations specified in section 17.216.080 of this Code shall be as follows: 
(a)  For the first violation within any 12-month period, the penalty shall be a written notice of violation and a fine not to exceed $250.00; 
(b)  For a second violation within any 12-month period, the penalty shall be a written notice of violation and a fine not to exceed $500.00; 
(c)  For a third violation within any 12-month period, the penalty shall be a written notice of violation, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, the business license shall be revoked for a period of 24 months, and the owner or local contact person shall not be eligible to reapply for a business license on the property in violation for a period of 24 months from the date of revocation. 
2.  A short term rental that is determined to be operating without the necessary business license required under this section shall subject the owner to a penalty of $500.00. Each day the short term rental is marketed or rented for overnight accommodation shall constitute a separate violation. 
3.  Failure of the owner or local contact person to respond to calls or complaints regarding the condition, operation, or conduct of occupants and/or guests of the short term rental in a timely and appropriate manner shall be grounds for imposition of penalties as set forth in this chapter. It is not intended that an owner or local contact person act as a peace officer or place himself or herself in an at-risk situation. 
4.  In addition to the penalties described above, any person violating the provisions of this chapter by operating a short term rental without a valid business license may be prosecuted according to the general penalties described in section 1.50.020 of this Code. 
E.  Enforcement. 
1.  Penalties, including a notice of violation, shall be imposed, and business licenses shall be revoked, in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(a)  Complaints shall result in a notice of the complaint being directed to the local contact person designated in the business license. The local contact person shall be responsible for contacting the responsible person to correct the problem within one hour. This local contact person is required to visit the property to confirm compliance with this chapter, unless compliance can reasonably be confirmed without visiting the property. 
(b)  If non-compliance with provisions of this section occurs, the business license department or officer of the county shall conduct an investigation whenever there is reason to believe that an owner and/or local contact person has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter. The investigation may include an inspection of the premises, review of law enforcement/security reports, online searches, citations, or neighbor documentation consisting of photos, sound recordings and video all of which may constitute evidence of a violation. Should the investigation support a finding that a violation occurred, the business license department or designee shall issue written notice of the violation and intention to impose a penalty and/or revoke the business license. The written notice may be served either by first class mail, by commercial overnight delivery, by personal service on the owner and/or local contact person, or by any other reasonable means of delivery, including email, and shall specify the facts which, in the opinion of the business license department, constitute grounds for imposition of the penalties and/or revocation, and specify that the penalties will be imposed and/or that the business license will be revoked 15 calendar days from the date of the notice unless the owner and/or local contact person files with the business license department a request for an appeal hearing before the board of commissioners. In considering such appeal, the board of commissioners shall determine whether the business license department has erred in his/her interpretation and/or enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  The business license department or officer of the county is hereby authorized and directed to establish such procedures, as specified in title 5 of this Code, which may from time to time be required to carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter. The Hall County Marshal and/or the Hall County Sheriff or his or her designee shall also have authority to enforce this chapter. 
(Res. of 3-22-18(1), § 5(Exh. A)) 
CHAPTER 17.220. - AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 

 

17.220.010. - Purpose. 
Obstructions to air navigation have the potential for endangering the lives and property of users of Lee Gilmer Memorial Airport and the property or occupants of land in its vicinity. An obstruction to air navigation may affect existing and future instrument approach patterns of aircraft to Lee Gilmer Memorial Airport and may reduce the size of areas available for the landing, takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of Lee Gilmer Memorial Airport and the public investment therein. The purpose of this zoning district is to impose height restrictions necessary to ensure that structures and natural objects will not impair flight safety or decrease the operational capability of Lee Gilmer Memorial Airport. 
(Res. of 1-14-91; Code 1991, § 17.220.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.220.020. - Definitions. 
The terms as defined in this section apply only to chapter 17.220 and do not apply to any other chapter of the county zoning resolution [this title]. 
A.  Airport: As defined in chapter 17.20 of this resolution [title]. In regard to this chapter of the resolution [this title], the term applies specifically to the Lee Gilmer Memorial Airport or Gilmer Memorial Airport. 
B.  Airport elevation: 1,277 feet above mean sea level. 
C.  Airport reference point: A horizontal reference point calculated in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circular 150/5300-4B. (For the airport configuration on July 1, 1990, the position is 34°16′22″ N, 83°49′47″ E.) 
D.  Approach surface: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway center line, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in section 17.220.040 of this chapter. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
E.  Approach, transitional, horizontal, conical and navigable airspace zones: These zones are set forth in section 17.220.030 of this chapter. 
F.  Conical space: A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
G.  Hazard to air navigation: An obstruction determined to have substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
H.  Height: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this section, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
I.  Horizontal surface: A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
J.  Larger than utility runway: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and jet powered aircraft. 
K.  Navigable airspace: That area of airspace greater than 200 feet above ground level or above the established airport elevation (Lee Gilmer Memorial Airport elevation of 1,277 feet plus 200 feet equals 1,477 feet), whichever is higher, within three nautical miles of the established airport reference point, which height increases in the proportion of 100 feet for each additional nautical mile of distance from the airport to a maximum of 500 feet. 
L.  Nonconforming structure, object or use: Any structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which lawfully exists at the time of adoption of this chapter and which does not conform with the provisions of this chapter or an amendment thereto. 
M.  Nonprecision instrument runway: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
N.  Obstruction (or obstruction to air navigation): Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in section 17.220.040 of this chapter. 
O.  Person: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or government entity; includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of them. 
P.  Precision [instrument runway]: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other planning document. 
Q.  Primary surface: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in section 17.220.030 of this chapter. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway center line. 
R.  Runway: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and take-off of aircraft along its length. 
S.  Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or semipermanent location on the ground or which is attached to something having permanent location on the ground. In regard to this chapter of the resolution [this title], the term applies also to mobile objects, constructed or installed by man, including but not limited to buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations, and overhead transmission lines. 
T.  Transitional surfaces: These surfaces extend outward at 90-degree angles to the runway center line and the runway center line extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at 90-degree angles to the extended runway center line. 
U.  Tree: Any object of natural growth. 
V.  Utility runway: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less. 
W.  Visual runway: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. 
(Res. of 1-14-91; Code 1991, § 17.220.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq.; zoning definitions, ch. 17.20. 
17.220.030. - Airport zones. 
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to Lee Gilmer Memorial Airport. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
A.  Utility runway visual approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 250 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line of the runway. 
B.  Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line of the runway. 
C.  Runway larger than utility visual approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line of the runway. 
D.  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-fourths mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line of the runway. 
E.  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as three-fourths mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line of the runway. 
F.  Precision instrument runway approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line of the runway. 
G.  Transitional zones. The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces. 
H.  Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii for all runways designated utility or visual and 10,000 feet for all others from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
I.  Conical zone. The conical zone is established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
J.  Navigable airspace zones. These four zones are at the ends of each runway beginning at their intersection with the conical zones 200 feet above the established airport elevation (1,277 feet plus 200 feet equals 1,477 feet) and expanding outwardly as shown in table 1 below. 
_____
TABLE 1. NAVIGABLE AIRSPACE ZONES 

 
(Res. of 1-14-91; Code 1991, § 17.220.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
_____
17.220.040. - Airport zone height limitations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be erected or altered, and no tree shall be allowed to grow, in any zone created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
A.  Utility runway visual approach zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway center line. 
B.  Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway center line. 
C.  Runway larger than utility visual approach zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway center line. 
D.  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-fourths mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. Slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway center line. 
E.  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as three-fourths mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. Slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway center line. 
F.  Precision instrument runway approach zone. Slopes 50 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway center line; thence slopes upward 40 feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway center line. 
G.  Transitional zones. Slope seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each one foot upward beginning at the sides of and the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90-degree angles to the extended runway center line. 
H.  Horizontal zone. Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation. 
I.  Conical zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 
J.  Navigable airspace zone. Established at 200 feet above the airport elevation (1,277 feet plus 200 feet equals 1,477 feet) and extending outward at this elevation to a distance of three nautical miles from the airport reference point. At three nautical miles this zone then slopes upward at a rate of 100 feet per nautical mile and ends at six nautical miles from the airport reference point at an elevation 500 feet above the established airport elevation (1,277 feet plus 500 feet equals 1,777 feet). 
K.  Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure or growth of any tree to a height up to 50 feet above the surface of the land. 
(Res. of 1-14-91; Code 1991, § 17.220.040; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.220.050. - Use restriction. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use shall be made of land or water within any zone established by this chapter in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
(Res. of 1-14-91; Code 1991, § 17.220.050; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.220.060. - Nonconforming structures, objects or uses. 
A.  Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed in this chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this chapter and is diligently prosecuted. 
B.  Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this chapter, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the county administrator or his designee to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport construction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the City of Gainesville as the owner of the airport. 
(Res. of 1-14-91; Code 1991, § 17.220.060; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.220.070. - Permits. 
A.  Future uses. No new structure shall be erected or otherwise established, unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted as provided in chapter 17.360. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with paragraph D, "Variances," below. 
B.  Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming structure to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this section or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. 
C.  Abandoned or destroyed nonconforming structures. Whenever the county administrator, or his designee, determines that a nonconforming structure has been abandoned or more than 50 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
D.  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter may apply to the zoning board of adjustment for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. No application for variance to the requirements of this chapter may be considered by the zoning board of adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the airport manager for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the airport manager does not respond to the application within 15 days after receipt, the zoning board of adjustment may act without his review to grant or deny said application. A variance shall be allowed as provided by chapter 2.40. In addition to the four [sic] criteria established by section 2.40.040.A as grounds for granting a variance, the zoning board of adjustment must also make a finding, before a variance may be granted, that the relief granted will not create a hazard to air navigation as defined by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
E.  Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure in question to install, operate, and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by the zoning board of adjustment, this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the City of Gainesville, as the owner of the airport, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain the necessary markings and lights. 
(Res. of 1-14-91; Code 1991, § 17.220.070; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.225. - PROTECTED WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED, PROTECTED GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA, AND WETLANDS PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 

 

17.225.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose and intent of these overlay zones is to conserve natural resources or realize development objectives without unduly disturbing the expectations created by the existing zoning ordinance. The existing zoning provisions may properly regulate the relevant district, in general, but more specific and targeted provisions contained in an overlay district are needed to accomplish pressing land use objectives related to the conservation of fragile natural resources. These resources include, but are not limited to, ground water recharge areas, water supply watershed and wetlands. 
(Res. of 3-22-01, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.225.020. - Definitions. 
The definitions listed below shall pertain to activities within the overlay districts: 
Aquifer: Any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Buffer: A natural and/or landscaped open space and/or screen for buffering incompatible land uses or to visibly separate uses through distance to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other nuisances; that portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established for the purpose of screening and separating properties with incompatible land uses, width of which is measured from the common property line and extending the developed portion of the common property line. A buffer consists of trees, shrubs and other natural vegetation undisturbed by grading or site development and replanted where sparsely vegetated or where disturbed for approved access and utility crossings. 
Buffer, undisturbed: An undisturbed buffer is one left in a natural state or augmented with plantings to achieve the goal of buffering. 
Drastic: The standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600/2-87-035. The "drastic" methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility. 
Generalized wetlands maps: All wetlands within the jurisdiction of Hall County, Georgia, as indicated on the National Wetlands Inventory Maps. Disclaimer Language: The generalized wetlands map does not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within Hall County and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. 
Hazardous waste: Any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations, promulgated by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 C.F.R. Section 261.3. 
Impervious surface: Man-made structures or surfaces which prevent the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples include, but are not limited to, buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools or patios. 
Intake: The intake for the purpose of determining the watershed above the intake is the structure by which water will be removed from the North Oconee River and pumped to the reservoir, and will be located in the approximate area of the intersection of the Buffington Mill Creek and the North Oconee River. 
Jurisdictional wetlands: An area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetlands determination: A delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, as amended. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any grading, scraping, excavating, or filling of land; clearing of vegetation; and any construction, rebuilding, or alteration of a structure. Land-disturbing activity shall not include activities such as ordinary maintenance and landscaping operation, individual home gardens, yard and grounds upkeep, repairs, additions or minor modifications to a single-family dwelling, and the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
Overlay district: A zoning district that encompasses one or more underlying zones and that imposes additional requirements above that required by the underlying zone(s). An overlay district can be coterminous with existing zoning districts or contain only parts of one or more such districts. 
Perennial stream: A stream which flows throughout the entire year as indicated by a solid blue line on a USGS 7½ minute topographic series map. 
Pollution susceptibility: The relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharge, leaks, impoundments, application of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. 
Pollution susceptibility maps: Maps prepared by the Department of Natural Resources showing relative vulnerability of aquifers to pollution. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas having high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
Recharge areas: Any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Regulated activity: Any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Reservoir boundary: The edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Significant recharge areas: Those areas mapped by the Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology, soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contracts, geologic structure, the presence or karst, and potentiometric surfaces. Significant recharge areas for Hall County are typified by those in the Piedmont and Blue Ridge, where rocks have primary porosity, with most groundwater being stored in the overlying soils. 
Utility: Public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems, and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Water supply reservoir: A governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes multi-purpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Water supply watershed: The area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
Water supply watershed protection plan: A land use plan prepared and adopted by local government for the protection of the quality of drinking water obtained from the watershed. 
Wetland protection district: All wetlands within Hall County which are indicated on the wetlands protection district overlay map as "wetlands providing significant wildlife habitat and/or which may be subject to extensive mitigation." 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, and that meets the definition of natural conditions. Wetlands shall include any area delineated as a wetland by the United States Army Corps of Engineers under their jurisdiction pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act as amended; or any area shown on a 1:24,000 scale, United States Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetland Inventory Map as being a wetland; or any area shown on a 1:24,000 scale, Georgia Department of Natural Resources land cover database map as being a wetland. 
Wetlands, freshwater: A wetland, as defined in this Code, that does not include any areas defined as "coastal marshlands" by the State Coastal Marshlands Protection Act. 
(Res. of 3-22-01, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.225.030. - North Oconee Water Supply Watershed District. 
The North Oconee River Small Water Supply Watershed Overlay District is hereby designated, and shall consist of the land areas that drain to the proposed North Oconee River public water supply intake and water supply reservoir. The boundaries of this overlay are defined by the ridgelines of the respective watershed and the boundary of a radius of seven miles upstream of the respective water supply intake. This district shall be further delineated and defined on the Water Supply Watershed Protection Overlay Map of the Hall County Official Zoning Map, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this resolution by reference. 
(Res. of 3-22-01, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.225.040. - Minimum criteria for North Oconee Water Supply Watershed. 
A.  Permitted uses for perennial stream corridors within a seven mile radius upstream of the North Oconee River public drinking water supply intake: All uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts as established by this resolution, except for those listed below are permitted in the water supply watershed protection district, subject to the following standards: 
1.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
2.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in this setback. 
B.  Permitted uses for perennial stream corridors outside a seven mile radius upstream of the proposed North Oconee public drinking water supply intake: All uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts as established by this resolution, except for those listed below, are permitted in the water supply watershed protection district, subject to the following standards: 
1.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 50 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
2.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in this setback. 
C.  General criteria for small water supply watersheds: The following criteria apply to all locations in the North Oconee water supply watershed: 
1.  The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be limited to twenty-five (25) percent, or existing use, whichever is greater. 
2.  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
3.  New sanitary landfills are allowed only if they have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
4.  New facilities, located within seven miles of a water supply intake or water supply reservoir, which handle hazardous material of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or the requirements of the Standard Fire Prevention Code. 
(Res. of 3-22-01, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.225.050. - Exemptions. 
The following uses are exempt from the stream corridor buffer and setback requirements if they meet the stipulated conditions: 
A.  Land uses existing prior to the promulgation of the water supply watershed protection plans are exempt from the provisions of water supply watershed protection plans. Any existing structure which is nonconforming with respect to the setback, buffer and/or impervious surface requirements of this chapter may be reestablished if damaged or destroyed, provided the degree of nonconformity is not increased with the construction of the replacement structure. 
B.  Forestry and agricultural activities. 
1.  Agricultural activities involving the planting and harvesting of crops, and the raising of poultry and livestock, are exempted if they conform to the best management practices established by the Georgia Department of Agriculture, and the activity does not impair the quality of the drinking water system. 
2.  Silviculture activities must conform to the best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission and not impair the quality of the drinking water system. 
C.  Utilities. 
1.  Utilities shall be located as far as reasonably possible from the perennial stream bank, and shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
2.  Utilities shall be installed and maintained without changing the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as much as possible. 
(Res. of 3-22-01, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.225.070. - Protected groundwater recharge area district. 
The protected groundwater recharge area overlays are hereby designated, and shall consist of all lands within the jurisdiction of Hall County, Georgia that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. These districts shall be further delineated and defined on the Ground Water Recharge Area Protection Overlay Map of the Hall County Official Zoning Map, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this resolution by reference. 
(Res. of 3-22-01, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.225.080. - Permitted uses. 
All uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts as established by this resolution except for those listed in prohibited uses below are permitted in a significant protected groundwater recharge area overlay, subject to the following conditions and standards: 
A.  The department of natural resources shall not issue any permits for new sanitary landfills not having synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
B.  The department of natural resources shall not issue any new permits for the land disposal of hazardous wastes. 
C.  The department of natural resources shall require all new facilities permitted or to be permitted to treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste to perform such operations on an impermeable pad having a spill and leak collection system. 
D.  New above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. (Note: These figures are consistent with US EPA rules for oil pollution prevention, 40 CFR 112.1.) Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
E.  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within: 
1.  A high pollution susceptibility area; 
2.  A medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet; 
3.  A low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet. 
As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10-7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resources Conservation Service. (The average size of existing agricultural waste impoundments in Georgia is about 15 acre-feet; sheeps-foot rollers or pans with heavy rubber tires, which are normal equipment for most Georgia earth moving contractors, should be able to compact clay to the recommended vertical hydraulic conductivity.) 
F.  New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A-F) of the DHR Manual. 
1.  150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
2.  125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and 
3.  110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
G.  New manufactured home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having the following size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in sections A—F) of the DHR manual. 
1.  150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
2.  125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and 
3.  110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
Determination of pollution susceptibility: Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 edition. Said map is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
H.  If Hall County requires a larger lot size than that required by F. above for homes or by G. above for manufactured homes, the larger lot size shall be used. 
I.  No construction may proceed on a building or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank unless the Hall County Health Department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the DHR Manual and F., G., and H. above. 
J.  New facilities which handle hazardous material of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks), and amounts of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or the requirements of the Standard Fire Prevention Code. 
K.  The department of natural resources shall require conservative design in any new permits for the spray irrigation of wastewater or the land spreading of wastewater sludge in areas having high pollution susceptibility. This shall be accomplished by comparing the Department's Criteria for Slow Rate Land Treatment (February, 1986 or latest edition) with amendments and other technical publications to site specific information submitted by a registered professional engineer for each project. 
L.  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
M.  Exclusive of mining settling basins, new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(Res. of 3-22-01, § 1; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 25; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.225.090. - Exemptions. 
Any lot of record approved prior to the date of the adoption of this resolution shall be exempt from the lot size standards in F. and G. above. 
(Res. of 3-22-01, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.225.100. - Wetland protection district. 
Wetland protection district overlays are hereby designated, and shall consist of all wetlands as indicated on the generalized wetlands map, as defined herein and located within the jurisdiction of Hall County. These districts shall be further delineated and defined on the Wetland Protection District Overlay Map of the Hall County Official Zoning Map, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this resolution by reference. 
The generalized wetland map is a general reference document and wetland boundaries indicated on the map are approximations. The purpose of the generalized wetland map is to alert developers/landowners if they are within proximity to a wetland, which means that there is a high likelihood of the presence of a jurisdictional wetland and a need for the developer/landowner to seek U.S. Army Corps of Engineers guidance as to whether a Section 404 Permit will be required to prior to any activity. The generalized wetland map does not necessarily represent the exact boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within Hall County and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this chapter does not relieve the landowner from federal and state permitting requirements. 
(Res. of 3-22-01, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.222.105. - Local development permits. 
A.  No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetland protection district, without prior approval by Hall County in the form of a local development permit. Issuance of a local development permit is contingent on full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. All activities which are not exempted below shall be prohibited without prior issuance of a local development permit. 
B.  Prior to the issuance of a local development permit, the planning department shall assess whether the proposed activity is of a type that could result in a disturbance of wetlands and, if so, shall also assess whether the proposed activity is located with the wetland protection district or within 50 feet of the district. 
C.  If the planning department determines that the proposed activity is of a type that could not result in a disturbance of wetlands, or if the proposed activity is not located within the wetland protection district or within 50 feet of the wetland protection district, the planning department shall follow normal procedures for issuing a development permit. 
D.  If the planning department determines that the proposed activity is of a type that could result in a disturbance of wetlands and that the proposed activity is located within the wetland protection district, or within 50 feet of the wetland protection district, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers jurisdictional wetland determination shall be required prior to issuance of a local development permit. 
1.  If the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that a Department of the Army permit is required, a local development permit shall be issued only following issuance of the Department of Army permit. 
2.  If the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that the proposed activity would not require a Department of Army permit, the planning department shall proceed with normal procedures for issuing a local development permit. 
(Res. of 3-22-01, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.225.110. - Permitted uses. 
All uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts as established by this resolution except for those listed in prohibited uses below are permitted in the wetland protection district overlay, subject to the following conditions and standards: 
A.  No development permit shall be issued on a project that appears to contain wetlands until a determination has been made by the corps of engineers on whether jurisdictional wetlands exist on the site. If there are jurisdictional wetlands on the site that will be disturbed by the proposed development, the applicant must obtain a wetlands alteration Section 404 permit from the corps of engineers. 
B.  If a project appears to contain wetlands, the following note must be printed in bold-face type on all development plans: This site contains wetlands. The applicant will first obtain a wetland alteration Section 404 permit from the corps of engineers prior to disturbing any jurisdictional wetlands. 
C.  Use of wetland areas without long term impairment is permitted. Acceptable uses may include: 
1.  Timber production and harvesting; 
2.  Wildlife and fisheries management; 
3.  Wastewater treatment; 
4.  Recreation; 
5.  Natural water quality treatment or purification; 
6.  Other uses permitted under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(Res. of 3-22-01, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.225.115. - Prohibited uses. 
Prohibited uses of wetland areas include: 
A.  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; 
B.  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Res. of 3-22-01, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.230. - CORRIDOR DEVELOPMENT (CD) OVERLAY DISTRICT 

 

17.230.010. - Signs; purpose. 
The purpose of these regulations is: 
•  To provide for a comprehensive and balanced system of signs to facilitate communication between people and their environment; 
•  To avoid the visual clutter that is potentially harmful to community appearance; 
•  To protect the general public from damage and injury caused by the distractions, hazards, and obstructions caused by signs; and 
•  To preserve the value of property by assuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses. 
With these purposes in mind, it is the intent of these provisions to authorize the use of signs which are: 
•  Compatible with their surroundings; 
•  Appropriate to the activity that displays them; 
•  Expressive of the identity of individual activities and the community as a whole; and 
•  Legible in the circumstances in which they are seen. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Sign standards and restrictions generally, ch. 17.270. 
17.230.020. - Signs; definitions. 
[For purposes of this chapter:] 
Awning means a cloth, plastic, or other nonstructural covering that either is permanently attached to a building or can be raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use. 
Expressway means a highway to which access is restricted except by ramps or interchanges. 
Facade means the side of a building, below the eaves. 
Land use, commercial means a land use included in 1987 Standard Industrial Classifications 52-59, 70-79, 40-41, 44-45, or 47-48; or, in the case of vacant land, land which is zoned for such a commercial use. 
Land use, industrial means a land use included in 1987 Standard Industrial Classifications 10-14, 15-17, 20-39, 42, 46, 49, or 50-51; or, in the case of vacant land, land which is zoned for such an industrial use. 
Land use, institutional means a land use included in 1987 Standard Industrial Classifications 01-09, 43, 60-67, 80-89, or 91-97; or, in the case of vacant land, land which is zoned for such an institutional use. 
Marquee means a permanent structure other than a roof attached to, supported by, and projecting from a building and providing protection from the elements. 
Sign means a surface (or series of surfaces connected to a common supporting structure) on which is displayed an announcement, name, illustration, symbol or insignia used to inform the public or to identify, advertise or promote the interest of any person. (A flag of any country, state, or unit of local government is not considered a sign. Traditional holiday messages, placed on walls or in windows for the holiday period, are considered decorations, not signs.) 
Sign area means the area of the smallest rectangle within which all elements of a flat sign are contained (a flat sign being one with two display surfaces facing exactly opposite directions, or one display surface if against the wall of a building); or the maximum projected surface area (projected in one direction) of any other sign. 
Supporting structures for signs shall not be counted in the sign area, provided such supporting structures consist of posts, hangers, or brackets of the minimum number and size necessary to support the sign. A wall or fence on which a sign is mounted shall not be counted in the sign area, provided it serves primarily to enclose, divide, or protect an area. 
Supporting structures of natural-finish brick masonry, stone masonry, or wood shall not be counted in the sign area, provided that: 
(1)  Such structures do not extend more than one foot above or two feet beyond the ends of the sign; 
(2)  The height of the combined sign and supporting structure does not exceed six feet; and 
(3)  The area of the combined sign and supporting structure does not exceed twice the area of the sign itself. 
Sign, free-standing means a sign which is not mounted on a principal building. 
Sign, marquee means a sign which (a) is attached to a canopy or covered structure projecting from and supported by a building and (b) does not extend above or below such canopy or structure. 
Sign, portable means a sign which is not permanently affixed by rigid structures to a permanent, concrete foundation or a building; including any sign mounted on a vehicle, trailer, or other device designed to be moved periodically from place to place. 
Sign, wall means a sign which is mounted on the facade of the building in which the activity advertised by the sign is located, is in a plane parallel to the wall (i.e., does not project at an angle to the wall), and does not project more than 12 inches from the wall. 
Sign, window means a sign placed on or visible only through a window, display case, or entry door of a building. 
Signable wall area means the largest rectangular or (in the case of a gable) triangular area on the facade of a building which is free of architectural details (any projection, relief, cornice, column, change of building material, window, or door opening); or such defined area on that part of a building in which the activity advertised by the sign is located. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq.; zoning definitions, ch. 17.20. 
17.230.030. - Signs; regulations. 
Signs that are not within the right-of-way of a public street and are intended to be seen or read by persons on the public street (as indicated by sign size, orientation, and lettering or symbol size) shall comply with the requirements herein. 
A.  Sign types. 
1.  Sign class. Each sign shall be classified as one of the following: 
(a)  Commercial, displaying the name and other information about a land use permitted in the underlying zoning district and corresponding to the definition of commercial land use. 
(b)  Industrial, displaying the name and other information about a land use permitted in the underlying zoning district and corresponding to the definition of industrial land use. 
(c)  Institutional, displaying the name and other information about a land use permitted in the underlying zoning district and corresponding to the definition of institutional land use; or displaying the name of the church, public library or recreation center, public school, or other non-commercial and non-profit institutional (including governmental) use; and including space for changeable announcements and schedules of events. 
(d)  Residential, displaying the name and address of the family or individuals residing on the property; or displaying the name, address, and rental information for apartments and the name, address, and telephone numbers of the owner, agent, manager, or rental office; or displaying the name of a subdivision. 
(e)  Address, displaying the street address of the property. 
(f)  Real estate, announcing the availability of the property for sale or rent, and displaying information about the property and the name, address, and telephone numbers of the owner or agent. 
(g)  Charity event, announcing an event held by a civic, charitable, or religious organization to raise money for charitable purposes; which sign is erected no more than 30 days prior to the event and is removed immediately thereafter. 
(h)  Temporary, displaying the name of a workman or company currently making physical improvements on the property; or notice of a garage sale, auction, or similar activity; which sign is displayed only for the duration of the activity, but not longer than 14 days. 
(i)  Political, displaying information about candidates for political offices or issues in a referendum, which sign is displayed only for the duration of the campaign (for an election, from the close of qualification for candidacy through the general election; and for a referendum, from official notice of the referendum date through that date). 
(j)  Warning, displaying notices about trespassing, dangerous animals, and the like. 
(k)  Traffic control, displaying information such as "entrance" or "exit" or directions to off-street parking necessary to direct vehicles entering or leaving the property; and a logo or name where necessary to indicate the property to which the sign applies. 
(l)  Construction, displaying the name of the development and the owner, contractor, architect, engineer, and financing entity for a building under construction; which sign shall be removed from the site within ten days after completion of the project. 
(m)  Subdivision announcement, announcing a land subdivision development, which sign shall be removed when 75 percent of the lots are conveyed. 
(n)  Public interest, designated by the board of commissioners to be of general public interest, such as historical markers or ornamental signs displaying commonly known and accepted names of sections of the county. 
(o)  Identification, displaying the name and other information about a land use for which no other sign class is applicable, such as a non-conforming land use. 
2.  Free-standing signs, wall signs, and marquee signs. Only free-standing signs, wall signs, and marquee signs shall be permitted. No sign shall be permitted which is mounted on or extends into the air above any roof surface of a building. A sign may be mounted against a parapet of uniform height around the perimeter of a building but may not extend above the parapet. 
3.  Portable signs. No portable sign shall be permitted; except that real estate, charity event, temporary, political, construction, and subdivision announcement signs, as defined herein, are designed and intended for short-term use only and shall be permitted, provided they are supported solely by rigid structures firmly implanted in the ground to a depth equal to at least half the sign height. 
B.  Prohibited signs. 
1.  Signs imitating warning signals. No sign shall use the words "stop," "danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol or character or any light in a manner that might mislead or confuse an automobile or other vehicle driver. 
2.  Signs within street right-of-way. No signs, whether temporary or permanent, except traffic signs and signals and information signs erected by a public agency are permitted within any street right-of-way. 
3.  Off-site signs. Signs which advertise products or services available, property for sale or rent, construction or similar activities, or buildings or other facilities at a location other than that on which the sign is placed shall be prohibited. Political signs shall be permitted at any location. 
4.  Certain attached and painted signs. Signs painted on or attached to trees, fence posts and telephone or other utility poles or signs painted on or attached to rocks or other natural features or painted on the roofs of buildings shall be prohibited. 
5.  Fluttering ribbons and banners. Fluttering ribbons and banners and similar devices, except the flags of governments and their agencies, shall be prohibited. 
C.  Number of signs permitted. 
1.  Free-standing signs. Only one free-standing sign of each class shall be permitted on a lot, except that: 
a.  One political sign shall be permitted for each elective office and referendum issue; 
b.  One traffic control sign shall be permitted for each driveway providing access to the property, except two signs for a two-way driveway; 
c.  The number of public interest signs shall be as determined by the board of commissioners; and 
d.  Separate requirements may be applied for each street on which a corner lot or double-frontage lot faces. 
2.  Wall signs and marquee signs. Only one wall sign or marquee sign of each class shall be permitted for each part of a building housing a separate business; except that separate requirements may be applied for each street on which a corner lot or double-frontage lot faces. 
3.  Window signs. Window signs are not limited in number but may not be placed in dormers, skylights, or other openings through the roof of a building. 
D.  Sign area permitted. 
1.  Free-standing signs. Maximum area permitted for a free-standing sign of each class is as follows: 
a.  Commercial, industrial, or institutional, in accordance with tables 17.230.030A and 17.230.030B. 
b.  Residential, one square foot per dwelling unit or lot, 25 square feet maximum. 
c.  Address, 1½ square feet. 
d.  Real estate, ten square feet. 
e.  Charity event, ten square feet. 
f.  Temporary, three square feet. 
g.  Political, ten square feet. 
h.  Warning, three square feet. 
i.  Traffic control, three square feet. 
j.  Construction, ten square feet. 
k.  Identification, ten square feet. 
Where property is occupied by a mixture of commercial, industrial, or institutional uses, the land use (for tables 17.230.030A and 17.230.030B) is considered to be whatever type of land use occupies the plurality of leasable floor space. 
Notwithstanding the sign size permitted by tables 17.230.030A and 17.230.030B, no free-standing sign on a street frontage of less than 100 feet shall have an area in excess of 25 square feet. 
_____
TABLE 17.230.030A. SIGN AREA AND HEIGHT ON TWO-LANE STREETS 

 
Note: A use is surrounded by commercial or industrial uses if it is bordered on both sides and across the street by commercial or industrial uses. A use is surrounded by institutional, residential, or agricultural uses if it is bordered on either side or across the street by institutional, residential, or agricultural uses. 
TABLE 17.230.030B. SIGN AREA AND HEIGHT ON FOUR-LANE AND WIDER STREETS 

 
(1)  Surrounded by commercial or industrial. 
(2)  Surrounded by institutional, residential, or rural. 
2.  Wall signs. Area of wall signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of the facade of a building or the percent of the signable wall area indicated by table 17.230.030C, whichever is the smaller area. 
TABLE 17.230.030C. AREA OF WALL SIGNS 

 
(1)  Surrounded by commercial or industrial land uses. 
(2)  Surrounded by institutional, residential, or rural land uses. 
3.  Marquee signs. A marquee sign shall not extend outside the lines of the marquee and shall not exceed the permitted size of a wall sign allowed under the same circumstances. 
4.  Window signs. Area of window signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of any window in which they are placed. 
E.  Height and ground clearance. Height of a free-standing sign shall not exceed five feet or a height in accordance with tables 17.230.030A and 17.230.030B, whichever is the greater height, and shall be measured from the higher of: 
1.  Edge-of-pavement elevation of the nearest public street; or 
2.  Actual ground elevation at the sign location, provided such elevation is not raised above that of land surrounding the sign location so as to raise sign height. 
F.  Separation. Each free-standing sign of a class commercial, industrial, institutional, residential, or identification shall be separated from any other sign of these classes and on the same lot by a distance of at least 200 feet of street frontage. 
G.  Setback. Free-standing signs shall be at least 15 feet from every property line, not including public street rights-of-way; shall be at least 15 feet from the edge of pavement of any public street; and shall neither be placed in nor extend over public rights-of-way. 
H.  Illumination. No sign shall be illuminated by lights which flash, move, change in intensity, or turn on intermittently (more than once per day); except that a digital display of current time and temperature (which inherently must change at least once per minute) may change no more often than once each six seconds. To prevent glare visible from a public street or adjoining property, the beam of any light shall be directed so as not to be visible beyond the sign at which it is directed. Only commercial, industrial, and institutional signs and residential signs for multi-family developments may be illuminated. 
I.  Movement or animation. No sign or part of a sign shall rotate, oscillate, or otherwise move or change in appearance, whether such motion is driven by wind, mechanical, electrical, or other means; except as provided under "Illumination" above. 
J.  Vision clearance. No sign between heights of 2½ and ten feet, except sign supports not exceeding a 12-inch maximum dimension, shall be permitted within triangular areas defined as follows: 
From the point of intersection of the edge of pavement of a public street with: 
•  The edge of pavement of another public street; 
•  The edge of pavement of a driveway for other than single- or two-family use; or 
•  A railroad right-of-way with an at-grade crossing; 
measure along each such edge or line (and the extension of such edge or line, tangent to any intersection radius) 25 feet to a point, then connect said points by a straight line. 
K.  Maintenance. Signs must be constructed of durable materials, be maintained in good condition, and not be permitted to become dilapidated. 
L.  Permit required. A permit shall be required for the erection, alteration, or reconstruction of any sign unless otherwise noted herein and shall be issued by the building official in accordance with these regulations. The number of the sign permit shall be painted on the face of each sign erected, in letters not less than one-half inch or more than three inches in height. 
M.  Signs for which permit is not required. A permit is not required for the following signs in any district: 
1.  Signs authorized by any public agency for official purposes. 
2.  Official notices issued by any court, public agency, or officer. 
3.  Residential (except apartment or subdivision signs), real estate, charity event, temporary, political, warning, or traffic control signs. 
N.  Variances. Variance from these provisions shall not be permitted. 
O.  Nonconforming signs. Signs shall be subject to the provisions of this title for nonconforming uses and structures, except that a nonconforming sign may not be changed (including changing the removable sign faces within a frame), reestablished, enlarged, or replaced except in accordance with these sign provisions. 
P.  Obsolete signs. A sign for products, services, or uses which no longer exist on the property or a sign which is allowed to become dilapidated or is not maintained is obsolete. Obsolete signs shall be removed by the owner of property upon which the obsolete sign is located within 30 days after receipt of written notice from proper county officials. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.230.040. - On-site standards; buildings. 
A.  Height. Except as provided herein, height of a non-residential building shall not exceed one story and shall not exceed 15 feet, except that a total height of 30 feet for an additional lower story is permitted on the downslope end of a building which is constructed on a hillside so that only one story is above ground on the upslope end. 
Such height is the vertical distance to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. Height shall be measured from the grade elevation at the midpoint of each wall of a building, except that, for a wall running down a slope, height may be measured at each end of the wall. 
Buildings of greater height are permitted subject to additional setback from arterial roads and from property zoned for residential use. Such setback shall be an additional 15 feet for each additional story. One large-species tree (over 40 feet in height at maturity) for each 30 feet of building perimeter shall be planted or retained between such buildings of greater height and adjoining property lines, to reduce impact on surrounding properties. 
B.  Floor area. Gross floor area in the following shall not include floor area in parking structures or in covered parking spaces within the building. 
1.  No building used primarily for residential uses shall have a ratio of gross floor space to lot area in excess of 0.20. 
2.  No building used primarily for offices shall have a ratio of gross floor space to lot area in excess of 0.25 for one story or 0.35 for two stories (where permitted). 
3.  No building used primarily for retail sales or services shall have a ratio of gross floor space to lot area in excess of 0.35. 
C.  Materials. 
1.  Exterior wall materials shall be brick masonry, stone masonry, or split-face block masonry; or wood clapboards or weatherboarding (or vinyl siding having the same appearance). Standing-seam or corrugated metal walls are not permitted. (Metal roofs are acceptable, with a reflectance similar to that of the siding material.) 
2.  Mirrored glass with a reflectance greater than 20 percent is not permitted. 
D.  Design. 
1.  Where exposed walls extend more than four feet below the lowest finished floor elevation, those portions of the walls that are below the lowest finished floor elevation shall be screened from view from adjoining property, from public streets, and from parking areas or other areas open to the public. Such screening shall be provided by trees (deciduous or evergreen) and evergreen shrubs. If necessary, such screening shall be in addition to other provisions for trees. 
2.  Flat roofs shall not be permitted. 
3.  Where a building is architecturally distinctive from a building on the adjoining property, trees and shrubs shall be provided as necessary to visually separate the buildings by filling the space between them, when viewed from any public street. Buildings are architecturally distinctive if they differ significantly in such features as: 
•  The rhythm or pattern of placement of windows, doors, chimneys, gables, dormers, offsets in the walls, and other elements; 
•  Height-to-width ratios of elements of a structure; 
•  Absolute heights and widths of elements; 
•  Pitch of roof surfaces, symmetry about the ridge, and overhangs; and 
•  Color and texture of finishes. 
4.  "Four-sided architecture" is encouraged; i.e., architectural treatment should be consistent on all sides of the building, with service areas screened and limited in extent rather than dominating one side of the building. (See section 17.230.060.) 
E.  Placement. On hillsides, buildings shall be placed to blend with and avoid dominating the natural terrain; e.g., not on the crest of hills or ridges but below the crest. Buildings, even on separate but adjoining lots, should be grouped to complement the natural terrain and each other. 
F.  Setbacks. Building setback requirements of the underlying zoning district shall apply, except that: 
1.  The building setback from the principal roads in the corridor (identified in the ordinance applying these regulations to a specific corridor) shall be no less than 25 feet from the right-of-way; and 
2.  Side and rear setbacks may be varied to achieve the objectives of section 17.230.040.E. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.040; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.230.050. - On-site standards; parking areas. 
A.  Location. Parking shall be permitted anywhere on a lot, provided conflicts with hillside development, tree protection and open space, screening, and other requirements applicable to this district are minimized. 
B.  Screening. Parking areas and parked cars shall be screened from view from public streets by shrubs, trees, berms, brick masonry or stone masonry walls, the principal building, or a combination of these. If necessary, such screening shall be in addition to other provisions for trees. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.050; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Off-street parking requirements generally, ch. 17.250. 
17.230.060. - On-site standards; service areas. 
Service areas such as loading areas, vehicle entrances, and sites for trash containers or heating, ventilating, and air conditioning equipment shall be screened from view from adjoining property, from public streets, and from parking areas or other areas open to the public. Such screening may be provided by shrubs; trees; berms; walls of brick masonry, stone masonry, concrete masonry, or concrete which is architecturally compatible with the principal building; or a combination of these. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.060; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.230.070. - On-site standards; walls and hedges. 
A.  Walls and hedges on or within all rear and side property lines, up to the required front yard setback line, shall be no more than six feet in height; except that, within a yard abutting a street, such height shall be no more than three feet six inches. 
B.  Walls and hedges in any required front yard shall be no more than three feet six inches in height. 
C.  Walls shall be of brick masonry, stone masonry, concrete masonry, or concrete which is architecturally compatible with the principal building. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.070; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Screening and fencing requirements generally, ch. 17.260. 
17.230.080. - On-site standards; landscaping. 
A.  Additional trees and shrubs. Where trees or shrubs are required by these on-site standards and the requirement is not satisfied by other regulations requiring the planting or retention of trees, the requirements herein shall be in addition to those in such other regulations. 
B.  Cut and fill slopes. Cut or fill slopes more than ten feet in height or 20 feet in depth (in plan view) shall be planted with trees. Trees shall be spaced in accordance with the species planted so that the crowns will touch at maturity, but not farther apart than on 30-foot centers (approximately one tree per 600 square feet). If necessary, these shall be in addition to other provisions for trees. 
C.  Blending. Landscaping shall be used around buildings to blend cuts and fills into the natural terrain. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.080; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.230.090. - On-site standards; open space. 
Not more than 80 percent of any lot shall be covered by impervious surfaces such as buildings and other roofed areas, asphalt, or concrete. (Note: Other development requirements, such as tree protection and planting, may preclude maximum permitted coverage by impervious surfaces.) On slopes, maximum coverage by impervious surfaces shall be reduced in accordance with table 17.230.090. 
TABLE 17.230.090 

 
*Average slope of an area is determined as follows: 
S =  0.0023 × I × L  A 

 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.090; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.230.100. - Hillside development; intent. 
The intent of these provisions is to retain an overall appearance similar to that of the natural terrain, i.e., to limit extreme alteration of the terrain and blend approved alterations into the natural shape of the land; specifically: 
A.  To preserve the most visually significant slope banks and ridge lines in their natural state by clustering developments; 
B.  To encourage only minimal grading which relates to the natural contour of the land; 
C.  To preserve visually significant rock outcroppings, native plant materials, natural hydrology, and areas of visual significance; 
D.  To encourage variety in building types, padding techniques, grading techniques, lot sizes, site design, density, arrangement, and spacing of buildings in developments; 
E.  To encourage innovative architectural, landscaping, circulation, and site design; 
F.  To discourage mass grading of large pads and excessive terracing; and 
G.  To provide safe circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and within the hillside areas and to provide access for emergency vehicles necessary to serve the hillside areas. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.100; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.230.110. - Hillside development; guidelines for adaptation to site. 
A.  Orient roads and building sites to minimize grading. 
B.  Orientation of buildings should consider views from the site as well as the aesthetic impact of views of the site from surrounding properties. 
C.  Hilltops, if graded, shall be rounded to blend with natural slopes rather than leveled. 
D.  Slopes providing a transition from graded areas into natural areas shall be varied in percent grade both up-slope and across the slope, in the undulating pattern of surrounding natural slopes; so that the top or the toe (or both) of the cut or fill slope will vary from a straight line in plan view. 
E.  Parking areas shall be constructed on multiple levels and follow natural contours as necessary to minimize cut and fill. 
F.  Roads shall follow natural topography to the extent feasible, to minimize cut and fill. Necessary grading shall be constant half-cut and half-fill along the length of the road (versus all cut or all fill at points) unless other arrangements would result in less severe alteration of natural terrain. 
G.  Repetitive padding or terracing of a series of lots (stair-stepping up a slope) shall not be permitted. Creation of a single large pad or terrace (especially creating a single pad or terrace of an entire lot) shall be an exception to typical design, to deal with circumstances that cannot be managed with other techniques. Typical design shall utilize full split pads (separate level for a down-slope lower story), a split foundation (adapting a single story to a slope), setting the building into a cut in the hillside, or a combination of techniques. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.110; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.230.120. - Hillside development; requirements for all sites. 
A.  Cut and fill slopes shall be no more than 1.5 times natural grade (e.g., increased from ten percent to 15 percent) and shall be no steeper than two to one. 
B.  Sharp angles shall be rounded off, in a natural manner, at the top and ends of cut and fill slopes (within approximately five feet of the sharp angle). Where this would damage tree root systems at the top of the slope, the amount of rounding off may be reduced and shrubs used instead to hide the transition. 
C.  Except for driveways, cut and fill slopes shall be entirely contained within a lot; i.e., natural grade at the lot lines shall be maintained. 
D.  Retaining walls may be used to minimize cut and fill. Generally, a retaining wall shall be no higher than four feet, except that a wall varied in height to accommodate a variable slope shall have an average height no greater than four feet and a maximum height no greater than eight feet in any 100-foot length. A higher wall is permitted: 
1.  Where used internally at the split between one- and two-story portions of a building; and 
2.  Where substantially hidden from public view at the rear of a building, where it may not exceed the eave height of the building. 
A retaining wall shall not be stepped in height but shall be sloped from one height to another to match the terrain behind it. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.120; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.230.130. - Site plan review; required. 
All plans for development of a site within this district shall be subject to review to ensure compliance with all policies and regulations applicable to this district. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.130; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Administration and enforcement, ch. 17.360. 
17.230.140. - Site plan review; review process. 
A.  Site plans shall be subject to review and approval by a design review committee including representatives of the planning, engineering, and building inspection departments of the county and such other persons as may be appointed by the county administrator. 
B.  All determinations of the design review committee shall be reported regularly to the board of commissioners. 
C.  Determinations of the design review committee with regard to section 17.230.110 and other provisions subject to interpretation may be appealed as indicated herein. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.140; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.230.150. - Site plan review; modifications. 
A.  Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations and/or the purposes of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve modifications to these regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such modification shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; and further provided the planning commission shall not approve modifications unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that: 
1.  The granting of the modification will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property; 
2.  The conditions upon which the request for a modification is based are unique to the property for which the modification is sought and are not applicable generally to other property; 
3.  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations is carried out. 
B.  In approving modifications, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations. 
C.  A petition for any such modification shall be submitted in writing. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner and be accompanied by a plat or plan showing the proposed modification. 
D.  The design review committee shall review the proposed modification and report its findings to the planning commission. 
E.  The planning commission shall act upon the application in regular meeting, shall enter its action into its records and shall notify the applicant in writing. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.150; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.230.160. - Site plan review; appeals. 
Upon determination by the design review committee that a development plan is not in compliance with provisions of section 17.230.110 or other provisions subject to interpretation, the applicant may appeal such interpretation to the board of commissioners under the terms described elsewhere in this title for hearing a request for interpretation by the zoning board of adjustment. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.160; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Appeals, ch. 17.370. 
17.230.170. - Site plan review; conformance to development policy. 
Development policy adopted by the county shall supersede any conflicting regulations adopted prior to adoption of such policy, and all plans for development of a site within this district shall conform to such policy. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.170; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.230.180. - Site plan review; conformance to land development regulations. 
Where: 
A.  Land development regulations (zoning, subdivision, hillside development, driveway access, and others) are not in conflict with the development policy adopted by the county; or 
B.  New or amended land development regulations are adopted by the county subsequent to the adoption of such policy; 
all plans for development of a site within this district shall conform to such regulations. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.180; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.230.190. - Parkway landscaping; applicability. 
These provisions are applicable only to those roads specifically designated by action of the board of commissioners as parkways for the purpose of applying these development standards, not generally to all designated corridor development overlay districts. (Use of "Parkway" in the road name shall not imply such designation.) 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.190; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and public places, tit. 12. 
17.230.200. - Parkway landscaping; designation of parkways. 
A.  Parkways may be designated by adoption of a development plan for a defined area by the board of commissioners, which development plan includes such treatment of a road. 
B.  Parkways may be designated by resolution or ordinance of the board of commissioners, upon review and recommendation by the planning commission. 
C.  Parkways may be specifically designated as part of an ordinance applying a corridor development overlay district zoning classification to a defined area. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.200; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.230.210. - Parkway landscaping; landscaping plan. 
A.  Property within a designated parkway landscape buffer area shall be landscaped in accordance with a plan adopted by the board of commissioners. 
B.  The landscaping plan may be adopted by reference in the development plan, resolution, or ordinance by which the parkway is designated (see above). The plan may also be adopted by separate resolution or ordinance of the board of commissioners after review and recommendation by the planning commission. 
C.  The landscape plan may require increases in setbacks, reduction in coverage by impervious surfaces, or other alterations to development regulations as necessary to achieve the objectives of the plan. 
(Res. of 11-25-91; Code 1991, § 17.230.210; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.240. - AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS[14] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and public places, tit. 12; access to lots, § 16.50.040; specifications for subdivision lots, § 16.100.090 et seq. 

17.240.010. - Minimum lot area, setback and height requirements. 
Minimum lot area, setback and height requirements are as listed in table 17.240.010. Exceptions to the requirements in the table are described below. 
_____
TABLE 17.240.010 a 

 
• Maximum height: No building shall be constructed or renovated in violation of the state or county fire code height regulations. 
• Health department requirements regarding minimum lot size and width may differ from these requirements and will prevail where they exceed these requirements. 
• If any commercial or industrial property adjoins a residential district, a planted buffer shall be required in accordance with section 17.260.020 of this title. 
a  For additional requirements (corner lots, poultry houses, etc.) see text of chapter 17.240. 
;sup\sup; Side and rear yards which adjoin Lake Lanier may have a zero setback, see section 17.240.070. 
c  Five hundred feet of frontage is required for property having access to divided four-lane highways; see section 17.240.160. (Note: See the subdivision regulations, section 403 [section 16.50.040], for additional lot width requirements on arterial and collector roads.) 
d  The minimum lot size shall be 21,780 square feet for lots served by public sewer or an approved private sanitary sewer system. 
e  Two-family residences require 35,000 square feet. 
f  For single-family residences only; any other type of residence requires a 75-foot minimum lot frontage. 
g  For overhangs greater than 2½ feet, the setback will be measured from the edge of the overhang. (Note: See also setbacks in 17.290.020.) 
h  Residences (three or more families): 

 
;sup \sup;Effective April 18, 1983, 40,000 square feet; effective February 1, 1992, 43,560 square feet with public water, 65,340 square feet without public water. 
j The minimum lot size can be 30,000 square feet for lots served by public water and septic tank in the R-I, R-II, V-C (Vacation Cottage), AR-III, and AR-IV zoning districts for minor subdivisions only. This provision only applies to existing lots of record with a maximum of two acres in size as of the date of the zoning amendment change. 
k The minimum lot frontage may be varied to a minimum of 50 feet for lots of record as of the date of the ordinance with approval by the planning commission. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 16(A); Res. of 3-28-83; Res. of 4-18-83; Res. of 12-28-87; Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 7-23-90; Res. of 9-24-90; Res. of 12-9-91; Res. of 4-15-93; Res. of 12-9-93; Code 1991, § 17.240.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 5-8-03(2), § 1; Res. of 3-23-06, § 1; Res. of 10-25-07, § 1; Res. of 12-13-07, § 1) 
17.240.020. - Exceptions to lot size requirements. 
The minimum lot sizes listed in table 17.240.010 shall not apply to lots containing only structures that are part of public utilities systems and not designed to accommodate persons other than for periodic maintenance. Said lots shall be large enough to include the structure, any parking and service area, and any required buffers, tree protection requirements or landscaping. Additionally, the lot shall be large enough to permit all structures to comply with the minimum setbacks of the zoning district or special setbacks as required by the county commission during the approval process. 
(Res. of 12-9-93; Code 1991, § 17.240.015; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.240.030. - Corner lot setbacks. 
A.  On corner lots in residential and agricultural districts, the minimum setback adjacent to the side of the residence shall be 30 feet from the property line or 55 feet from the center line of the street, whichever is greater. 
B.  In all other districts [on] a corner lot which abuts on two intersecting streets, the minimum setback for side yard purposes for each district measured from the center line of the side street shall be the same as the front yard setback in section 17.240.010. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 16(B); Code 1991, § 17.240.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.240.040. - Setbacks from arterial streets. 
No structure may be placed less than 100 feet from the center line of an arterial street (as defined in section 17.20). Arterial streets shall be so designated by the county commission. (See appendix B.) 
(Res. of 3-11-91; Res. of 2-10-92; Code 1991, § 17.240.025; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.240.050. - Accessory building setbacks. 
Setbacks for accessory utility buildings not exceeding 144 square feet in floor area may be a minimum of five feet from side and rear property lines. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 16(C); Code 1991, § 17.240.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.240.060. - Poultry houses, barns, commercial kennels, equestrian centers, composting operations, and structures for storage of organic waste or raising of exotic animals. 
No commercial poultry house, structure for the keeping of livestock for commercial purposes, or structure for the storage of organic waste shall be constructed closer than 200 feet from side and rear property lines. Commercial or on-farm composting operations must also maintain a minimum 200-foot setback from side and rear property lines for the operation. In AR-III and AR-IV zones, the side and/or rear setback for such structures or composting operations may be reduced to 100 feet when the property that is adjacent on that property line is zoned PCFD. The front setback for such structures or composting operations shall remain the same as for any other structure within the same district. 
In a commercial kennel, no structure, including outside runs, for the keeping of dogs or cats shall be constructed closer than 200 feet to a property line. 
In an equestrian center, no structure for the keeping of horses, including stables, shall be constructed closer than 200 feet to a property line. No other structures or facilities, including but not limited to riding trails, show/training rings or jumps, shall be located closer than 50 feet to a property line. 
In the raising of exotic animals, no structure, including outside runs or pens used to house those animals, shall be constructed closer than 200 feet to a property line unless specifically approved by the zoning board of adjustment based on a finding, in addition to the other criteria used to review variance requests, that the type of animal being raised does not generate byproducts such as but not limited to noise, odor, disease or a threat to life. In AR-III and AR-IV zones, the side or rear setback may be reduced to 100 feet when the property that is adjacent on that property line is zoned PCFD. The front setback for such structures shall remain the same as for any other structure within the same district. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 16(D); Res. of 3-12-84; Res. of 12-8-86; Res. of 7-8-91; Res. of 10-14-91; Res. of 5-11-92; Code 1991, § 17.240.040; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Animals generally, tit. 6; animals in residential districts, ch. 17.290. 
17.240.070. - Setbacks adjacent to Lake Lanier. 
The minimum setback requirement shall not apply to side or rear yard property lines which adjoin or abut the Corps of Engineers property line provided that the owner's sewage treatment system is located wholly on private property or is otherwise permitted by the county health department. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 16(E); Res. of 10-14-85; Code 1991, § 17.240.050; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.240.080. - Exceptions to front setback requirements. 
The setback requirements for these regulations for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average setback on developed lots located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot and within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same street as such lot is less than the minimum required setback. In such cases the setback on such lot may be less than the required setbacks on the developed lots. This section shall not be construed to allow less setback on lots which extend [across] a developed area but, rather, to allow the filling in of a developed area. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 16(F); Res. of 3-11-91; Res. of 2-10-92; Code 1991, § 17.240.060; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.240.090. - Exceptions to front, side and rear setbacks in the R-I, R-II and V-C zoning districts. 
Those lots zoned R-I, R-II and V-C, which lie in subdivisions which were approved under section 101.2(b) of the county subdivision regulations [section 16.30.070.B] to be constructed without installing curbing and related storm drainage, shall have the following setback requirements unless otherwise exempted by this regulation: 
Front yard: 65 feet from the center line of the road or 40 feet from the property line, whichever is greater. 
Side yard: 15 feet. 
Rear yard: 25 feet. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 16(G); Res. of 8-27-90; Code 1991, § 17.240.065; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.240.100. - Lots of record. 
Whenever a lot or plat has been legally and duly recorded with the county clerk of superior court prior to the effective date of the resolution codified in this chapter [August 28, 1978] and actually exists as so shown or described, it shall be deemed a lot of record. In addition, lots legally recorded after August 28, 1978, that met zoning standards in place at the time of recordation, but do not meet standards currently in place are also considered lots of record. Although said lot may not contain sufficient land area or lot frontage to meet the minimum lot size requirements of this chapter, such lot may be used as a building site provided that all other requirements of the district are met and that building plans are consistent with all state and local health codes. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 16(H); Code 1991, § 17.240.070; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 12-14-06(5), § 1) 
17.240.105. - Modification of lots of record. 
The following modifications to lots of record can be made, or are deemed to be made by certain actions: 
A.  The line between two adjoining lots of record that are non-conforming as to lot size may be modified only such that neither lot becomes smaller. When such a non-conforming lot of record adjoins a lot that meets or exceeds lot size standards, the line may be modified only such that the non-conforming lot does not become smaller, and the conforming lot is not made non-conforming. 
B.  When a building is constructed across the line between two lots of record under the same ownership that are non-conforming as to lot size or frontage, the lots shall be deemed to have been combined. For buildings constructed after August 28, 1978 that were built too close to such a line to meet required setbacks without a variance having been issued, such lots are also deemed to be combined. However, a setback variance may be considered in the situation where a building does not cross the line. 
C.  A lot that is non-conforming in one dimensional criteria, but conforming to other criteria, may be modified such that no conforming dimension is made non-conforming, and the non-conforming dimension is not made non-conforming to a greater extent. For example, if a non-conforming lot of record has less than the required lot frontage, but has excess lot area, the lot area can be reduced as long as it maintains the minimum area, but the lot frontage can not be reduced. 
(Res. of 12-14-06(5), § 2) 
17.240.110. - Lot density exceptions. 
Residential zones. In all residential zoning districts except planned development districts, only one principal structure and its customary accessory buildings, including agricultural buildings, may be erected on any parcel recorded as a separate lot or tract with the clerk of superior court unless otherwise specifically permitted by either: 
A.  Approval of a site plan for multi-family development, in zones permitting such uses, by the planning commission; or 
B.  Approval of a caretaker or hardship special exception by the zoning board of adjustment. 
Non-residential zones. In all other zoning districts except planned development districts, only one principal structure and its customary accessory buildings for each 15,000 square feet of land area may be erected on any parcel. A minimum of 20 percent of the site must be retained as open space. That open-space area must be maintained as either a natural or landscaped area. 
Nonconforming uses. Any building containing a nonconforming use is considered a principal structure. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 16(I); Res. of 2-14-83; Res. of 5-11-87; Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 4-26-91; Res. of 4-15-93; Code 1991, § 17.240.080; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.240.120. - Lot width requirements. 
Except as provided for in chapter 17.320 and for the planned development districts, minimum lot width at the building line shall be 75 feet in all residential zones and 100 feet in all other zones when the lot is served by an approved public or community water system as defined by the county health department. Said community water system shall comply with the county's Standard Construction Practices for Water and Wastewater Systems (see chapter 13.20). Except as provided for in chapter 17.320 and for the planned development districts, minimum lot width at the building line shall be 150 feet when the lot is served by an individual well. 
(Res. of 10-23-89; Res. of 4-15-93; Code 1991, § 17.240.090; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.240.130. - Street frontage requirements. 
A.  No principal building shall be placed or erected on a lot or parcel which does not abut: 
1.  A street or road shown on the official county road map or otherwise maintained by a governmental unit; or 
2.  An existing public way not maintained by the county; or 
3.  A newly created street which meets the standards of the county subdivision regulations. 
B.  Exceptions to subsection A of this section: 
1.  A parcel recorded as a separate lot or tract with the clerk of superior court prior to the effective date of the resolution codified in this chapter. 
2.  A parcel recorded as a result of a judicial decree. 
3.  A landlocked parcel separated from public road frontage only by the right-of-way of an active railroad, provided the following criteria are met: 
(a)  The parcel has an area of ten acres or more. 
(b)  The parcel is cut from a landlocked lot of record, not from a parcel that has frontage in accordance with subsection A. 
(c)  The parcel is in an industrial zoning district. 
(d)  The railroad line is parallel to the public road at the point of driveway access, not intersecting with it. 
(e)  The railroad has granted a written easement for driveway access to the parcel across that right-of-way. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 16(K); Res. of 8-25-94; Code 1991, § 17.240.100; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Approved street access required for all lots, § 16.30.060. 
17.240.140. - Street frontage requirements on cul-de-sacs. 
Any lot that has at least 60 percent of its frontage on the turn-around portion of a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum frontage of 40 feet measured on the chord. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 16(L); Res. of 4-26-91; Code 1991, § 17.240.105; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.240.150. - Flag lot width and frontage standards. 
The minimum required lot frontage as established by the county zoning regulations shall be maintained as the minimum lot width for all of that portion of the lot between the front property line (frontage) and the actual building site on the lot even if the building site is a greater distance from the front property line than the minimum required front setback. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 16(M); Res. of 10-23-89; Code 1991, § 17.240.110; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Similar provisions, § 16.100.110. 
17.240.160. - Development standards for property having access to divided four-lane highways. 
A.  All property abutting and proposing access from a divided four-lane highway, regardless of zoning classification, shall be developed in conformance with the following minimum standards of frontage and access points: 
1.  Frontage. Lots which are created after January 11, 1982, which abut a divided four-lane highway shall have a minimum of 500 feet of frontage abutting the four-lane divided highway; and 
2.  Access points. 
a.  One access point per lot may be permitted provided that approval from the Georgia Department of Transportation shall be required prior to the final approval and recording of a plat of the lot. 
b.  Additional access points may be approved by the planning commission upon a finding that: 
i.  The additional access is essential to the use of the property; and 
ii.  Alternative access from another road, joint access with adjoining property or the construction of a frontage road is not feasible; and 
iii.  Additional access would not be detrimental to existing or proposed uses in the area; and 
iv.  The Georgia Department of Transportation will approve the proposed access; and 
c.  The existence or approval of access for residential or agricultural purposes does not obligate or require the county or the Georgia Department of Transportation to approve access for a change in use to non-residential or non-agricultural uses. 
B.  If the property abutting the four-lane divided highway does not propose direct access to the highway, then the property must abut some other public road and have the minimum frontage abutting said road as required in the applicable zoning district. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 16(N); Res. of 1-11-82; Code 1991, § 17.240.120; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and public places, tit. 12. 
CHAPTER 17.250. - OFF-STREET PARKING, STORAGE AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS[15] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference— Vehicles and traffic, tit. 10; driveway construction, ch. 12.40; parking area standards for CD overlay district, § 17.230.050; approval of additional parking on other than principal lot, § 17.350.100. 

17.250.010. - Purpose. 
In order to facilitate the movement of police, fire and hospital vehicles, to lessen congestion in the streets, and to prevent obstructing traffic and blocking streets, alleys and entrances to buildings, the following regulations are established. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 17; Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.250.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.250.020. - Off-street parking. 
Off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided on every lot on which any of the following uses (in table 17.250.020A) are established. Such space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley, and shall be provided in accord with Hall County's adopted driveway construction standards, and shall be equal in number to at least the minimum requirements for the specific use set forth below. Each fraction occurring in the total spaces required for a particular use shall be construed to mean one additional space. 
In the case of any building, structure or premises the use of which is not specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use which is so mentioned and to which said use is similar shall apply. The building official shall make the determination, subject to an appeal to the planning commission. 
On-street parking by residents of districts V-C, R-I, R-II, R-TF, R-MF, AR-III, AR-IV and PRD is prohibited on a permanent basis. 
All off-street parking areas that make it necessary for vehicles to back out directly into a public road, street or highway are prohibited except for single-family residential units and, if approved by the Hall County engineering department, duplexes and multi-family units. 
All off-street parking facilities shall be constructed of dust-free materials which will have a surface resistant to erosion, drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets and periodically maintained by the owner, and such facilities shall be arranged for convenient access and safety to pedestrians and vehicles. 
No parking area shall be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies. 
Each automobile parking space for other than residential purposes shall be clearly marked and shall be provided entrances, exits and driveways adequate to connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. 
Minimum dimensions for off-street parking and maneuvering space or driveways shall be as provided in the tables below (tables 17.250.020B and 17.250.020C). The parking design may include up to 40 percent of the spaces designed for small cars. Those spaces designed for small cars shall be restricted to use by small cars and clearly marked to indicate that restriction. 
_____
TABLE 17.250.020A 

 
TABLE 17.250.020B. LARGE-SIZE CAR PARKING LAYOUT DIMENSION GUIDELINES 

 
(1)  Measured at right angles to stall line. 
(2)  May also apply to boundary curb where bumper overhang is allowed. 

 
TABLE 17.250.020C. SMALL-SIZE CAR PARKING LAYOUT DIMENSION GUIDELINES 

 
(1)  Measured at right angles to stall line. 
(2)  May also apply to boundary curb where bumper overhang is allowed. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 17(A)(1), (2), (5)—(10); Res. of 11-26-90; Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.250.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 4-8-2010, § 1(Exh. A)) 
17.250.030. - Off-site parking. 
If off-street parking and storage cannot be reasonably provided upon the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, the zoning board of adjustment may permit such spaces to be provided on other off-street property (see section 17.350.100). Such vehicle parking spaces shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. Information shall be provided to justify use of premises for additional parking. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 17(A)(3); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.250.040; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.250.040. - Combined parking spaces. 
The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half of the parking space required for churches, theaters, or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at nights or on Sundays. 
A maximum of 50 percent of the required off-street parking for places of noncommercial assembly may be met by utilizing parking facilities which normally serve businesses operating only during daytime hours if the parking facilities are within 300 feet of the place of public assembly. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 17(A)(4); Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.250.050; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.250.050. - Off-street loading and unloading space. 
Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to a public alley or, if there is no alley, to a public street. 
The off-street loading facilities shall in all cases be provided on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they are intended to serve, and in no case shall said off-street loading space be part of the area used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of this resolution [title]. Each space provided shall have a minimum 14-foot overhead clearance. 
TABLE 17.250.050 

 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 17(B); Res. of 1-27-92; Code 1991, § 17.250.060; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.260. - SCREENING, FENCING AND OUTDOOR STORAGE REQUIREMENTS[16] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference— Business regulations, tit. 5; storage of junk, § 8.60.300; deposit or storage of junk, § 8.140.020; walls and hedges in CD overlay district, § 17.230.070. 

17.260.010. - Outdoor storage. 
A.  Inventory items and manufacturing scrap and by-products at all business and industrial locations shall be stored inside a fenced enclosure in the rear or to the side of the facility. Fencing shall be six feet in height and shall be constructed of materials which provide a non-visible screen. 
B.  Old appliances, scrap materials, building materials, parts to machinery and similar type items which are not legitimate inventory items must be stored inside an enclosed building in all zoning districts with the exception of districts AR-III and AR-IV. In districts AR-III and AR-IV such items must be stored in such a manner so as not to be visible to surrounding properties. Any of the above-noted items found to be stored other than as provided for in this section shall be removed by the property owner within ten days after proper notice by the building official. Buildings or additions to buildings which are under construction with a valid building permit will be exempt from this requirement. 
C.  Non-operable vehicles shall be stored inside an enclosed building in all zoning districts with the exception of AR-III and AR-IV. Any non-operable vehicles found to be stored outside shall be removed by the property owner after proper notice by the building official within ten days. 
D.  In districts AR-III and AR-IV all outdoor storage and/or inoperable vehicles must be stored in such a manner so as not to be visible to surrounding properties. 
E.  For all automobile repair garages except those provided for under section 17.350.140 any operative or non-operative vehicle which is visible from beyond the premises shall have a current vehicle registration and a paid ad valorem tax receipt, except that a maximum of three vehicles which are either non-operative and [or] not registered, exempt from registration because they are used for racing or competition events or qualify as antique or classic vehicles undergoing restoration, may be stored within view from beyond the premises without having a current vehicle registration. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 18(A); Res. of 7-11-88; Res. of 4-27-90; Res. of 8-26-91; Code 1991, § 17.260.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.260.020. - Vegetation buffers and vision clearance. 
A.  Planted buffers. Except as noted under paragraph K. of this section, a vegetated buffer screen with a minimum width as specified below shall be planted parallel with the lot line when a non-residential use is made of a lot and the adjacent property is zoned V-C, R-I, R-II, R-TF, R-MF, AR-III, AR-IV, PRD, or PCFD, or is designated on the Comprehensive Plan for residential use. 
B.  Buffer width. The buffer width shall be determined by the intensity of commercial use and the distance to the residential use from the property line as follows: 
1.  Where an office or retail use with no outside activity (beyond parking and loading areas) abuts residential use, the minimum buffer shall be ten feet. 
2.  Where a retail use with outside activity abuts residential use, the minimum buffer shall be 20 feet. 
3.  Where an industrial use with no outside activity abuts residential use, the minimum buffer shall be 30 feet. 
4.  Where an industrial use with outside activity abuts residential use, the minimum buffer shall be 50 feet. 
5.  Where existing residential structures are less than 50 feet from the property line, or where zoning or Comprehensive Plan designation suggests that future residential structures will be less than 50 feet from the property line, the buffer shall be increased by a minimum of ten feet. 
6.  Where outside machinery, loading docks, drive-up windows, storage areas or other areas of special impact are immediately adjacent to residential use, the planning commission or county commission may require a greater buffer width as a condition of their approval. 
C.  Buffer materials. The buffer strip shall be planted in a minimum ten-foot area and shall consist of evergreen trees or shrubs of a minimum height of five feet at the time of planting, spaced to provide a continuous screen. Where buffer widths of greater than ten feet are required, the remaining buffer adjacent to residential use shall be left in a natural forested state, if such condition exists, or planted with a mix of deciduous and evergreen trees to re-establish a forested area. Where natural evergreen material in good condition meeting the minimum height remains in the buffer area after clearing and construction, it may be utilized and credited toward meeting the screening requirement. The county must approve the materials and planting plan for the buffer prior to the buffer being established. Authority for questions of plant characteristics shall be publications and recommendations of the Cooperative Extension Service of the University of Georgia College of Agriculture, or other authority acceptable to the county. 
D.  Height. The screening vegetation shall attain a minimum height of ten feet within five years of establishment of the buffer. Growth during the five-year period shall be adequate to ensure compliance by the end of five years. Where the required interim growth has not been attained, the property owner is responsible for replacing the vegetation with new vegetation that will meet the buffer requirement within the remaining portion of the original five-year period. 
E.  Setbacks. The vegetation shall be planted far enough from the property lines to prevent encroachment over the property lines. 
F.  Planting requirements. Spacing of screening plants shall be the minimum required for mature plants, and two staggered rows shall be used if necessary to attain the required initial screening. Screening plants shall be nursery-grown and of such size, species and condition as to ensure the maximum initial screening commensurate with a high rate of survival and a high growth rate. Other trees planted to re-establish a forested area shall be a minimum of two feet tall at the time of planting. 
G.  Substitution of fence. A solid fence buffer may be substituted, with planning commission approval, for part or all of the vegetated buffer as follows: 
1.  A brick or stone wall with a minimum height of six feet may be placed on the property line in lieu of some or all of the buffer requirements. 
2.  A solid wooden fence with a minimum height of six feet may be placed on the property line. The fence must have a natural finish. If stained or varnished, the resulting finish must be natural in appearance, and the finished side of the fence shall face the neighboring property. 
3.  The width of the buffer may be reduced and the planted screening may be reduced or eliminated if the planning commission finds that a wall or fence will provide a satisfactory overall screening of the property, considering use, topography and appearance, and that a wall or fence will not create a safety problem or impose an adverse visual barrier that could affect the use or value of the residential property. 
H.  Berms. Earthen berms may be incorporated in the buffer design if approved by the county after a determination that the berms will not cause drainage or erosion problems. 
I.  Maintenance of buffer. All buffer strips required by this regulation shall be maintained in a healthy condition and pruned so as to provide a solid screen with maximum opacity from the ground to a height of at least ten feet. Should vegetation die or be removed such that the buffer no longer functions as required, that vegetation must be replaced. Fences serving as a buffer must remain in a good state of repair to provide a solid screen. 
J.  Time of installation. The required buffer must be installed prior to occupancy or commencement of use. Where compliance with the preceding sentence is not possible because of the season of the year, the county may grant a temporary occupancy permit until the season changes. In this case, a bond or other performance guarantee to cover the cost of planting the buffer will be required by the county prior to the temporary occupancy permit being issued. 
K.  Vision clearance. In all districts, no plantings, fences, walls, signs or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet shall be permitted within 25 feet of the intersection of the right of way lines of two streets, railroads or of a business driveway and a public road. 
L.  Buffer modification or waiver. 
1.  The county commission may modify or waive the buffer requirements on rezonings and uses subject to their approval, if it is determined that the buffer is not necessary, undesirable or creates a hardship. The planning commission may modify or waive the buffer requirements on uses subject to their approval, if it is determined that the buffer is not necessary, undesirable or creates a hardship. 
2.  The planning director may modify or waive the buffer requirements on plan approvals not subject to planning commission or county commission review, based on a specific finding that existing topography, vegetation, building orientation or other physical characteristics of the area will provide screening and buffering that meets the intent of this section. 
3.  The county commission, planning commission, or planning director as appropriate to the required level of review of the plan, may approve a reduction in the size of required buffer planning material on-sites adjacent to vacant properties where development is not imminent. 
(Res. of 4-15-93; Code 1991, § 17.260.020; Res. of 7-11-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.260.030. - Junk yard screening requirements. 
A.  Occupancy permit. No person, firm or corporation shall operate, use or expand a junk yard as defined in this title unless and until a valid occupancy permit has been issued for the site used. Application shall be made on the proper form and a detailed site plan shall be attached. Occupancy permits shall be issued according to the provisions of these requirements. 
B.  Intent. These regulations are intended to shield junk yards from public view of the surrounding occupied properties and the public right-of-way, to reduce noise emitting from the junk yard and to protect the surrounding properties from dangers of fire. Modification of these requirements may be granted by the county planning commission when the requested modification does not contravene the intent of these regulations. Request for a modification shall be made in writing at the time of application for an occupancy permit. 
C.  Vegetation buffer strip. 
1.  Evergreen buffer required. A vegetation buffer strip shall be planted or existing vegetation on the site, if adequate, may be used to form a hardy screen dense enough to interrupt vision and noise during all months of the year. 
2.  Height. The vegetation shall attain a height of eight feet within five years of establishment of the buffer. Growth during the five-year period shall be adequate to ensure compliance by the end of five years. Where the required interim growth has not been attained, the property owner is responsible for replacing the vegetation with new vegetation that will meet the buffer requirement within the remaining portion of the original five years. A detailed description or site plan of a vegetation buffer strip that will meet all requirements within the remainder of the five-year period shall be submitted for review and approval by the planning commission. 
3.  Setbacks. The vegetation shall be set [back] five feet from the street right-of-way and adjacent to the side and rear property lines. The vegetation shall be planted far enough from the property lines to prevent encroachment over the adjacent property lines. 
4.  Planting requirements. Either larger plants or a greater number of plants than will be needed at maturity shall be planted as necessary to attain full screening horizontally while the plants are growing to full height. Spacing shall be the minimum required for mature plants, and two staggered rows shall be used if necessary to attain the required initial screening. New plants shall be nursery-grown and of such size, species, and condition as to ensure the maximum initial screening commensurate with a high rate of survival and a high growth rate. 
5.  Plan. A detailed description or site plan of a vegetation buffer strip that meets these requirements shall be submitted for review and approval by the planning commission. 
6.  Final approval. Where a certificate of occupancy has been issued for a site prior to the imposition of vegetation buffer requirements, a certificate of zoning compliance may be used to indicate approval of a completed vegetation buffer strip. 
7.  Exceptions. Provisions 4 and 5 shall not apply to junk yards for which a vegetation buffer strip has been approved prior to adoption of these provisions. 
D.  Parking on public right-of-way. The parking of non-operable motor vehicles or the storage of junk on the public rights-of-way adjacent to a junk yard or outside the fenced enclosure is specifically prohibited and shall be deemed cause for immediate revocation of the occupancy permit by the building official. 
E.  Fence requirement. A permanent screened fence not less than six feet in height shall be erected enclosing the junk yard and shall be set back of the vegetation barrier. The minimum setback shall be ten feet from any property line. The fence shall completely obstruct vision. Wood or metal slatted chain-link fencing shall be used unless specifically modified by the planning commission. The slatting used on chain-link fencing must be wide enough to completely fill the area between the links. Gates shall be of the same material and shall obstruct vision when closed. 
F.  Modifications. 
1.  The planning commission may modify the requirements in relation to the vegetation buffer strip for reasons of topography; and 
2.  The planning commission may modify the requirements relating to fence screening for reasons of topographic or other unusual conditions. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 18(C); Res. of 4-15-93; Code 1991, § 17.260.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Storage of junk, § 8.60.300; deposit or storage of junk, § 8.140.020. 
CHAPTER 17.270. - SIGN STANDARDS[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of a resolution adopted Sept. 24, 2015, repealed the former Ch. 17.270, §§ 17.270.010—17.270.100, and Exh. A to said resolution enacted a new Ch. 17.270 as set out herein. The former Ch. 17.270 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. of 5-27-04, § 1; Res. of 9-26-13(1), §§ 1—6(Exhs. C—D). See the Code Comparative Table for prior derivation. 
Cross reference— Animals generally, tit. 6; setbacks for buildings or pens housing livestock or other animals, § 17.240.060. 

17.270.010. - Purpose and findings. 
The county commission finds that signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of noncommercial and commercial messages. However, left completely unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard and detriment to property values and to Hall County's overall public welfare as an aesthetic nuisance. By enacting this chapter 17.270, the county commission intends to: 
A.  Balance the rights of individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
B.  Further the objectives of the Hall County Comprehensive Plan; 
C.  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare; 
D.  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; 
E.  Maintain and enhance the visual environment, and preserve the right of the citizens to enjoy Hall County's scenic beauty; 
F.  Protect property values by minimizing possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
G.  Avoid the harmful aspects of the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
H.  Promote economic development; and 
I.  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
(Res. of 9-24-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
17.270.020. - Applicability and severance. 
The regulations set forth below shall apply and govern in all zoning districts. Within the unincorporated portions of the county no sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with this chapter 17.270. In the event that a court should adjudge any part of this chapter a violation of the Georgia or United States Constitutions or any other provision of law, it is the specific intent of Hall County Board of Commissioners that the offending provision or provisions be stricken from this chapter and the remainder of this chapter stay in effect to regulate signs on property within Hall County. This severance section is in addition to the legislative intent expressed elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Res. of 9-24-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
17.270.030. - Definitions. 
A.  Address sign. Sign displaying the street address of the property. 
B.  Billboard. A freestanding sign larger than 200 square feet in area. 
C.  Billboard, digital. A freestanding sign larger than 200 square feet in area and programmable by a computer capable of displaying words, symbols, figures, or picture images that can be altered or rearranged on site or by remote means without altering the face or surface of the sign. 
D.  Construction sign. A temporary sign erected on premises where construction for which a permit is required is taking place. 
E.  Directory sign. Any sign located on developed premises, adjacent to exits, entrances, driveways or off-street parking facilities. 
F.  Freestanding sign. A sign that is not mounted on a principal building. 
G.  Marquee sign. A sign that: 
1.  Is attached to a canopy or covered structure projecting from and supported by a building; and 
2.  Does not extend above or below such canopy or structure. 
H.  Monument sign. Any sign that has a brick, masonry, stucco or stone base supporting a sign panel. 
I.  Nonconforming sign. Any sign that does not conform to the provisions of this Code and was legal when originally erected. 
J.  Portable sign. A sign which is not permanently affixed by rigid structures to a permanent, concrete foundation or a building; including any sign mounted on a vehicle, trailer, or other device designed to be moved periodically from place to place. 
K.  Roof sign. A sign projecting over the coping of a flat roof, or wholly or partially over the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof, and supported by or attached to the roof. 
L.  Sign. A surface (or series of surfaces connected to a common supporting structure) on which is displayed an announcement, name, illustration, symbol or insignia used to inform the public or to identify, advertise or promote the interest of any person. 
M.  Sign area. The area of the smallest rectangle within which all elements of a flat sign are contained (a flat sign being one with two display surfaces facing exactly opposite directions, or one display surface if against the wall of a building); or the maximum projected surface area (projected in one direction) of any other sign. 
1.  Supporting structures for signs shall not be counted in the sign area, provided such supporting structures consist of posts, hangers, or brackets of the minimum number and size necessary to support the sign. A wall or fence on which a sign is mounted shall not be counted in the sign area, provided it serves primarily to enclose, divide, or protect an area. 
2.  Supporting structures of natural finish brick masonry, stone masonry, or wood shall not be counted in the sign area, provided that: 
a.  Such structures do not extend more than one foot above or two feet beyond the ends of the sign; 
b.  The height of the combined sign and supporting structure does not exceed the maximum height allowed in this chapter; and 
c.  The area of the combined sign and supporting structure does not exceed twice the area of the sign itself. 
N.  Temporary sign. A display, sign, or banner with or without a structural frame, not permanently mounted, and intended to be displayed for only a limited time. 
O.  Subdivision sign. Any sign located in a subdivision or planned unit development. 
P.  Wall sign. A sign which is mounted on the facade of the building, is in a plane parallel to the wall (i.e., does not project at an angle to the wall), and does not project more than 12 inches from the wall. 
Q.  Window sign. A sign placed on or visible only through a window, display case, or entry door of a building. 
R.  Temporary event. An activity having a specific duration or the end of which is related to a specific action, usually lasting for only a few days or months at a time. Temporary events include, but are not limited to, such activities as: 
1.  A model home/apartment or sales office in a residential development; 
2.  Special business promotions, such as, but not limited to, "grand openings," "close-out sales," carnivals and seasonal sales events; business promotions, such as, but not limited to, "grand openings," "close-out sales," carnivals and seasonal sales events; 
3.  A special event by a civic, philanthropic, education or religious organization, such as a community fair or religious assembly. 
(Res. of 9-24-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
17.270.040. - General. 
A.  Permit required. A permit shall be required for the erection, alteration or reconstruction of any sign unless otherwise noted and shall be issued by the building official in accordance with these regulations. 
B.  Materials and maintenance. Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition and not permitted to become dilapidated. 
C.  Freestanding signs. All permanent freestanding signs over six square feet in area shall be designed as "monument" style signs with bases that rise directly from a foundation set in the ground. Any pole used to support the sign shall be completely hidden by the monument base. The sign monument must be at least two-thirds the width of the sign itself. Unless otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter, the maximum height of any freestanding sign shall be six feet. Maximum sign areas shall apply to each face separately, but no freestanding sign shall have more than two faces. Where two sign faces are located in a "V" formation, the angle between the two sign faces shall not be greater than 60 degrees. 
D.  Wall and projecting signs. Wall signs attached flat against a wall may extend not more than 12 inches from the wall. Signs attached at an angle to a wall may extend outward from the wall of a building not more than five feet and may be located not closer than 18 inches to a vertical plane at the street curb line. In no case shall signs project beyond property lines. Painted murals are not permitted as wall signs. 
E.  Sign setbacks. Except as otherwise specifically provided, signs shall be setback from property and right-of-way lines as shown in Table 17-270.A. However, in no case will a sign be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersection, or railway crossing, as prohibited by Code. 

 
* May be reduced to zero feet for signs with a single face parallel to the road on vacant tracts where dense vegetation or severe slopes preclude any location with a greater setback. 
F.  Obsolete signs. A sign becomes obsolete if it conveys advertising or identification to services or uses that no longer exist, or a sign that is allowed to become dilapidated or is not maintained. Obsolete signs must be removed or repaired by property owner, developer or former lessee of property upon which sign is located within 30 days after receipt of written notice from the planning director or code enforcement division. 
G.  Illumination. No sign shall be illuminated by lights that flash, move, change in intensity, or turn on intermittently; except that a digital display may change no more often than once each 20 seconds, and shall be subject to the applicable lighting standards within this chapter. To prevent glare visible from a public street or adjoining property, the beam of any light shall be directed so as not to be visible beyond the sign at which it is directed, and the light source shall not be visible from any point on an adjacent property or the public right-of-way. 
H.  Movement or animation. No sign or part of a sign shall rotate, oscillate, or otherwise move or change in appearance, whether such motion is driven by wind, mechanical, electrical, or other means; except as provided under "Illumination" above. 
I.  Signs identifying or related to nonconforming uses. Signs identifying or related to nonconforming uses, and located on the same lot or property as the nonconforming use, may continue to exist, but may not be increased in size or number, and shall not be relocated on the same site unless the relocation of the existing sign brings it into greater conformity with the provisions of this chapter that would apply if the use were a permitted use in that zone district. 
(Res. of 9-24-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
17.270.050. - Signs for which a general permit has been granted. 
A general permit is hereby granted for the following types of signs in any district, provided that such signs are erected and maintained in compliance with all applicable conditions: 
A.  Directory sign with a maximum area not to exceed six square feet, maximum height five feet and setback of one foot from the edge of the pavement. One directory sign is allowed per exit, entrance, and off-street parking lot. 
B.  Construction sign with a maximum area not to exceed 50 square feet, a maximum height of eight feet, and shall be at least ten feet from the edge of the adjacent pavement. 
C.  Bulletin boards for any use categorized in Table 17-400.B as a public or institutional use, not exceeding six square feet in residential districts and 20 square feet in other than residential districts. All bulletin board signs shall be set back no less than five feet from the street right-of-way line, unless attached to the front wall of a building. 
D.  One unlighted identification sign for a permitted home occupation, provided that such sign is attached to the structure in which the home occupation is conducted, and has a maximum sign area of one square foot. 
E.  Internal development signs: One sign shall be allowed at each intersection of streets that are internal to a multi-building residential or nonresidential complex. The signs shall not exceed six square feet in area, four feet in length, and shall not be mounted more than five feet above grade. 
F.  Temporary signs as permitted in Table 17-270.B on residentially zoned lots. Owners of nonresidentially zoned lots must apply for a permit for temporary signs. 
G.  Flags, provided that (a) no more than two flagpoles are permitted per lot, (b) no more than two flags are permitted per flagpole, (c) the maximum dimension of the hoist side of each flag shall not exceed 20 percent of the height of the flagpole, (d) all flagpoles shall be set back from each property boundary a distance equal to the height of the flagpole, and (e) all flagpoles shall maintained in good repair, so as not to constitute a threat to public safety. On officially designated county, state, and federal holidays, there shall be no maximum flag size or number of flags on display. 
H.  In addition to any other permitted sign, additional non-commercial or commercial use of the property signs are permitted as follows: in agricultural and residential zoning districts, individual signs of up to six square feet, with an aggregate sign area not exceeding 18 square feet; and in other districts, individual signs up to ten square feet with a total sign area not exceeding 30 square feet. Such signs shall be a maximum height of five feet with a minimum setback of five feet from side property lines. 
(Res. of 9-24-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
17.270.060. - Sign permits. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a mechanism for reviewing applications for sign permits to ensure signs within the county comply with the standards of this chapter. 
B.  Authority. The planning director is authorized to review and approve or disapprove an application for a sign permit pursuant to the procedures of this section and the standards of this chapter. 
C.  Applicability. No sign, except those specified in subsection D of this section for which a general permit has been granted, shall be erected, placed, reconstructed or structurally altered without the sign owner having first obtained a sign permit from the planning director, pursuant to the procedures in this section and the standards of this chapter. 
D.  Signs for which a general permit has been granted. Pursuant to section 17.270.050, a general permit has been granted for those signs listed, and no application for a sign permit is required so long as the standards of this chapter are met. 
E.  Procedure. 
1.  Initial submission and review of application. Application for a sign permit shall be made on the form provided by the planning department, and shall be accompanied by the information and documents listed on the form and the fee as required by the board of county commissioners. An application will only be deemed as sufficient when all required information and accompanying documents are received. 
2.  Action by planning director. Within ten working days after the application is determined sufficient, the planning director shall review the application in accordance with this section and determine whether the application complies with the standards in this chapter. 
3.  Approval. If the planning director finds that the application complies with the standards of this chapter, the planning director shall approve a sign permit. Any sufficient sign application for which no action has been taken after ten working days shall be deemed approved. 
4.  Fails to comply. If the planning director determines the application fails to comply with the standards of this chapter, the applicant shall be provided a notification with written comments, explaining why the application fails to comply with the standards. The applicant shall be provided an opportunity to submit a revised application. If a revised application is not resubmitted within 30 days of the date of notification, the application shall be considered withdrawn and subject to a new application and remittance of accompanying fees. The time for resubmission may be extended an additional 30 days, if requested prior to the original deadline for resubmittal. 
5.  Re-submittal. A revised application shall be re-submitted to the planning director and reviewed by the planning director within five working days after its re-submittal. The planning director shall approve or disapprove the application, based on the criteria in this chapter. 
F.  Criteria. A sign permit shall be approved upon a finding that the applicant has demonstrated the application complies with the standards of this chapter. 
G.  Expiration. If the work described in any sign permit has not been completed within six months from the date of issuance, the sign permit shall expire and be void, however, one six-month extension of the permit shall be granted if an additional permit extension fee has been paid prior to the expiration date of the initial permit. The permit extension fee shall be the amount of the initial permit fee. 
H.  Amendments. A sign permit may be amended, extended, or modified only in with the procedures established for its original approval. 
I.  Appeals. Any person aggrieved or affected or any officer, department, board or bureau of the county affected by the determination of the planning director on an application for approval of a sign permit may appeal the determination to the planning commission in accordance with the procedures of section 17.360.020. The appeal shall be heard within 45 days of the filing of the written notice of appeal. 
(Res. of 9-24-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
17.270.070. - Standards for specific zone districts. 
A.  Permitted signs: AR-III, AR-IV, R-I, R-1L, R-II, R-TF, and PRD zone districts. The following signs shall be permitted in the AR-III, AR-IV, R-I, R-IL, R-II, R-TF, and PRD districts, all other signs being specifically prohibited: 
1.  Signs for which a general permit has been granted. 
2.  One per entrance, with a maximum height of six feet above grade, and a maximum sign area as follows: 
a.  For areas with fewer than 100 residential units or lots: 20 square feet; 
b.  For areas with between 101 and 200 residential units or lots: 32 square feet; 
c.  For areas with more than 200 residential units or lots: 48 square feet; 
d.  For lots containing a permitted nonresidential use, one attached or freestanding sign, with a maximum height of six feet above grade, and a maximum sign area of 20 square feet; 
e.  One non-illuminated sign for lots containing a permitted residential business (i.e. a business secondary to the residential use of the property), not greater than 16 square feet in area, with a maximum height of five feet above grade. 
B.  Permitted signs: RMF and MHP zone districts. The following signs shall be permitted in the RMF and MHP districts, all other signs being specifically prohibited: 
1.  Signs for which a general permit has been granted. 
2.  One sign per entrance to a subdivision, with a maximum height of six feet above grade, and a maximum sign area as follows: 
a.  For areas with fewer than 100 residential units or lots: 20 square feet; 
b.  For areas with between 101 and 200 residential units or lots: 32 square feet; 
c.  For areas with more than 200 residential units or lots: 48 square feet. 
3.  For lots used for nonresidential purposes, one attached or freestanding sign per establishment, with a maximum height of six feet above grade, and a maximum sign area of 30 square feet. 
4.  For lots containing a permitted residential business, one non-illuminated sign not greater than 16 square feet in area, with a maximum height of five feet above grade. 
C.  Permitted signs: O-I, S-S, PCD, H-B, I-I and I-II zone districts. The following signs shall be permitted in the O-I, S-S, PCD, H-B, I-I and I-II districts, all other signs being specifically prohibited: 
1.  Signs for which a general permit has been granted. 
2.  Monument signs. One ground mounted monument sign shall be permitted on each lot, except that in the case of a corner lot, the provisions of this section shall apply separately to each street frontage. However, no sign on a corner lot shall be closer than 50 feet from the lot corner, defined by the lot lines extended. 
a.  The sign structure shall be constructed of the same materials that are used in the facade of the principal building. 
b.  Dimensional standards for monument signs are set forth in the table below: 

 
3.  Wall signs and marquee signs. One wall sign or marquee sign shall be permitted for each building or for each tenant in a multi-tenant building. The maximum sign area shall be 64 square feet per building, or one square foot per linear foot of storefront, whichever is greater. Wall signs and marquee signs are only permitted on the side of a building that includes the primary public entrance. A tenant that has less than 16 lineal feet of storefront shall be a permitted a wall sign or marquee sign with a maximum area of 16 square feet. 
4.  Master plan for signs in multi-tenant developments. For all multi-tenant buildings or developments, a coordinated program of wall signs shall be developed and approved by the county at the time of site plan approval. The signage master plan shall specific the sign type, design, height, colors, illumination, and other specifications to give a coordinated appearance to the building or development. The county's review and approval of the signage master plan shall be based on the compatibility of the proposed signage with the siting and architecture of the subject building or development and the compatibility of the signage with surrounding land uses. 
5.  Additional signage permitted for service and fueling stations are as follows: 
a.  One sign per canopy facade per public street frontage with a maximum of 16 square feet shall be permitted, provided that the area used to display this information is no larger than eight square feet and does not extend above or below the edge of the canopy. 
b.  Spreader bars (signs located under canopy over pump islands) shall be limited to no more than two signs per spreader bar, not to exceed four square feet per sign. However, total square footage for all spreader bars shall not exceed 24 square feet. 
D.  Nonconforming signs. A building or freestanding sign that is lawfully existed on the effective date of this Code may continue to be used, except that the nonconforming sign: 
1.  Shall not be repaired, rebuilt, replaced or altered after damage or removal exceeding 50 percent of the sign structure. 
2.  Shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity. 
3.  Shall not be altered for a change in use, change in ownership or change in business name. Individual sign panels not exceeding 50 percent of the total sign face area of a multi-tenant freestanding sign shall be allowed to be replaced for a change in use or change in business name. 
(Res. of 9-24-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
17.270.080. - Standards for billboards. 
A.  General standards. This section 17.270.080 shall apply to prohibit the erection of new billboards in Hall County, or the reconstruction of existing billboards to the fullest extent that is not inconsistent with state and federal law or with the provisions allowing for the reduction of the overall number of billboards within Hall County, per subsection C of this section. 
1.  Permit required. No billboard shall be permitted to be erected or reconstructed without a permit from the county building official. 
2.  No new billboards. After the effective date of this chapter, the county building official shall not issue permits for new billboard structures except as required by Georgia or federal law and/or permitted by subsection C of this section. 
3.  Billboards are primary structures. After the effective date of this chapter, all billboards shall be classified as primary structures, and no billboard shall be located on any lot or parcel that contains another primary structure. Lots or parcels that contain both a billboard and another primary structure shall be nonconforming and shall be subject to the nonconforming use provisions of this Code. 
B.  Location, area and height. All billboard structures required to be permitted under state or federal law, and erected so as to be visible from any public, state or federal road shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  General. All billboard structures erected abutting or so as to be visible from the right-of-way of any state highway that is a limited or controlled access highway shall conform with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75, and shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit under said code. In instances where the sign controls of this regulation are stricter, these regulations shall apply. 
2.  Structure type. Only one sign shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back-to-back or V-formation signs, provided they are joined by a mutual or attached frame, but prohibits two signs stacked or side-by-side facing the same direction. 
3.  Setback. All structures shall be set back not less than 15 feet from any property or right-of-way line. 
4.  Spacing. 
a.  All roads except divided lane four-lane highways and limited or controlled access highways. No billboard structure shall be permitted within 500 feet of another billboard along the same side of the road or within 1,000 feet of any residential or agricultural district, public park, public building or religious building, regardless of whether the measurements extend outside of county limits. 
b.  Divided four-lane highways and limited or controlled access highways. No billboard structure shall be permitted within 500 feet of another billboard, measuring from the two closest points, regardless of whether the measurements extend outside of county limits. 
5.  Maximum sign area. 
a.  All roads except divided lane four-lane highways and limited or controlled access highways. The maximum sign area permitted for each face of the structure shall not exceed 64 square feet with or without trim. 
b.  Divided four-lane highways and limited or controlled access highways. The maximum sign area permitted for each face of the structure shall not exceed 100 square feet with or without trim. 
6.  Sign height. All signs shall be a minimum of ten feet above the adjacent road measuring from the lower portion of the sign face. No sign shall exceed the height of 35 feet from either the level of the road or the ground surface, whichever is higher. Two signs in the same location back-to-back or in a V-formation shall be the same height above the pavement surface. 
7.  Extrusions prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
8.  Lighting. No illumination of off-premises signs shall be permitted. 
C.  Digital billboard conversion and location. Any legally erected billboard may be converted to a digital billboard so long as it meets the following limitations: 
1.  Replacing a static billboard with a digital billboard. 
a.  Two square feet of existing static billboard display shall be removed within the county limits for each one square foot of digital billboard display area, either newly constructed or installed as a modification and/or conversion of an existing static billboard. The two square feet removed must be from physically completed static billboards with complete sign faces. No partially erected/completed signs may be used to qualify for the requirement. 
b.  The applicant shall provide an inventory of their outdoor advertising sign locations within the county. A company that converts an existing static billboard to a digital billboard must provide, with each permit application, a complete current inventory of its billboards located within the corporate limits of Hall County. The inventory shall include per structure: location (longitude/latitude), size, number of faces and type of illumination. 
c.  No person shall convert an existing static billboard structure to a digital billboard structure without first obtaining a sign permit as required by this section. 
d.  Digital billboards shall be the same size or smaller than the static billboard being replaced. 
e.  A digital billboard replacing a nonconforming static billboard as defined in section 17.270.080.A.4. may be permitted if approved by the county board of commissioners. 
2.  Construction of digital billboards in new locations. 
a.  After removing two square feet of existing static billboard display per subsection C.1.a of this section, a new structure may be erected containing a digital billboard if the location is approved by the county board of commissioners. 
b.  The county board of commissioners shall have the right to permit the installation of a new digital billboard structure in any location within the county so long as the location complies with all applicable state and federal regulations pertaining to outdoor advertising, and these regulations. 
3.  Digital billboard operational standards. 
a.  Digital billboards shall display static images for a period of at least 20 seconds before instantaneously transitioning to another static image. 
b.  Animation, frame effects, flashing and the appearance of movement whatsoever shall be explicitly prohibited. 
c.  All digital billboards shall come equipped with automatic dimming technology which automatically adjusts the sign's brightness based on ambient light conditions. 
d.  No digital billboard shall exceed a brightness level of 0.3 foot-candles above ambient light as measured using a foot-candle meter at a preset distance depending on sign area. Measuring distance shall be determined by the following equation: the square root of the product of the sign area and 100. 
Example using a 200 square foot digital billboard: 
(200×100) = 141.4 feet measuring distance. 
e.  The county will from time to time check the brightness of each digital billboard to verify the levels specified in this chapter are met. If the owner of a sign fails to control brightness within these limits, the sign permit will be revoked. Should a permit be revoked, the sign must be turned off immediately and remain off unless and until the sign is re-permitted. Re-permitting requires the owner to reapply in accordance with the procedures in place at the time of the new permit application, including paying fees required for a new permit. 
f.  All digital billboards shall have a switch or circuit breaker located on the property that allows electrical power to be turned off. The owner of each digital billboard shall provide the county contact information for a 24-hour, seven-day/week contact person who has the authority and is able to turn off the sign promptly if a malfunction occurs. If at any time more than 30 percent of the digital display lights malfunction or are no longer working property, the owner of the digital billboard shall turn off the electronic display until repairs are made. 
4.  Emergency compliance. The permit holder of a digital billboard shall coordinate with governmental authorities to display, when appropriate, emergency information important to the traveling public, such as Amber Alerts or alerts concerning terrorist attacks, or natural disasters. Emergency information messages shall remain in the advertising rotation according to the protocols of the agency that issues the information, or protocols established by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
D.  Nonconforming billboards. Any legally erected sign that would become nonconforming as a result of this chapter will be allowed to remain in accordance with this Code, or until purchased by the department of transportation or the county, provided that the sign owner meets the requirements of state laws and rules and regulations governing such signs. No nonconforming billboard shall be allowed to be increased in size or height or relocated on the property, but may be decreased in size or height and/or may be converted to a digital billboard subject to subsection C of this section. 
(Res. of 9-24-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
17.270.090. - Standards for temporary signs. 
A total of one additional sign per street frontage, which may be either of the following, shall be permitted for the duration of a temporary event: 
A.  One non-illuminated temporary sign, flag or banner, not exceeding six square feet in area nor four feet in height in a single-family residential zoning district and not exceeding 32 square feet in area nor 12 feet in height in a multifamily or nonresidential zoning district; or 
B.  One non-illuminated inflatable sign, which may be placed on a building roof, but regardless of location, shall be installed in accordance with all requirements of the building code. Such inflatable sign shall not contain an inflatable area in cubic feet that is greater than the square footage area of the sign structure for the principal freestanding sign on the property as determined by the director of planning and development. 
Signage shall be limited to a total of 60 days a calendar year for the same business or organization. The duration of the temporary event shall not last longer than 15 consecutive days and shall not take place more frequently than four times in any calendar year for the same business or organization. Any four such events must be separated by at least 30 consecutive days. 
(Res. of 9-24-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
17.270.100. - Prohibited signs. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the following types of signs shall be prohibited anywhere in the unincorporated areas of Hall County: 
A.  Signs imitating warning signals. No sign shall display intermittent lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles, nor shall any sign use the words "stop," "danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in a manner that might mislead or confuse an automobile or other vehicular driver. 
B.  Signs within street or highway right-of-way. No sign whatsoever, whether temporary or permanent, except traffic signs and signals and information signs erected by a public agency, are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way. 
C.  Certain attached and painted signs. Signs painted on or attached to trees, fence posts and telephone or other utility poles or signs painted on or attached to rocks or other natural features or painted on the roofs or walls of buildings shall be prohibited. 
D.  Fluttering ribbons and banners. Fluttering ribbons and banners and similar devices are prohibited within the front yard setback. This restriction shall not apply to flags. 
E.  Billboards. Billboard signs shall be prohibited, except as required by Georgia or federal law. 
F.  Roof signs. No sign shall be permitted that is mounted on or extends into the air above any roof surface of a building. A sign may be mounted against a parapet of uniform height around the perimeter of a building but may not extend above the parapet. 
G.  Portable signs. No portable sign shall be permitted unless it qualifies as a temporary sign and complies with all applicable requirements for such signs under this chapter. 
H.  Painted wall murals. No painted mural shall be permitted. 
I.  Signs within visibility clearance areas. No freestanding sign or flag between a height of two and one-half feet and ten feet, and no billboard support structure with a maximum dimension of 12 inches or more, shall be installed and or maintained within the visibility clearance area defined by: 
1.  Points 25 feet distant from the intersection of any two of the following: 
a.  Any public street(s); 
b.  Any driveway for other than single- or two-family use; or 
c.  Any railroad right-of-way with an at-grade crossing; and 
2.  A straight line connecting those two points. 
(Res. of 9-24-15(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
17.270.110. - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  A building or freestanding sign that is lawfully existed on the effective date of this Code may continue to be used, except that the nonconforming sign: 
1.  Shall not be repaired, rebuilt, replaced or altered after damage or removal exceeding 50 percent of the sign structure. 
2.  Shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity. 
3.  Shall not be altered for a change in use, change in ownership or change in business name. Individual sign panels not exceeding 50 percent of the total sign face area of a multi-tenant freestanding sign shall be allowed to be replaced for a change in use or change in business name. 
B.  The owner of a nonconforming sign who wishes to apply for its continued use, and who makes an application for such within one year from the date such sign became nonconforming, shall have his/her application fee waived. An owner who submits his/her application for the continued use of a nonconforming sign within two years of the date such sign became nonconforming shall have one-half of the application fee waived. Any owner of a nonconforming sign shall apply for its continued use after the expiration of two years from the date the sign became nonconforming shall be required to pay the full application fee as required by Chapter 17.30 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 9-24-15(1), § 1(Exh. A); Res. of 4-14-16(1)) 
CHAPTER 17.280. - TREE PROTECTION[18] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Cross reference— Soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 8.40; buildings and construction, tit. 15; subdivisions, tit. 16. 

17.280.010. - Purpose. 
Growth and development in Hall County has resulted in the loss of innumerable trees in areas. Tree roots hold soil in place and tree photosynthesis converts carbon dioxide to oxygen. Tree loss thus has contributed to dramatically increased soil erosion and sedimentation. High growth areas, where natural green spaces are diminishing, have fewer trees to transform into oxygen the carbon dioxide of ever increasing harmful vehicular and industrial emissions, resulting in air quality degradation. Therefore, since trees: 
A.  Cool the environment three to ten degrees; 
B.  Protect from winter winds thus reducing heating costs and the burning of fossil fuels; 
C.  Reduce the velocity of falling rain, help stormwater infiltrate into the soil, settle particulates, slow runoff, prevent soil erosion, and help to protect water quality; 
D.  Buffer noise and reduce glare; 
E.  Remove carbon from the atmosphere and give off oxygen; 
F.  Are an invaluable physical, aesthetic, and psychological counterpoint to the urban setting, making urban life more comfortable by providing shade and cooling the air and land, reducing noise levels and glare, and breaking the monotony of human developments on the land, particularly parking areas; and 
G.  Have important impact on the desirability of land, and therefore property values; 
it is not only desirable but essential to the health, safety, and welfare of all persons living or working within the jurisdiction to protect certain significant existing trees and, under circumstances set forth herein, to require the planting of new trees. 
(Res. of 7-13-92; Code 1991, § 17.275.010; Ord. of 11-11-99; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.280.020. - Applicability. 
A.  The tree protection zone shall apply to the entirety of a tract of land for which no tree protection plan has been approved. After such approval, the tree protection zone shall correspond to that part of a tract of land designated as a tree conservation area in said plan. 
B.  The tree protection zone shall not apply to the following (but see the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance for provisions regarding retention of undisturbed natural vegetative buffers adjacent to Lake Lanier and other state waters): 
1.  Tracts of land for which the zoning ordinance imposes no yard requirements and permits 100 percent coverage of the lot by buildings. 
2.  Property already occupied by an owner-occupied single-family dwelling; unless nonresidential uses are proposed for such property, except that any construction, paving, or other activity on the property that will damage trees on the public right-of-way is subject to the restrictions of section 17.280.040, "Protection of existing trees." 
3.  Public utility companies and government agencies conducting operations on public and utility rights-of-way and easements or on-sites for electric power substations and similar facilities, which operations are for the purpose of assuring uninterrupted utility and governmental services and unobstructed passage on public streets. 
4.  Property in use for tree farming (as defined herein) or other agricultural activities (as defined herein), provided the best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission or the state department of agriculture are observed. 
5.  Family held property the subdivision of which is affected for the sole purpose of transferring a portion of such property to one (1) or more family members for use as the family member's primary residence. 
6.  Minor subdivisions as defined in section 17.20.720. 
(Res. of 7-13-92; Code 1991, § 17.275.020; Ord. of 11-11-99; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.280.030. - Removal of trees other than during development. 
A.  Permit. On properties which are not exempted under section 17.280.020.B, a permit shall be required to remove or cause the death of existing significant trees and any other trees ten inches DBH or larger located within the tree protection zone or for grading or other work adjacent to a tree which would affect it adversely. An approved tree protection plan is required for issuance of a permit. Permit requirements are waived where the county determines that trees to be removed are dead, are diseased or are infested to the extent that removal is necessary, or have been damaged by lightning, wind, ice, or other disasters to the extent that public safety is endangered. 
B.  Retention. The property owner shall retain trees on the property equivalent to 15 units per acre of development site, as defined herein, (not including land area covered by buildings) in accordance with these regulations and the approved plan, including, if necessary, replacing trees which die or are irreparably damaged. 
(Res. of 7-13-92; Code 1991, § 17.275.030; Ord. of 11-11-99; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.280.040. - Protection of existing trees. 
A.  Priority among existing trees. When a choice is available as to which existing trees to save, emphasis shall be given to the preservation of significant trees, even isolated individual trees, over retention of other trees. Nonsignificant trees, however, should be saved in stands rather than as individual trees scattered over a site. Removal of significant trees and other trees ten inches DBH or larger shall be permitted only in conjunction with an approved preliminary tree protection plan, an approved grading plan, and actual grading of building pads (i.e., not simply to clear the lot). 
B.  On properties which are not exempted under section 17.280.020.B, the following provisions shall apply; except that encroachment on the critical root zone of a tree is permitted where necessary to the development (e.g., construction of a driveway), provided the tree is not counted toward the required 15 units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings): 
1.  Damage prohibited. No person shall: 
a.  Cut, carve, or otherwise damage or remove any tree except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
b.  Attach any wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance harmful to any tree; 
c.  Allow any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to trees (such as concrete washout, fuel, lubricants, herbicides, or paint) to come in contact with them; or 
d.  Set a fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree. 
2.  Fence required. During excavation, filling, construction, or demolition operations, each tree or stand of trees to remain on the property shall be protected against damage to bark, roots, and low-hanging branches with a fence enclosing the critical root zone. Fencing shall be either plastic construction area fencing, silt fencing, 12-gauge two-inch by four-inch wire mesh, double one-inch by four-inch rails on two-inch by four-inch posts, or high-visibility surveyors' tape on one-inch by two-inch posts. Height of the latter three fence types shall be four feet. 
3.  Compaction prohibited. All building materials, vehicles, construction equipment, dirt, debris, or other objects likely to cause soil compaction or above-ground damage shall be kept outside the critical root zone. Where a limited amount of encroachment is unavoidable and is approved by the county, the critical root zone shall first be mulched with a four-inch layer of processed pine bark or wood chips or a six-inch layer of pine straw. 
4.  Grade change prohibited. There shall be no raising or lowering of the ground level within the critical root zone. Stripping of topsoil in the critical root zone shall not be permitted. Where necessary, the use of moderate fill is permitted only with prior installation of an aeration system approved by the county. Deposition of sediment in the critical root zone shall be prevented by placement of sediment barriers, which shall be backed by two-inch by four-inch wire mesh in areas of steep slope. 
5.  Ditches prohibited. No person shall excavate any ditch or trench within the critical root zone. Where such encroachment is unavoidable and is approved by the county, ditches or trenches shall be so located as to minimize root damage. If roots must be cut, root pruning procedures approved by the county must be employed. 
6.  Paving prohibited. No person shall pave with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious material within the critical root zone. 
(Res. of 7-13-92; Code 1991, § 17.275.040; Ord. of 11-11-99; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.280.050. - Criteria for replacement trees. 
A.  Spacing and the potential size of species chosen shall be compatible with spatial limitations of the site. 
B.  The species must be ecologically compatible with the specifically intended growing site. 
C.  The trees must have the potential for size and quality comparable to those removed. 
D.  The trees must be compatible in extent of crown and root systems at maturity with nearby utilities. 
E.  Planting preference shall be given to specimens of no more than three inches DBH. 
F.  Where trees must be added to achieve the required 15 units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings), pines may not comprise more than 30 percent of the required units. Where existing pines already comprise 30 percent or more of the required units, no more pines may be credited toward the required units. At least 25 percent of the replacement tree units must be canopy trees. 
G.  Authority for questions of tree characteristics shall be publications of the Georgia Forestry Commission, publications of the Cooperative Extension Service of the University of Georgia College of Agriculture, or other authority acceptable to the county. 
(Res. of 7-13-92; Code 1991, § 17.275.050; Ord. of 11-11-99; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.280.060. - Tree measurement units. 
The diameter of a tree's trunk will be measured and a value assigned in "units" in accordance with the following table. The values assigned to trees of the same size will be different for existing and new trees, as indicated. One unit is not the same as one tree.       
Table of Values for Existing Trees*       
Diameter at breast height 

 
      
Table of Values for New (Replacement) Trees 

 
      
Large Species** 

 
**A "large species" is one which will have a height at maturity of 40 feet or more. 
**A "canopy tree" is one that will have a height at maturity of 40 feet or more and is known to provide shade. See definition. 
Note: For existing trees, a "unit" is one square foot of trunk cross-section area. 
(Res. of 7-13-92; Code 1991, § 17.275.060; Ord. of 11-11-99; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.280.070. - Tree protection plan. 
A proposal for development or improvement of any tract of land shall include a tree protection plan. The tree protection plan may be included on the soil erosion plan. Such plan shall be submitted to the county prior to any grading, bulldozing, or other removal of existing vegetation. A preliminary plan may be submitted in certain circumstances, as provided in section 17.280.070.B. 
A.  The full tree protection plan shall show the following: 
1.  The extent of the development site. 
2.  All significant trees to be removed and all other trees ten inches DBH or larger to be removed. 
3.  All significant trees and all other trees ten inches DBH or larger which will remain on the development site and be protected during construction; and trees less than ten inches DBH which are submitted for credit as part of the required 15 units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings). 
4.  In heavily wooded areas that will not be disturbed, the plan may show only the boundaries of each stand of trees and a list of the number, size, and type (e.g., hardwood, softwood, deciduous, evergreen) of trees in each stand which are submitted for credit. 
5.  Areas subject to provisions of the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance regarding retention of undisturbed natural vegetative buffers adjacent to Lake Lanier and other state waters shall also be shown. 
6.  Locations of proposed on-site underground utility lines. 
7.  Locations of other on- and off-site utility lines. Indicate areas where trees cannot be planted because of interference with (1) existing or proposed utilities on public rights-of-way or on utility rights-of-way or easements and (2) existing utilities on adjoining properties. 
8.  Limits of land disturbance, clearing, grading, and trenching. 
9.  Limits of tree conservation areas, showing trees to be maintained and planted, specifying type and size. 
10.  Grade changes or other work adjacent to a significant tree or any other tree ten inches DBH or larger which would affect it adversely, with drawings or descriptions as to how the grade, drainage, and aeration will be maintained around the tree. 
11.  Planting schedule, if applicable. 
B.  A preliminary tree protection plan may be submitted for development of an industrial park where multiple sites will be cleared and graded for purposes of marketing vacant sites to industrial prospects. Planting of new trees will not be required on a lot until a use is developed on that lot, and locations of new trees need not be shown on the preliminary plan. The preliminary tree plan for industrial/office or commercial parks protection shall show the following: 
1.  The extent of the development site. 
2.  Limits of land disturbance, clearing, grading, and trenching. 
3.  All significant trees to be removed and all other trees ten inches DBH or larger to be removed. 
4.  Grade changes or other work adjacent to a significant tree or any other tree ten inches DBH or larger which would affect it adversely, with drawings or descriptions as to how the grade, drainage, and aeration will be maintained around the tree. 
5.  Units of trees that will be required on the lot when it is developed, calculated both (a) without subtracting any building footprint area from the acreage and (b) by subtracting one-third of the lot area as assumed building area. 
C.  Where property has been clear-cut of trees in violation of the Best Management Practices as established by the Georgia Forestry Commission, or in violation of the provisions of this ordinance [chapter], no rezoning or permissive use application shall be made for that property for a minimum of three years. 
(Res. of 7-13-92; Code 1991, § 17.275.070; Ord. of 11-11-99; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.280.080. - Tree requirements for non-single-family residential development. 
The following shall apply to the development of tracts for non-single-family residential uses. 
A.  Upon completion of development, all properties shall have a number of trees equivalent to 15 units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings). 
B.  Existing significant trees or any other trees ten inches DBH or larger that are in excess of the required 15 units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings) but outside the construction area (buildings, accessory uses, parking area) shall not be removed unless adjacent development would cause irreparable damage to the critical root zones. 
C.  Flowering ornamental trees can not be used in density calculations. 
D.  Trees located within the 25 foot non-disturb buffer of a creek or stream shall not count toward the unit requirement. 
E.  Frontage landscape strips shall be provided between any parking lot designed or intended to accommodate five cars or more and any street frontage of the property on which the parking lot is located. Landscaping shall be provided as follows unless the parking area is otherwise screened from the street by a building or other means. The depth of such strips shall be ten feet for commercial and industrial zoned properties, and 20 feet for residentially zoned property. 
1.  Landscape strips shall contain no structures, parking areas, patios, stormwater detention facilities, or any other accessory uses except for retaining walls or earthen berms constructed as part of an overall landscape design, pedestrian-oriented facilities such as sidewalks and bus stops, underground utilities, driveways required to access the property, and signs otherwise permitted by this regulation. 
2.  One tree shall be provided within the landscape strip for every 40 feet of length of street frontage, or portion thereof. Such trees must be of a type that is suitable to local growing conditions and that will normally reach at least 12 inches at diameter breast height upon maturity. 
3.  All portions of a landscape strip shall be planted in trees, shrubs, grass, or ground cover, except for those ground areas that are mulched or covered by permitted structures. 
4.  Upon planting, new trees shall have a caliper of no less than two inches, and may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design. 
5.  Plant materials in the landscape strip are not to extend into the street right-of-way unless specifically allowed by the public works department. 
6.  Where, for any reason, trees cannot be saved or planted within the required planting strips, the depth of the strip shall be extended beyond the minimum indicated to such depth as necessary to accommodate the required number of units. (Uniform extension of the depth is not required.) 
F.  Deciduous shade trees shall be provided within any parking lot designed or intended to accommodate five cars or more, in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
1.  One deciduous shade tree shall be provided within the parking lot for every ten parking spaces, or portion thereof. Each tree shall be located within the parking lot in reasonable proximity to the spaces for which the tree was required. Trees provided to meet the minimum requirements of any landscape strip or buffer may not be counted toward this requirement. 
2.  A landscaping island shall be located at the end of every parking bay between the parking space and an adjacent travel aisle or driveway. The island shall be no less than eight feet wide for at least one-half the length of the adjacent parking space. The island shall be planted in trees. 
3.  Tree planting areas shall be no less than eight feet in width and shall provide at least 100 square feet of planting area per tree. No tree shall be located less than two and one-half feet from the back of curb. 
4.  Landscaping islands and tree planting areas shall be well drained and contain suitable soil and natural irrigation characteristics for the planting materials they contain. 
5.  To facilitate a more efficient and functional parking lot design, the planning department may approve modifications to the above requirements (such as the clustering of landscape islands or expansion of frontage strips) to the above planting requirements, provided the total landscaping area is not reduced. 
G.  Trees between building and street. Where trees must be added to achieve the required 15 units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings), such additions should be made between the street right-of-way and the building tree line (as defined herein) in locations approved by the planning department. 
H.  Parking lot and buffer trees. Trees required by this regulation in relation to parking lot landscaping may be included in calculating the required 15 units per acre. However, trees existing or planted in a buffer required under section 17.260 of this regulation are not to be counted as part of the minimum 15 units per acre requirement. 
I.  On properties on which all of the requirements of this section would exceed the required 15 units per acre, the planning department shall approve of the location and design of the landscape plan. 
(Res. of 7-13-92; Code 1991, § 17.275.080; Ord. of 11-11-99; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.280.090. - Tree requirements for single-family residential development. 
The following shall apply to single-family residential development. 
A.  A tree plan shall accompany all preliminary plat submissions. The tree plan shall indicate the location of all significant trees and existing tree stands, and the limits of clearing proposed to accommodate the construction of roads, utilities and other infrastructure necessary for the development of the subdivision. 
B.  The removal or clearing of trees or other existing vegetation shall be prohibited outside the appropriate clearing boundaries as defined on the approved preliminary plan. 
C.  Lots shall not be cleared and prepared during the construction of the roads, infrastructure, utilities, etc. Where limited clearing is necessary, a note shall be placed on the final plat indicating a tree plan for the lot in its entirety shall be required. 
D.  In order to encourage the preservation of significant trees and the incorporation of these trees into the design of the development, additional density credit will be given for significant trees that are successfully saved. Credit for any significant tree saved will be two (2) times the assigned unit value shown in "Table of Values for Existing Trees." 
E.  Any significant tree that is removed without the appropriate review and approval by the department of planning must be replaced by trees with a total density equal to twice the unit value of the tree removed. 
F.  Preference is given to existing trees that will be maintained on the property. 
G.  Each residential subdivision development shall, upon completion, achieve a tree count equivalent to 15 tree units per acre. It is anticipated that this requirement shall be achieved through the preservation of existing trees on the site. However, where a site is primarily pasture land (90 percent open space or greater) prior to the initiation of the subdivision development, the tree units required shall be calculated using the total acreage from disturbed areas only (i.e. acreage from road and utility construction). 
H.  For subdivision developments in which trees must be planted to achieve the required tree units, the final plat shall include a landscaping plan specifying the method in which the requirement shall be met. Any new trees required shall be planted prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for any dwelling located on a lot which would require a tree unit(s). 
(Res. of 7-13-92; Code 1991, § 17.275.090; Ord. of 11-11-99; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.280.100. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Agricultural activities means (a) good-faith commercial production from the land or on the land of agricultural products, including horticultural, floricultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, and apiary products, but not including forestry products (see "tree farming" herein); and (b) clearing trees for the purpose of planting crops, providing pasture for livestock, or constructing buildings accessory to production of agricultural products. 
Authority for questions of tree characteristics or urban and community forestry shall be referred to the USDA Forest Service, Georgia Forestry Commission, Cooperative Extension Service of the University of Georgia College of Agriculture, American Forest Foundation, The National Arbor Day Foundation or any other authority found acceptable by the county. 
Building tree line means the lines extending from the corners of a building nearest a street to the side lines of the lot (not including a street right-of-way), parallel to the right-of-way line or to the chord of that line. 
Caliper means tree trunk diameter measured at a point six inches above ground level. (See also DBH.) 
Canopy tree is a species of tree that normally reaches a height at maturity in excess of 40 feet and in which the layers of leaves and branches of the tree are so arranged or formed to provide shade. Examples of canopy trees would include scarlet oak, northern red oak, shumark oak, water oak, white oak, yellow poplar, red maple, sugar maple, American elm, winged elm, Chinese elm, trident maple, pin oak, American beech, pecan, southern magnolia, sweetgum, and willow oak. 
Clear cut is the large-scale, indiscriminate removal of trees, shrubs, and undergrowth with the intention of preparing real property for non-agricultural development purposes. 
Critical root zone means the land area circular in shape and centered on the trunk of a tree, the radius of which circle is determined by the farthest extent of the drip line from the trunk. 
DBH (diameter-at-breast-height) means tree trunk diameter (in inches) at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one half feet, then each trunk is measured as a separate tree. (See also Caliper.) 
Development site means that portion of a tract of land that will be dedicated to a proposed development, including that land containing trees that will be counted toward satisfying the requirements of these provisions. Where a development site is smaller than the tract in its entirety, only those trees specified to be within the construction area shall be counted toward meeting the 15 units per acre requirement. 
Drip line means a perimeter formed by the points farthest away from the trunk of a tree where precipitation falling from the branches of that tree lands on the ground. 
Significant tree means a tree in fair or better condition which has been determined to be of a high value by a knowledgeable person because of its species, size, age, or other professional criteria. A tree is considered in fair or better condition if: 
(1)  Its life expectancy is greater than 15 years; 
(2)  It has a relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay or hollow with less than 29 percent radial tip die-back; and 
(3)  It has no major insect or pathological problems. 
Hardwood trees such as oaks and hickories and softwood trees such as pines and cedars whose diameters are 18 inches DBH or more and small hardwoods such as dogwoods, redbuds or sourwoods whose diameters are eight inches DBH or more shall be considered significant trees due to size. A tree of lesser size than the preceding shall be significant if it is a rare or unusual species or is of historical significance or is specifically used by design as a landscape focal point of the project. 
Tree farming means the planting, cultivating, and harvesting of trees in a continuous cycle as a regular practice on a tract of land, not including the removal of trees for purposes of development or the removal of trees without replanting. 
(Res. of 7-13-92; Code 1991, § 17.275.100; Ord. of 11-11-99; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.20.010 et seq.; zoning definitions, ch. 17.20. 
CHAPTER 17.290. - ANIMALS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS[19] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Cross reference— Animals generally, tit. 6; setbacks for buildings or pens housing livestock or other animals, § 17.240.060. 

17.290.010. - Purpose. 
It is the intent of this chapter to permit certain uses in residential districts which involve the keeping of limited numbers of domestic animals or pets where it is recognized that such areas are changing from agricultural to suburban residential in character. This chapter is further intended to minimize problems which may arise from such animal uses and to provide suitable standards for protection of health, safety, welfare and preservation of residential districts from indiscriminate raising of animals. These restrictions apply to districts V-C, R-I, R-II, R-TF, R-MF and PRD and shall be subject to all state and local health codes. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 20; Res. of 11-26-90; Code 1991, § 17.280.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.290.020. - Permitted uses. 
A.  Livestock. Horses, cows, pigs, ponies, donkeys and other domestic livestock may be kept, raised or bred for home use and enjoyment provided that only one such animal shall be permitted for each 15,000 square feet of land area and shall be adequately contained within that property. 
B.  Domestic pets. Cats, dogs, rabbits or other generally recognized domestic pets may be kept or bred by persons residing on the property for their use and enjoyment. 
C.  Fowl. Ducks, quail, chickens, turkeys, squabs, pheasants, etc., may be raised for home use, provided such fowl are adequately contained within that property. 
D.  These permitted use provisions for animals in residential districts are meant to apply only outside of the residence on an individual lot and are not intended to restrict the type or number of animals within a residence. 
E.  Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, buildings or other structures which are located in residential districts and are used to accommodate or restrain animals noted in subsections A and B of this section shall be located no less than 50 feet from all property lines. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 20(A); Res. of 9-7-88; Code 1991, § 17.280.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.290.030. - Prohibited uses. 
A.  The keeping, breeding, or training of any animals or fowl for monetary gain or profit shall be deemed a commercial business and is expressly prohibited in all residential districts except where such operations may qualify as a home occupation. 
B.  Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, the killing, slaughtering and/or butchering of livestock, fowl or other domestic or farm animals, whether for personal consumption or for resale or gift, is expressly prohibited in all residential districts, V-C, R-1, R-11, R-TF, R-MF, PDR, and shall include AR-III and AR-IV districts where the subject parcel is three acres or less and the principal use is residential and not a bona fide "farm" or "agricultural" use as is otherwise defined in Sections 17.20.030, 17.20.440 and/or 17.20.450 of this Code. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 20(B); Code 1991, § 17.280.030; Res. of 9-14-00, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.290.040. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
(Res. of 9-14-00, § 2; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.300. - MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR APARTMENTS[20] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Cross reference— Business licenses and regulations, tit. 5; buildings and construction, tit. 15. 

17.300.010. - Purpose. 
To prevent the construction of undesirable apartment uses in the county, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid the undue concentration of population within certain districts and to insure the adequate protection of the surrounding area, the following minimum standards for apartment development shall apply. These requirements are designed to guide apartment development in districts where they are permitted by inherent right and in districts where they are permitted subject to the approval of the planning commission. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 21; Code 1991, § 17.290.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.300.020. - Design standards and restrictions. 
A.  Apartment construction shall be according to a comprehensive development plan with adequate provisions for access and for adequate protection of the surrounding properties. 
B.  When more than one apartment house is constructed, the buildings shall collectively and individually adhere to the setback requirements of the district in which they are located, plus five feet per story over two stories. 
C.  When more than one apartment house is constructed, external walk areas shall be lighted. 
D.  When more than one apartment house is built, no apartment shall be closer than 20 feet from any other apartment house. 
E.  No apartment shall be constructed at a distance of less than 40 feet from adjoining property lines. 
F.  Off-street parking shall be provided at a rate of 1½ spaces per unit. 
G.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, apartment projects hereafter constructed shall provide on-site open space areas equal to 25 percent of the total land area, excluding parking areas. 
H.  In the event that swimming facilities are designed as a part of the project, these facilities shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four feet high. 
I.  All areas not utilized for building, off-street parking or off-street loading facilities shall be landscaped and maintained in a suitable manner. 
J.  There shall be off-street loading, unloading and service areas provided. These areas shall be screened through landscaping or permanent construction from adjoining areas. 
K.  An apartment shall meet all other requirements of the zoning regulations and the building code as applicable. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 21(A); Code 1991, § 17.290.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.310. - STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOME AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS[21] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of June 17, 2002(2), § 25, amended the title of Ch. 17.310 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Business licenses and regulations, tit. 5; health and safety, tit. 8; public services, tit. 13; mobile homes, § 15.10.110; street construction requirements for subdivisions, ch. 16.70; water and sewer system requirements for subdivisions, ch. 16.80; mobile home park district, ch. 17.200. 

17.310.010. - Manufactured home parks; minimum design standards and restrictions. 
A.  The minimum land area of any manufactured home park shall be five acres. Each space within the park shall have a minimum area of not less than 8,000 square feet if separate individual sewage disposal facilities are located within the bounds of the manufactured home space. In cases where shared or central sewage disposal facilities are utilized, the space size may be reduced to 6,000 square feet. All manufactured home space lot lines and the type of sewage disposal proposed for each space shall be clearly delineated on a site plan prior to approval by the planning commission. 
B.  No manufactured home within the park shall be located closer than 40 feet to adjoining property lines, and the front setback for each manufactured home shall be at least 25 feet from the front lot line. 
C.  Manufactured homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least 25 feet. 
D.  Off-street parking for the park shall be provided at a rate of two parking spaces per each manufactured home lot. 
E.  All manufactured home lots shall abut upon an interior driveway. All interior driveways shall have not less than a 30-foot right-of-way and have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. 
F.  All interior streets within the park shall be graded, based, and paved in accordance with the typical cross section (see table [figure] 17.310.010). If a proposed street is to be greater in length than 300 feet, a plan profile for the road system shall be submitted along with the site plan. The county engineer shall approve all road construction specifications and make a report to the planning commission regarding the finished road at the time the final plat is submitted. 
G.  The park street system shall be adequately maintained and lighted by the owner. The lighting units shall be so spaced and equipped to provide for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicle traffic at night. 
H.  Parks designed to accommodate 25 or more manufactured homes shall provide one or more recreation areas. The size of the recreation area shall be based upon a minimum of 100 square feet for each manufactured home space. Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and should, where topography permits, be centrally located. 
I.  In the event that a swimming pool is developed or planned as a part of the park, this facility shall be enclosed by a chain link, masonry or wood fence not less than four feet high. 
J.  All park grounds shall be maintained with grass, trees, and/or shrubs to enhance the appearance of the park and to prevent soil erosion or the creation of dust during dry weather. 
K.  No individual lot in any park may be sold or control of that lot transferred with the intent or effect of a sale unless that lot and park shall meet all requirements of the county subdivision regulations and the park owner shall hold a valid subdivision recording permit. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 22(A); Res. of 3-26-79; Res. of 12-28-87; Code 1991, § 17.300.010; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 27; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
[FIGURE 17.310.010.] ROAD CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS  MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 
 Road Construction Requirements Manufactured Home Parks 
(Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 27; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.310.020. - Manufactured home parks; service buildings. 
Accessory structures and community service facilities are hereby permitted for the convenience and well-being of park residents. Such structures may include but are not limited to the following uses: 
A.  Park management offices, repair shops, and storage. 
B.  Community sanitary facilities. 
C.  Community laundry facilities. 
D.  Community postal facilities. 
E.  Indoor community recreation areas. 
F.  Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for the use of park residents. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 22(B); Code 1991, § 17.300.020; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 27; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.310.030. - Manufactured home parks; water supply and sewage disposal. 
Every park must have a public, community or private water and sewer system, which shall be approved by the county health department and the local water department when appropriate. Water and sewer approval shall be obtained prior to submission of a site plan to the planning commission. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 22(C); Code 1991, § 17.300.030; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 27; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Sewage collection and disposal, ch. 13.10; construction standards for water and wastewater systems, ch. 13.20. 
17.310.040. - Travel trailer parks; minimum design standards and restrictions. 
A.  The minimum land area of any travel trailer park shall be five acres. Each space within the park shall have a minimum area of not less than 5,000 square feet, and lot lines shall be clearly delineated. 
B.  Lots may be set at an angle, set parallel to the street or varied in other ways provided that the arrangement is approved by the planning commission. 
C.  Each lot within the park shall have a minimum of 25 feet of street frontage and shall have a minimum depth of 100 feet. 
D.  Off-street parking for the park shall be provided at a rate of one parking space per each travel trailer lot. 
E.  All travel trailer lots shall abut upon an interior driveway. All interior driveways shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. 
F.  All interior streets within the park shall be graded, stabilized and covered with a dust-free material which shall be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. 
G.  No permanent structures and no non-motorized vehicles except those falling under the definition of "travel trailer" shall be permitted on any approved lot within the park. 
H.  Parks designed to accommodate 15 or more travel trailers, campers, etc., shall provide one or more recreation areas. The size of the recreation area shall be based on a minimum of 200 square feet for each travel trailer space. No recreation area shall be smaller than 3,000 square feet. 
I.  In the event that a swimming pool is developed or planned as a part of the park, this facility shall be enclosed by a chain link, masonry or wood fence not less than four feet high. 
J.  All park grounds shall be maintained with grass, trees and/or shrubs to enhance the appearance of the park and to prevent soil erosion or the creation of dust during dry weather. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 22(D); Res. of 12-28-87; Code 1991, § 17.300.040; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.310.050. - Travel trailer parks; service buildings. 
Community service facilities and accessory structures are hereby permitted for the convenience of park patrons. Such structures may include but are not limited to the following uses: 
A.  Park management offices. 
B.  Community sanitary facilities. 
C.  Community laundry facilities. 
D.  Indoor community recreation areas. 
E.  Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for the exclusive use of park patrons. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 22(E); Code 1991, § 17.300.050; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.310.060. - Travel trailer parks; water supply and sewage disposal. 
Every park must have a public, community or private water and sewer system, which shall be approved by the county health department and the local water department when appropriate. Water and sewer approval shall be obtained prior to submission of the site plan to the planning commission. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 22(F); Code 1991, § 17.300.060; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Sewage collection and disposal, ch. 13.10; construction standards for water and wastewater systems, ch. 13.20. 
CHAPTER 17.330. - DETERMINATION OF UNCLASSIFIED USES 

 

17.330.010. - Procedure; criteria. 
In the event an applicant wishes to use property for a use which is not specifically identified under inherent uses, conditional uses, or uses permitted subject to the approval of the planning commission, or uses permitted subject to the approval of the county commission, and where such use is not specifically prohibited from the district, the following provisions shall apply: 
A.  The building official shall submit to the planning commission a written request for a determination of the unclassified use. 
B.  The planning commission shall review the request as submitted and determine if the proposed use is of a similar character to the district in which it is proposed. 
C.  If the planning commission determines that the use is of a similar character and meets the intent of the uses permitted inherently within the district, then they shall instruct the building official to issue a permit. 
D.  In the event that the planning commission determines that the proposed use in the district is consistent with the character and intent of the conditional uses, or uses subject to the approval of the planning commission, or uses subject to the approval of the county commission, within the district, then the applicant shall apply for a conditional use or use subject to approval in the normal manner. 
E.  In no event shall the provisions of this chapter be used to allow an incompatible use or a use specifically prohibited by this title within a certain district. 
F.  Once a use has been allowed or disallowed by the planning commission, it shall then be considered classified under the appropriate category in the district. 
(Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.320.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.340. - NONCONFORMING USE[23] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Cross reference— Nonconforming billboards, § 17.270.140. 

17.340.010. - Criteria for continuation of nonconforming use. 
A.  Any structure or use of land existing at the time of enactment or subsequent amendment of the resolution codified in this title, but not in conformity with its use regulations and provisions, may be continued with the following limitations. It shall not be: 
1.  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
2.  Re-established after discontinuance of that use for one year; 
3.  Enlarged beyond its size at the time the use or structure became nonconforming. This includes, but is not limited to, the size of the building, the number of employees, operation during other hours of the day or night, the use of additional land, and additional or more powerful equipment; 
4.  Rebuilt, altered, repaired or replaced after damage exceeding 75 percent of the fair sale value of the structure immediately prior to damage. A nonconforming mobile home may not be replaced after it is removed from the property. 
B.  Any building containing a nonconforming use is considered a principal structure. (See section 17.240.110.) 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 24(A), (B); Res. of 5-28-91; Code 1991, § 17.330.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.340.020. - Continuation of nonconforming use in hardship cases. 
The zoning board of adjustment may grant, with the exception of slow rate land treatment systems ([see definition in] chapter 17.20), which require county commission approval as a use subject to approval of the county commission (chapter 17.380), the change, re-establishment or enlargement of a nonconforming use or the enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement of a nonconforming structure upon the following findings: 
A.  The change, re-establishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement would be no more detrimental to the surrounding area than the existing or previous use. 
B.  The structure cannot economically be modified so as to be suitable for uses permitted in the district. 
C.  The structure would have to be removed to permit development of the property for conforming uses. 
D.  The structure has such value that removal to permit development of conforming uses would cause economic hardship to the owner. 
E.  The proposed change, re-establishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this title. 
F.  The requirements of this title for rezoning would prevent the current zoning from being changed to a classification that would allow the proposed change, re-establishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 24(C); Res. of 5-28-91; Code 1991, § 17.330.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.340.030. - Information required for application to continue nonconforming use. 
Applications submitted to the zoning board of adjustment requesting a change, re-establishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement of a nonconforming use or structure shall include the following information: 
A.  The applicant shall bear the burden of providing conclusive evidence to the zoning board of adjustment that the use or structure is legally nonconforming. This evidence may include, but is not limited to, business licenses, tax receipts, or utility bills. 
B.  The applicant shall submit a plat or an accurate site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions of the lot, size and location of all structures and their distance from all property lines, the names of all streets upon which the property is located, and parking spaces. 
C.  If the request is for a commercial use or structure, a written description shall be submitted to describe the business. This description shall include hours of operation, number of employees, equipment used, products made and/or sold, type of signs, and other information as needed for the board to reach a decision. 
D.  The applicant shall provide evidence to the zoning board of adjustment of how the proposed change, re-establishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement will comply with the current zoning, health and building requirements. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 24(D); Res. of 5-28-91; Code 1991, § 17.330.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.340.040. - Additional conditions placed on continuance of nonconforming use. 
If the requested change, re-establishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement is approved, the zoning board of adjustment may place conditions on the approval to insure protection of the surrounding area. The applicant is responsible for conformance with these conditions. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 24(E); Res. of 5-28-91; Code 1991, § 17.330.040; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.340.050. - Re-establishment of discontinued use. 
In cases where the request is to re-establish a discontinued use, the zoning board of adjustment may not approve the re-establishment of any use which has been discontinued for more than two years. For uses discontinued longer than two years, the county commissioners may approve re-establishment of the use as provided in chapter 17.380. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 24(F); Res. of 5-28-91; Code 1991, § 17.330.050; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.340.060. - Appeals. 
Any decision of the zoning board of adjustment may be appealed to the board of commissioners of the county, in accordance with chapter 2.40. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 24(G); Res. of 5-28-91; Code 1991, § 17.330.060; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.350. - CONDITIONAL USES AND USES SUBJECT TO APPROVAL OF PLANNING COMMISSION OR ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[24] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning board of adjustment, ch. 2.40; planning commission, ch. 2.60. 

17.350.010. - Authority of planning commission and zoning board of adjustment. 
The planning commission or zoning board of adjustment may authorize, under conditions prescribed herein, conditional uses and permitted uses expressly identified in a particular zoning district. However, the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment reserves full authority to deny any request for such a use or to impose conditions authorized on the use as it deems appropriate to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the county and its citizens. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 25(A); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.340.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.350.020. - Review procedure. 
A.  The planning commission or zoning board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing on all applications for conditional uses and permitted uses and consider the merits of the applications. 
B.  After hearing testimony from all interested parties, the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment shall have 30 days to render its decision. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 25(B); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.340.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.350.030. - Notice of public hearing. 
The requirements and procedures for notice of public hearing presented in sections 17.380.070 through 17.380.110 shall be given. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 25(C); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.340.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.350.040. - Submission requirements. 
An application shall be submitted to the planning department at least 30 working days prior to the date of the planning commission meeting or zoning board of adjustment meeting at which the application is to be considered. The completed application shall be accompanied by payment of such fee prescribed in chapter 17.30 hereof to cover administrative and advertising costs. The following items of information shall be supplied by the applicant as set forth in chapter 17.350. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 25(D); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.340.040; Res. of 11-11-98, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.350.050. - Review criteria. 
A conditional use or permitted use may be granted when the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment finds from a preponderance of the evidence produced at the public hearing that the proposed use is suitable for the subject property considering the general lines of inquiry established under section 17.380.060.C. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 25(E); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.340.050; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.350.060. - Burden of proof. 
The applicant for a conditional use or a permitted use shall have the burden of proof, which shall include the presentation of evidence and the burden of persuasion of all questions of fact which are to be determined by the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment as authorized herein. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 25(F); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.340.060; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.350.070. - Conditions of approval. 
The planning commission or zoning board of adjustment may place any reasonable conditions or stipulations upon any approved use as deemed necessary (such as hours of operation, parking, maximum building size, lot size, outside displays, signs, landscape and buffer improvements, screens, etc.) to further insure the orderly operation of the proposed use and its compatibility with the surrounding properties. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 25(G); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.340.070; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.350.080. - Expiration of approval. 
A.  No application approved by the planning commission shall be effective for a period of longer than 12 months unless action is taken by the applicant to implement the use proposed in the application by obtaining the proper permit and/or license, and development plat approval, and proceeding with the building, occupancy or establishment of business within 12 months from the date of approval by the planning commission. For applications approved by the zoning board of adjustment, if no action is taken by the applicant to implement the purpose of the application by obtaining the proper permit and/or license and proceeding with the building occupancy or establishment of a business within six months from the date of approval by the zoning board of adjustment, said approval shall become null and void. 
B.  Extensions may be considered by the planning commission not exceeding 180 days each upon written application without notice or hearing. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 25(H); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.340.080; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.350.090. - Appeals to board of commissioners. 
Any decision of the planning commission or the zoning board of adjustment may be appealed to the board of commissioners of the county in accordance with chapter 17.370 hereof. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 25(I); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.340.090; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.350.100. - Additional parking on other than principal lot. 
A.  If vehicle parking or storage space required under chapter 17.250 cannot be reasonably provided upon the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, the zoning board of adjustment may permit such spaces to be provided on other off-street property. Additional parking on other than the principal lot shall be subject to the conditions set forth below. The applicant shall bear the burden of providing conclusive evidence to the zoning board of adjustment that these conditions have been met. The zoning board of adjustment may modify the conditions listed below to be more restrictive, or place additional conditions, which may also be more restrictive than the conditions listed below, on any approval granted the applicant. If the additional parking on other than the principal lot is approved, the applicant is responsible for the operation of the said parking area in conformance with these conditions. The applicant shall submit a written description of the proposed parking area demonstrating that it will comply with each of the conditions listed below. Additionally, the applicant will submit a site plan showing the dimensions of the parking site and showing the parking spaces with dimensions (including a realistic representation of landscaping and screening when screening is a requirement under the zoning regulations) within the site. The principal use has the responsibility to maintain the required number of parking spaces as required by the zoning regulations. 
B.  Conditions. 
1.  The proposed additional parking area must be within 400 feet of the main entrance to the principal use building. 
2.  The proposed additional parking area must be in a zoning district that would allow the principal use. 
3.  The proposed additional parking area must conform to all dimensional requirements, including road frontage, of the zoning district in which it exists. 
4.  The proposed additional parking area must have frontage on and access to a county-maintained road or be directly abutting the primary use property with internal access to the primary use property. 
5.  The proposed additional parking area must be associated with the principal use and must serve that use exclusively. 
6.  The proposed additional parking area shall not, after approval, be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
7.  The proposed additional parking must conform to the criteria concerning off-street parking set forth in section 17.250.020 of the zoning regulations. 
8.  If the proposed additional parking area is separated from the principal use by a street or road, provisions for pedestrian safety must be provided. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 25(J)(1); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.340.100; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Off-street parking requirements, ch. 17.250. 
17.350.110. - Hardship manufactured homes. 
A.  Hardship manufactured homes shall be subject to the conditions set forth below. The applicant shall bear the burden of providing conclusive evidence to the zoning board of adjustment that these conditions have been met. The zoning board of adjustment may modify the conditions listed below to be more restrictive, or place additional conditions, which may also be more restrictive than the conditions listed below, on any approval granted the applicant. If the hardship mobile home is approved, the applicant is responsible for the operation of said manufactured home in conformance with these conditions. The applicant shall submit a written description of the proposed manufactured home demonstrating that it will comply with each of the conditions listed below. Additionally, the applicant will submit a site plan showing the dimensions of the lot, the location of the proposed manufactured home on the lot and its distance from all property lines. 
B.  Conditions. 
1.  The lot which contains the hardship manufactured home shall be an approved, recorded lot and shall front a publicly maintained road, or it shall be a lot of record as defined in chapter 17.20 of the zoning regulations. 
2.  The proposed manufactured home shall only be occupied by a relative by blood, marriage, or adoption of the owner of the property, or by a legally appointed guardian of the person upon whose condition the hardship is based. 
3.  The proposed hardship manufactured home shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the zoning district in which the manufactured home is to be located. 
4.  A hardship means as follows: 
a.  A medical condition of the applicant which requires proximity of a separate residence to provide necessary medical attendance; 
b.  Partial or total destruction of the principal residence on the tract which makes an alternative residence necessary; 
Written documentation such as a letter on professional stationary and signed by the attending physician in the case of a medical hardship, or verification of the circumstances surrounding the destruction of the principal residence shall be submitted by the applicant. 
5.  Only one hardship manufactured home is permitted on a single tract of land. 
6.  Hardship manufactured homes may be approved only in the zoning districts in which manufactured homes are inherently permitted under zoning regulations. 
7.  The manufactured home shall be removed from the property when the specified hardship ceases to exist. The manufactured home shall not be rented or otherwise occupied once the hardship has ceased to exist. 
8.  A permit for a hardship manufactured home shall be valid for only 12 months. Such permit may be extended an additional 12 months upon application filed in sufficient time for review by the zoning board of adjustment prior to expiration of the permit. A 12-month extension may be granted only two times. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 25(J)(2); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.340.110; Res. of 6-17-02(2), § 28; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Mobile homes, § 15.10.110. 
17.350.120. - Caretaker or employee residences. 
A.  Caretaker and/or employee residences shall be subject to the conditions set forth below. The applicant shall bear the burden of providing conclusive evidence to the zoning board of adjustment that these conditions have been met. The zoning board of adjustment may modify the conditions listed below to be more restrictive or place additional conditions, which may also be more restrictive than the conditions listed below, on any approval granted the applicant. If the caretaker and/or employee residence is approved, the applicant is responsible for the operation of said residence in conformance with these conditions. The applicant shall submit a written description of the proposed residence demonstrating that it will comply with each of the conditions listed below. Additionally, the applicant will submit a site plan showing the dimensions of the lot, the proposed location of the residence and its distance from all property lines. 
B.  Conditions. 
1.  The lot which contains the caretaker and/or employee residence shall be an approved, recorded lot and shall front a publicly maintained road or it shall be a lot of record as defined in chapter 17.20 of the zoning regulations. 
2.  The proposed residence shall only be occupied by a bona fide caretaker, employee or the owner himself. 
3.  The proposed residence shall meet all setback requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. 
4.  The proposed residence shall be permitted only if the residence is necessary to the property's orderly operation or safety. 
5.  Only one caretaker and/or employee residence is permitted on a piece of property at a time, except that in the AR-III and AR-IV zoning districts one caretaker and/or employee residence may be permitted for each five acres. 
6.  The proposed residence shall only be of a type inherently permitted in the zoning district in which it is to be located, unless otherwise specified by the zoning regulations. 
7.  If the proposed residence is for security purposes, this must be documented by evidence of police records or sheriff's reports of previous incidents. 
8.  If the proposed residence is for caretaker purposes, the need, purpose and duties of the caretaker must be documented in writing. 
9.  If the proposed residence is for employee purposes, the need, purpose and duties of the employee must be documented in writing. 
10.  The applicant for a caretaker/employee residence must demonstrate in writing how his circumstances are unique and different from those of other similar uses in the area to warrant approval of his application. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 25(J)(3); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.340.120; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Business regulations, tit. 5. 
17.350.130. - Residential businesses. 
A.  Residential businesses are designed to be less restrictive than a home occupation but more restrictive than a rural business in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number of employees and types of business. Residential businesses shall be subject to the conditions set forth below. The applicant shall bear the burden of providing conclusive evidence to the planning commission that these conditions have been met. The planning commission may modify the conditions listed below to be more restrictive or place additional conditions, which may also be more restrictive than the conditions listed below, on any approval granted the applicant. If the residential business is approved, the applicant is responsible for the operation of the said residential business in conformance with these conditions. The applicant shall submit a written description of the proposed business demonstrating that the proposed business will comply with each of the conditions listed below. Additionally, the applicant will submit a floor plan showing the dimensions of the residence and showing the area with dimensions to be involved in the business. 
B.  Conditions. 
1.  Residential businesses may include but are not limited to beauty shops, barber shops, professional offices and minor repair services. In R-I, the use is restricted to those uses where no customers/clients are coming to the site. 
2.  Residential businesses shall not include the repair and/or maintenance of motor vehicles, large scale manufacturing or any use which will create noise, noxious odors or any hazard that may endanger the health, safety or welfare of the neighborhood. 
3.  The residential business shall not involve group instruction or group assembly of people on the premises. 
4.  The occupation or profession must be conducted entirely within the dwelling. 
5.  The dwelling must be the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner and the residential business shall be valid only as long as the original principal practitioner resides in the dwelling, is conducting the business and has a current business license. 
6.  Residential businesses shall be limited to no more than 35 percent of the total heated floor area of the residence. The proposed size of the residential business shall be specified at the time of application. 
7.  Any additions or alterations to the residence which will be used for the residential business must be of an architectural style in keeping with the surrounding residential and agricultural development. 
8.  The portion of the residence in which the business is conducted shall be completely enclosed in a manner that the business is not visible from the surrounding property. 
9.  Only one employee in excess of family members residing on the premises shall be permitted. For uses where no customers/clients are coming to the site, the number of employees permitted at any one time may be increased to three. 
10.  Property on which the residential business is proposed must have frontage on a public road. 
11.  Parking for customers/clients must be provided on site as provided in chapter 17.300 [17.250]; location of the parking is to be approved by the planning commission. 
12.  Only one non-illuminated sign not to exceed one square foot is permitted; the location is to be approved by the planning commission. No sign is permitted in the R-I zone. 
13.  No outside storage or display shall be allowed. 
14.  Days and hours of operation allowing access by the public, employees, customers or clients shall be Monday through Saturday, daylight hours only. No access by the public, customers or clients is permitted in the R-I district. 
15.  No more than one home occupation, residential business or rural business is allowed in a residence at one time. 
16.  The principal practitioner will be permitted to park one commercial vehicle in the approved parking area. The commercial vehicle is limited to a passenger car, a van or a light truck (up to one ton). 
17.  Any utility trailer needed for the orderly operation of the business must be specifically requested and approved by the planning commission. The request must include the proposed use and size of the trailer. 
18.  The planning commission may place any reasonable conditions on the application deemed necessary to insure the orderly operation of the proposed business and its compatibility with the surrounding properties. 
19.  Pickups from and deliveries to the site in regard to the business shall be restricted to vehicles having no more than two axles and shall be restricted to no more than two pickups or deliveries per day. The pickups and deliveries are restricted to daylight hours only. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 25(K)(2); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 6-24-91; Res. of 9-28-92; Res. of 10-27-94; Code 1991, § 17.340.140; Res. of 4-11-96, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Business regulations, tit. 5. 
17.350.140. - Rural businesses. 
A.  [ Generally. ] Rural businesses are designed to be less restrictive than a residential business in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number of employees and types of business. Rural businesses shall be subject to the conditions set forth below. The applicant shall bear the burden of providing conclusive evidence to the planning commission that these conditions have been met. The planning commission may modify the conditions listed below to be more restrictive or place additional conditions, which may also be more restrictive than the conditions listed below, on any approval granted the applicant. 
B.  [ Compliance. ] If the rural business is approved, the applicant is responsible for the operation of the said rural business in conformance with these conditions. The applicant shall submit a written description of the proposed business demonstrating that the proposed business will comply with each of the conditions listed below. Additionally, the applicant will submit a site plan/floor plan showing the area to be involved in the business. 
C.  Intent. A rural business shall be a small office or small-scale retail sales or service-type business which shall be secondary or incidental to the primary use of property for agricultural or residential purposes. Such business shall be primarily directed toward providing local or neighborhood services to rural-residential areas. Rural businesses are intended to be of a smaller size, intensity and scale than commercial uses which would be more commonly found in commercial or business zoning districts. Rural businesses shall be similar to other home businesses except that the activity can occur in an accessory structure detached from the principal residence or in a screened area outside of the dwelling. In addition, an applicant for a rural business must have established residency and be living in a residence upon the subject property prior to any application being filed for consideration by the planning commission. 
D.  Uses permitted. 
1.  Offices; 
2.  Beauty shops, barber shops; 
3.  Retail sales or services of a specialty nature, antique shops, specialty foods, custom furniture, custom-made sporting goods, and meat cutting as a retail service to the public, provided, however, that no slaughtering or wholesale meat cutting or processing is permitted; 
4.  Small repair shops for appliances, machinery, farm equipment or automobiles with the following limitations: 
a.  Repair shops shall not create noise, noxious odors or any hazard which would adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of the adjoining property owners or the neighborhood in general; 
b.  Repair shops shall operate during daylight hours only; 
c.  No more than two vehicles shall actually be serviced, actively worked on or repaired at any one time. Any pieces of machinery, equipment or vehicles stored for service or awaiting pickup after servicing shall be parked within an area reserved for that purpose (maximum 1,000 square feet) and so designated at the time of approval by the planning commission. The storage area must be located to the side or rear of the shop building. Unless specifically modified by the planning commission, that area shall be enclosed by a minimum six-foot-high slatted chain-link fence that provides a complete screening of the storage area. Such modification may be granted by the county planning commission when the requested modification does not contravene the intent of these regulations. All pieces of machinery, equipment or vehicles awaiting service or pickup shall be tagged showing the date of service and the name and address of the owner of the vehicle; 
d.  All spare parts (new or used) shall be stored within a structure, and the storage space shall be included in the total space allocated for the rural business; 
e.  The shop and storage area shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any property line, unless this requirement is specifically modified by the planning commission. This modification must be granted based on a hardship as determined under the criteria listed in section 2.40.040.A. 
E.  Uses prohibited. 
1.  Retail sales of gasoline, service stations, car washes; 
2.  Truck terminals, heavy equipment rental; 
3.  Industrial or manufacturing uses which require specialized equipment not ordinarily associated with agricultural and residential uses, i.e., forges, large milling machinery, or poultry or meat processing and packing equipment (except as provided above); 
4.  Drive-in theaters, restaurants, entertainment facilities, skating rinks, or any use which, as a result of its normal operation, would generate large amounts of vehicular traffic; 
5.  Any use which clearly is out of scale or character with an agricultural or residential area. 
F.  Conditions. 
1.  The dwelling must be the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner and the rural business shall be valid only as long as the original principal practitioner resides in the dwelling, is conducting the business and has a current business license. 
2.  Rural businesses shall be limited to no more than 1,000 square feet if in a structure, and 1,000 square feet of land if outside a structure. Should the use require both inside and outside area, the total area used cannot exceed 1,000 square feet. If the rural business is to be in the residence, no more than 45 percent of the heated floor space or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less, may be used for the business. The proposed size of the business shall be specified at the time of application. 
3.  Any additions or alterations to the residence which will be used for the rural business must be of an architectural style in keeping with the surrounding residential and agricultural development. Any structure built to house the business must be located to the side or rear of the residence, or, if the structure would be in front of the residence, it must be at least 100 feet from the front property line in addition to meeting the applicable side and rear setbacks. The structure must be readily and easily usable for customary agricultural and residential uses. 
4.  Any outside area other than parking area in which the business is conducted shall be completely enclosed in a manner that the business is not visible from the surrounding property as set forth in chapter 17.260, Screening, Fencing and Outdoor Storage Requirements. 
5.  Only one employee in excess of family members residing on the premises shall be permitted. 
6.  Property on which the rural business is proposed must have frontage on a public road. 
7.  Parking for customers/clients must be provided on-site as provided in chapter 17.300 [17.250]; location of the parking is to be approved by the planning commission. 
8.  Only one non-illuminated sign not to exceed 16 square feet is permitted; the location is to be approved by the planning commission. Said location must be at least 15 feet from all property lines. 
9.  Days and hours of operation requiring access by the public, customers and/or clients shall be Monday through Saturday, daylight hours only. 
10.  No more than one home occupation, residential business or rural business is allowed in a residence at one time. 
11.  Rural businesses shall be located on property containing at least three acres of land. 
12.  No equipment which would not ordinarily be found in agricultural or residential use may be used in the rural business. 
13.  The planning commission may place any reasonable conditions on the application deemed necessary to insure the orderly operation of the proposed business and its compatibility with the surrounding properties. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 25(K)(3); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 12-19-90; Res. of 6-24-91; Res. of 11-11-91; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.340.150; Res. of 4-11-96, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Business regulations, tit. 5. 
17.350.150. - Subdivision amenities. 
A.  Subdivision amenities will be subject to the conditions set forth below. The applicant will bear the burden of providing conclusive evidence that these conditions have been met. The planning commission may modify the conditions listed below to be more restrictive or place additional conditions that may also be more restrictive than the conditions listed below. 
B.  If the subdivision amenities are approved, the applicant is responsible for the operation of the said amenities in conformance with these conditions. The applicant will submit a description of the proposed amenities demonstrating that they will comply with each condition listed below. Additionally, the applicant will submit a site plan showing the dimensions of the amenity site, and showing the proposed uses with dimensions (including a realistic representation of proposed landscaping and screening) within the site. 
C.  Conditions. 
1.  Subdivision amenities will be for the exclusive benefit of and under the control of a homeowners' association whose membership includes and is limited to all lot owners of the subdivision in which the amenity site is to be located. 
2.  If the parcel(s) designated for the amenity site does not conform to the minimum dimensional area requirements of the zoning district in which it exists, it will be noted on the plans submitted for approval and designated on the recorded plat as a non-buildable lot except as approved for the amenities. 
3.  No improvements (excluding parking lots) will be located closer than 50 feet from a lot line, except that the planning commission may allow the setback on improvements to be reduced to 20 feet when an adequate buffer is provided along the property line. Said buffer shall be a brick or stone wall or a solid wooden fence meeting the requirements of chapter 17.260. 
(a)  The planning commission may permit the substitution of a vegetated buffer to comply with the general buffer requirements of chapter 17.260. A site plan describing the details of the proposed buffer shall be submitted with the application. 
(b)  All buffers located near the intersection of two roads or the intersection of the amenity site driveway and a public street shall comply with the vision clearance requirements of chapter 17.260. 
(c)  Under no circumstances may improvements (excluding parking lots) be located closer than 50 feet from a lot line when that lot line is adjacent to an arterial or collector road. 
4.  Parking lots shall be located no closer than 50 feet from a lot line, except that the planning commission may allow the setback to be reduced to a minimum of ten feet when an adequate buffer is provided along the property line. The buffer is to be constructed within the setback area. 
(a)  When the parking is adjacent to a road, the buffer shall consist of earthen berms or vegetation to a minimum height of three feet. The berms will be designed [so] as not to cause draining or erosion problems. 
(b)  When the parking is adjacent to a building lot, it shall be screened by a wall or fence as provided in chapter 17.260. The planning commission may allow the substitution of a vegetated buffer as described in chapter 17.260. 
5.  Facility lighting shall be of the type that prevents direct view of the light source from adjacent residences. 
6.  Off-street parking in accordance with chapter 17.250 shall be provided sufficiently to accommodate projected normal usage during peak outdoor recreation seasons. 
7.  If the parcel does not conform to the minimal requirements of the county health department for a building lot, it shall be noted on the plans submitted for approval. 
8.  The completed covenants for the subdivision and the documents establishing the property owners association shall be submitted for review. These documents shall include a provision that would assure maintenance of the amenity package through adequate assessment of the subdivision property and would provide for establishing a lien against any property failing to pay said assessment. These documents shall be recorded simultaneously with the final plat and/or prior to the sale of any lots within the subdivision. 
D.  The planning commission shall hear request for variances as provided for in the above conditions at a public meeting. 
E.  The planning commission shall serve as a board of appeals regarding planning staff decisions and interpretations regarding amenity sites. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 25(K)(4); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 11-11-91; Res. of 9-28-92; Res. of 4-21-93; Code 1991, § 17.340.160; Res. of 3-27-97, § 2; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, tit. 16. 
17.350.160. - Utility substations. 
A.  Substations for electrical transformers, gas regulators and telephone subscriber carrier sites [may be permitted] provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  Exterior lighting shall be of the type which prevents direct view of the light source from adjacent residences. 
2.  The substation shall be screened in a manner to hide it from view from the adjacent property. The screening material shall be a vegetative buffer as provided for in section 17.260.020 or a masonry wall (brick or finished block). 
3.  The equipment contained on the site shall be enclosed by a locked security fence of a minimum height of six feet. A masonry wall used for screening may also serve as the security fence. 
[B.  Reserved.] 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 25(K)(5); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 4-26-91; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.340.170; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Public services, tit. 13. 
17.350.170. - Temporary sales offices. 
A.  Temporary sales offices shall be subject to the conditions set forth below. The applicant shall bear the burden of providing conclusive evidence that these conditions have been met. The planning commission to [may] modify the conditions listed below to be more restrictive or place additional conditions which may also be more restrictive than the conditions listed below on any approval granted the applicant. If the temporary sales office is approved, the applicant is responsible for the operation of the said sales office in conformance with these conditions. The applicant shall submit a written description of the proposed office demonstrating that it will comply with each of the conditions listed below. Additionally, the applicant will submit a site plan showing the dimensions of the lot and showing the proposed sales office with dimensions (including a realistic representation of any proposed landscaping and screening) and its location within the site. 
B.  Conditions. 
1.  The lot which contains the temporary sales office shall be an approved, recorded lot within an approved, recorded subdivision and shall front a publicly maintained road. 
2.  The temporary sales office is restricted in use to the sale of approved lots within the boundaries of that subdivision in which the office is located. The office may not be used for any other use other than a sales office. The storage of construction materials or equipment is prohibited. 
3.  The temporary sales office shall be housed in a structure that meets the following conditions: 
a.  The structure will either be a site-built structure or a DCA-approved commercial unit and will meet all local building codes and health regulations for a sales office. 
b.  DCA units will be underpinned. The curtain will be unpierced except for required ventilation and access and constructed of either masonry or a simulated rock or brick material manufactured for such purpose. It will be installed so that it encloses the area located under the house to the ground level. Such wall will be required to meet the standards specified in ANSI A225.1 or county building codes, whichever is the greater requirement. 
c.  For DCA units, the tongue, axles, transporting lights, and towing apparatus will be completely hidden by the underpinning or removed after placement on the lot and before occupancy. Bolted-on tongues will be removed. 
d.  A porch or landing at least three feet square and in compliance with county building codes is provided at each exit door. 
e.  In R-I and PRD zoning districts, the roof will be finished with a material that is residential in appearance, including but not limited to wood, asphalt composition, or fiberglass shingles, but excluding corrugated aluminum, corrugated fiberglass, or metal. 
f.  In R-I and PRD zoning districts, the exterior siding cannot have a high-gloss finish and must be residential in appearance, including but not limited to clapboards, simulated clapboards such as conventional vinyl or metal siding, wood shingles, shakes, or similar material, but excluding smooth, ribbed or corrugated metal or plastic paneled. 
4.  The temporary sales office shall only be located on a specific lot within the subdivision. The staff may approve alternate locations on specified lots provided those lots meet the requirements of this regulation. Only one sales office may be located within a subdivision at a time. 
5.  One small, unattended kiosk not to exceed 144 square feet may be permitted in addition to the sales office on a specified lot. The staff may approve alternate locations on specified lots provided that no more than one kiosk is located within the subdivision at a time. The kiosk is restricted in use to containing sales information (maps, brochures, etc.) for the convenience of the purchaser and shall not have facilities which would allow it to be used as a sales office. The information provided in the kiosk is restricted to information concerning only the subdivision in which the kiosk is located. 
6.  Exterior lighting shall be of the type which prevents direct view of the light source from adjacent residences. 
7.  Off-street parking in accordance with chapter 17.250 shall be provided sufficient to accommodate projected normal usage. The location of said parking shall be approved by the staff. 
8.  The temporary sales office shall be allowed to remain within the subdivision only until 75 percent of the recorded lots are developed with homes. The planning commission may approve an extension of the time limit up to the time that 90 percent of the lots are developed with homes. 
9.  The area around the structure will be landscaped to create an attractive appearance. The landscaping plan will be submitted to the staff for approval. 
C.  The planning commission shall hear requests for variances as provided for in the above conditions at a public hearing. The applicant will bear the cost of advertising the request. 
D.  The planning commission shall serve as a board of appeals regarding planning staff decisions and interpretations regarding sales office sites. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 25(K)(6); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 7-13-92; Res. of 9-28-92; Code 1991, § 17.340.180; Res. of 3-27-97, § 2; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, tit. 16. 
CHAPTER 17.360. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[25] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Cross reference— Administration generally, tit. 2; site plan review for development in CD district, § 17.230.140 et seq. 

17.360.010. - Building permit application procedure. 
A.  The method of enforcing this title and the procedure to be followed in making application to the building official for building permits shall be as follows: 
1.  Before any building, structure or part thereof shall be constructed, erected, enlarged, altered, repaired, changed, converted, moved or demolished, application for a building permit shall be made to the building official (except that, in districts AR-III and AR-IV, prefabricated or partially prefabricated utility buildings not exceeding 144 square feet may be erected without a permit provided said building adheres to the required property line setbacks). When an application for a building permit is made, the applicant shall be required to show that the proposed structure will meet the requirements of the county zoning regulations. The applicant shall present a site plan showing the property lines of the lot, the size and location of all existing and proposed structures and the distance of those structures from the closest property line. Said site plan may be drawn by the applicant. However, in situations when a clear determination that the structure meets the requirements of the county zoning regulations cannot be made, the county building official may require that the site plan be drawn by a registered engineer, architect, land surveyor or landscape architect. Additionally, the applicant shall provide a clear location of the property lines relative to the footings or structure prior to any inspection of said footings or structure. 
2.  Before any land may be used for a conditional use exception which is permitted in this title, application shall be made to the zoning board of adjustment or planning commission, whichever is appropriate, and that application shall show: 
a.  The actual dimensions of the lot built upon or to be built upon; 
b.  The size and location of the building or buildings to be constructed; 
c.  The size and location of any proposed extension; 
d.  The names of all streets upon which the property is located; 
e.  The zoning districts in which the property is located; 
f.  Such other information as may be necessary to provide for enforcement of this title or upon which to base an inspection prior to passing on the application as required by the building official or planning director. 
3.  When granting conditional uses, the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment shall instruct the building official to issue a permit. 
4.  If the application and the accompanying papers do not comply in all respects with the regulations of this title and the Standard Building Code, it shall be disapproved by the building official and the applicant notified in writing. The building official may, at his discretion, before disapproving any application, return such application to the applicant, who may amend the said application, plans or specifications in order to make the proposal comply with the regulations of this title. In such event the building official shall proceed to pass upon the application as if it were an original one. 
5.  If the application filed, together with the plans and specifications, conforms in all respects with the requirements of this title, the building official shall within a reasonable time issue the permit applied for. 
6.  If an application is disapproved, the applicant shall be notified in writing with the reason for the disapproval. 
7.  Whenever a permit is granted under the provisions of this title, it shall be exercised by the grantee therein named within six months from the date of its issuance, and if not exercised by the grantee within that time the privilege and all rights granted shall become null and void and of no effect. 
8.  The zoning board of adjustment may grant extensions to subdivision 7 of this subsection, if the grantee explains just cause for the delay to the satisfaction of the board. 
[B.  Reserved.] 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 26(A); Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 4-27-90; Res. of 8-26-91; Code 1991, § 17.350.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
Cross reference— Buildings and construction, tit. 15. 
17.360.020. - Appeals. 
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the building official or planning director may appeal said decision to the county zoning board of adjustment. A written notice of appeal shall be submitted to the enforcing officer directly involved within 30 days from the officer's decision. Costs of the appeal shall be established by the board at their discretion and may be changed from time to time as necessary. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 26(B); Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.350.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.370. - APPEALS[26] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Cross reference— Powers and duties of zoning board of adjustment, § 2.40.040; powers and duties of planning commission, § 2.60.030; appeal of decision on site plan for development in CD overlay district, § 17.230.160. 

17.370.010. - Right to appeal. 
A.  In the event of a denial of a proposed amendment, any conditional use or use subject to the approval of the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment or any other zoning decision, the applicant shall have the right to have an appeal of the decision before the board of commissioners of the county. 
B.  In the event of a grant of a proposed amendment, industrial use, variance, any conditional use or use subject to the approval of the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment or any other zoning decision, any affected person shall have the right to have an appeal of the decision before the board of commissioners of the county. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 29(A)(1); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.360.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.370.020. - Notice of appeal. 
In order to have an appeal, the appellant must submit a written notice of appeal within five working days of the decision to the planning commission office. The appellant must submit justification and reasons for the appeal. Such justification should make specific reference to such relevant criteria as listed in section 17.380.060.C. The appeal fee set forth in chapter 17.30 shall be paid at the time of filing said written notice of appeal. The planning director, upon receipt of the written notice of appeal and fee, shall notify the county administrator of the appeal and submit the notice and record of the application to the county administrator. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 29(A)(2); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 12-19-90; Code 1991, § 17.360.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.370.030. - De novo appeal. 
The appeal shall be de novo with the applicant having the right to submit any relevant evidence that the applicant desires. However, the evidence submitted to the lower administrative board shall be part of the record and resubmitted to the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 29(A)(3); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.360.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.370.040. - Required public notice. 
The required public notice set forth in sections 17.380.070 through 17.380.110 [shall be given]. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 29(A)(5); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.360.040; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.370.050. - Date of public hearing before board of commissioners. 
The county administrator shall place an appeal on the agenda of the first public meeting of the board of commissioners of the county arising after the relevant notice provisions of sections 17.380.070 through 17.380.110 have been complied with. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 29(A)(5); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.360.050; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.370.060. - Payment of costs of appeal; decision by board of commissioners. 
The appellant shall bear the costs of preparing the necessary documents as required by the county to properly appeal the matter before the board of commissioners, in addition to the appeal fee. The board of commissioners shall decide such appeals all in accordance with the provisions of section 17.380.130. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 29(A)(6); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.360.060; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.370.070. - Denial of appeal. 
If an appeal of a conditional use, a use permitted subject to approval of the planning commission or an application requiring approval by the zoning board of adjustment is denied by the board of commissioners, then the same property may not again be considered for any zoning application and no application shall be filed until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the denial of the appeal and may not be considered for an application of the same type and no application shall be filed (conditional use, etc.) until the expiration of at least 12 months immediately following the denial of the appeal. 
(Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 5-22-89; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.360.070; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.380. - AMENDMENTS 

 

17.380.010. - General procedures. 
All applications, requests and petitions for permits, certificates of zoning compliance, variances, conditional uses, planned developments, classifications and reclassifications of property, notices of appeal, amendments to this resolution [title] and other similar matters, together with all supporting documents required for such application, request or petition and fees therefor, shall be filed with the planning department in the appropriate form as specified herein. All data, drawings, narratives and other supporting documentation required herein must be provided for in an application to be officially received for staff review and scheduling of consideration by the planning commission in accordance with the scheduling provisions established herein. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 30(A)(1); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.370.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.380.020. - Minimum tract size and frontage for zoning change. 
Except in an application for rezoning to a nonresidential zoning district or as otherwise noted in section 17.180.030 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, no tract of land shall be considered for rezoning which has an area less than one acre unless such tract abuts a nonresidential zoning district within county or municipal jurisdiction. Application for rezoning may also be considered when a lot of record meets the minimum area and road frontage required by the zoning district in which the rezoning is sought. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 30(A)(2); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 11-10-94; Code 1991, § 17.370.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 12-14-06(6), § 1) 
Cross reference— Minimum tract size and frontage for planned development district, § 17.180.030. 
17.380.030. - Initiation of proposed amendments. 
These zoning regulations of the county, including the official zoning map, may be amended from time to time by the board of commissioners of the county. Amendments to the zoning regulations, including the official zoning map, may be proposed by the board of commissioners of the county, or the county planning commission, or by any individual, firm or organization or their duly appointed agent or attorney; provided, however, no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or have first been submitted to the county planning commission for review and recommendation. Application for uses subject to the approval of the county commission shall have first been submitted to the county planning commission for review and recommendation before consideration by the county commission. 
(Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.370.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.380.040. - Filing of proposed amendments. 
All proposed amendments, whether an amendment to the text or modification in the district boundaries on the official zoning map, and uses subject to approval of the county commission, shall be submitted to the planning department office of Hall County at least 30 working days in advance of the next regular meeting of the planning commission. The planning director shall arrange a suitable date for a hearing before the planning commission. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 30(B)(2); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.370.040; Res. of 3-27-97, § 1; Res. of 11-11-98, § 2; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.380.050. - Submission requirements. 
A.  Any person or persons requesting a change in the official zoning map or use subject to approval of the county commission shall file an application with a plat or map of the property attached thereto, together with payment of such fees set forth in chapter 17.30 to cover administrative and advertising costs, in the planning department office. Such person or persons or their authorized agent shall appear in person at the public hearing held to consider the district change. 
B.  All applications for a change of zoning classification or use subject to approval of the county commission shall include: 
1.  A narrative statement identifying the existing and proposed use of the property and addressing each of the criteria set forth in section 17.380.060.C of this section [chapter]. 
2.  A site plan drawn to scale designating the area covered by the application and identifying existing and proposed buildings and uses, adjacent existing land uses, zoning on contiguous parcels, including those across an abutting public right-of-way, and any other significant site improvements proposed to accommodate the proposed use or buffer adjacent uses, etc., or a plat of the subject property where no specific land use is proposed. In cases where only a plat or map is provided and no land use is proposed, the planning commission and county commission shall evaluate the application based on the most intense possible land use permitted in the proposed district. 
3.  For any application for a slow rate land treatment system (see chapter 17.20), the following additional requirements apply. 
Prior to consideration by the county planning commission for their recommendation to the county commission, the county engineering department shall have completed a review of the proposal for site acceptability relative to topography, soil classifications, public or private access, proposed effluent treatment levels and natural, undisturbed buffer zones for surface waters, floodplains, wetlands, wells, residential and other protected areas in addition to other criteria deemed appropriate by the planning commission or county commission. The following information shall be submitted to the county engineer for review of a zoning application and subsequent submittal of a report to the planning commission for consideration of the zoning of any land for a wastewater land application system. 
a.  The design development report submitted to the environmental protection division certified by a professional engineer experienced in the design of land application systems and registered to practice in the State of Georgia. 
b.  A plan for the disposal of excess biological solids. 
c.  Certification from a professional geologist, registered to practice in the State of Georgia, certifying that the land application site is not located within two miles of a significant groundwater recharge area as defined by the environmental protection division. 
d.  A detailed history of all the owner's previous activities, within the State of Georgia in the field of land application, including every other facility it has operated and including a detailed account of all past violations of federal, state, or county laws or regulations, and all past and pending litigation, favorable or unfavorable. 
4.  For any application proposing the development of 100 or more residential dwelling units, a traffic impact study shall be submitted prior to consideration of the application by the planning commission. At the applicant's expense, the traffic impact study shall be prepared by a professional engineer in accordance with requirements established by the Hall County Engineering Department. The engineering department shall review the traffic impact study and forward any comments to the Hall County Planning Commission. 
(Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 4-26-91; Code 1991, § 17.370.050; Res. of 11-11-98, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.380.060. - Planning commission and Hall County Commission consideration and decision. 
A.  1.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on all zoning applications or applications for a use subject to approval of the county commission after appropriate public notice has been given as provided herein to consider and decide the merits of each application. 
2.  The planning commission shall hold the required public hearing not less than 16 days nor more than 60 days from the date of the filing of the zoning application. 
B.  After hearing testimony from all interested parties, the planning commission shall have 30 days within which to make its decision to grant or deny the application. If the planning commission fails to make a decision within the specified period, it shall be deemed to have denied the application. 
C.  The planning commission shall study the need and justification for the change based on a determination of the facts applicable to the particular case, and the following general lines of inquiry shall be considered, to wit: 
1.  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use, development and zoning of adjacent and nearby property. 
2.  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
3.  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned. 
4.  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools, police protection, fire protection, public health facilities or emergency medical service. 
5.  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the future land use plan for the physical development of the area. 
6.  The extent to which property values are diminished by the existing zoning restrictions. 
7.  The extent to which the destruction of the subject property's value under the existing zoning promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public. 
8.  The relative gain to the public as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner. 
9.  The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property. 
10.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use or development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
11.  Whether the change would create an isolated district unrelated to the surrounding districts, such as "spot zoning." 
12.  Whether the present zoning district boundaries are illogically drawn in relation to existing conditions in the area. 
13.  Whether the change requested is out of scale with the needs of the county as a whole or the immediate neighborhood. 
14.  Whether it is impossible to find adequate sites for the proposed use in districts permitting such use and already appropriately zoned. 
15.  Whether the need for rezoning could be handled instead by a variance request to the zoning board of adjustment. 
16.  Whether there would be an ecological or pollution impact resulting from major modifications to the land if the request is granted. 
17.  Whether there is reasonable evidence based upon existing and anticipated land use that would indicate a mistake was made in the original zoning of the property. 
When the application is for site-built houses, modular homes and mobile homes more than seven years old being moved into Hall County for the purpose of permanent or temporary occupancy, in addition to the 17 items listed above, the planning commission shall also consider the compatibility of the proposed residential unit with the existing housing in the area surrounding the proposed location of that residence in terms of the type of housing, the style of housing, the age of housing and the condition of housing. 
D.  When the application is for pre-owned site built houses, industrialized homes or manufactured homes to be moved into Hall County for the purpose of permanent or temporary occupancy, in addition to the 17 items listed in section 17.380.060 C. above, the planning commission shall consider the compatibility of the proposed residential unit with the existing housing in the area surrounding the proposed location of that residence in terms of the type of housing, the style of housing, and the condition of such housing. Such residential unit shall meet the minimal standards of all applicable building and construction codes adopted as a part of the Official Code of Hall County. The planning commission shall first consider an application for such dwelling unit and make its recommendations to the Hall County Commission. The Hall County Commission, in making its decision, may approve the application, deny the application, or approve the application with conditions. 
E.  Any manufactured home proposed to be moved into the County into a registered and/or approved mobile home park within Hall County, or a manufactured home proposed to be moved into the County for the purpose of upgrading an approved, permitted existing manufactured home, shall be exempt from the provisions of review by the planning commission or county commission noted in paragraph D. of section 17.380.060. All applicable review and inspection required by chapter 15 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, shall remain in effect for any and all manufactured homes to be moved into the county which shall include a site inspection by the Hall County Building Inspection Department. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 30(B)(4); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 2-10-92; Code 1991, § 17.370.060; Res. of 6-17-02(2), §§ 29, 30; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 9-9-10(3), §§ 1, 2) 
17.380.070. - Public hearing required; notice required. 
The county planning commission, the county board of adjustment and the county board of commissioners, when taking action on all applications, shall provide for public hearings on the proposed actions. A notice of the public hearings shall be published at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to said public hearings in a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the county. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 30(B)(5); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.370.070; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.380.080. - Public notice of hearing; contents. 
The published notice shall state: 
A.  The time, place and purpose of the hearing; and 
B.  If an amendment to the text of these zoning regulations is under consideration, then the public notice shall, in addition to the requirements of sections 17.380.070 and 17.380.080.A, include a description of: 
1.  The proposed amendment; and 
2.  The intent of the proposed change; or 
C.  If an application is being considered for the sole purpose of zoning a specifically described tract or parcel of land (amendment to the zoning map) then the public notice shall, in addition to the requirements of sections 17.380.070 and 17.380.080.A, include the following information: 
1.  The location of the property; and 
2.  The present zoning classification; and 
3.  The proposed zoning classification of the property. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 30(B)(6); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.370.080; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.380.090. - Public notice of hearing; posting. 
All zoning map amendments initiated by a party other than the county planning commission or the county board of commissioners and applications for uses subject to approval of the county commission shall require a sign placed in a conspicuous location on the property which is the subject matter of the zoning application. 
(Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.370.090; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.380.100. - Public notice of hearing; sign information. 
The public notice sign shall contain the same information described in section 17.380.080.A and the present and proposed zoning classification. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 30(B)(9); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.370.100; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.380.110. - Public notice of hearing; sign posting date. 
The required public notice sign shall be posted not less than 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 30(B)(9); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.370.110; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.380.120. - Public notice of hearing; applications initiated by county. 
When an application is brought by or initiated by the board of commissioners of county or the county planning commission, the only public notice required by these zoning regulations is newspaper advertisement as set forth in sections 17.380.070 and 17.380.080. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 30(B)(10); Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.370.120; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.380.130. - Board of commissioners' action. 
A.  The board of commissioners shall consider applications for uses subject to approval of the county commission and all zoning decisions of the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment including conditions of approval and any additional evidence that applicant wishes to present at a public hearing on the date advertised, at which time all interested parties and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard and present evidence regarding the proposed amendment or use subject to approval of the county commission, or the appeal of the conditional use or use subject to approval of the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment or other zoning decisions. 
B.  The board of commissioners may place any reasonable conditions or stipulations upon any application for a use subject to approval of the county commission, a proposed amendment or the appeal of a conditional use or use subject to approval of the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment or other zoning decisions as deemed necessary (such as hours of operation, parking, maximum building size, lot size, outside displays, signs, screens, buffers, etc.) to further insure the orderly operation of proposed uses and their compatibility with the surrounding properties. 
C.  The board of commissioners, in making its decision on the proposed amendment, the use subject to approval of the county commission, or the appeal of a conditional use, or the use subject to approval of the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment or other zoning decisions, shall consider the general lines of inquiry established under section 17.380.060 and any other relevant factor submitted by the applicant. 
D.  The applicant/appellant shall have the burden of proof, which shall include the presentation of evidence and the burden of persuasion of each factor necessary to receive approval of the board of commissioners. Failure of the applicant/appellant to meet this burden shall result in a denial of the proposed amendment, the use subject to the approval of the county commission, or the appeal of a conditional use or the use subject to approval of the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment or other zoning decisions. 
E.  The board of commissioners' public hearing is to be held as follows: 
1.  The public hearing is to be held in conjunction with regular meetings of the board of commissioners, with published notice of time and place. 
2.  The hearing is conducted by the county attorney or other hearing officer designated by the board of commissioners. 
3.  The hearing officer introduces the proposed zoning amendments before the board of commissioners. Proposals are considered in order as listed in the published notice. The hearing officer describes each proposed zoning amendment and the party initiating the proposal. Staff is then called upon to report on the planning commission's recommendation and summarize its written report. 
4.  Persons both favoring and opposing the proposed amendment are provided an opportunity to address the board of commissioners. During this period: 
a.  Each speaker must first state his name and address. 
b.  Comments are accepted first from the party proposing the action and any other proponents of the action, followed by opponents of the action. The party proposing the action may then offer rebuttal. 
c.  The hearing officer may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against the proposal, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed for comment. No less than ten minutes shall be permitted for all of those speaking in support of an amendment and no less than ten minutes shall be permitted for all those speaking against, unless such proponents or opponents take less time than the minimum allowed. 
d.  Comments must pertain only to the merits of the proposed action, and must be directed to the board of commissioners. Comments are not allowed that may be construed as personal attacks on any other speaker, or are irrelevant to the proposed action. Violators will be first cautioned and then prevented from making further comment. 
e.  Petitions, studies, letters, and other material should be submitted prior to the hearing, allowing ample time for study by the board of commissioners. Materials submitted at the hearing may or may not be accepted by the board, and if presented orally are subject to time limitations. 
5.  The board of commissioners may, if necessary, call on previous speakers for clarification, or may call for additional views, studies or information from any source considered necessary to making a sound decision. The board of commissioners may continue the hearing to a later date. 
6.  The decision rendered by the board of commissioners regarding the proposed amendment, the use subject to approval of the county commission, or the appeal of a conditional use or the use subject to approval of the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment or other zoning decisions shall be deemed to be the final action on the application. 
7.  No approval or denial of an amendment, use subject to approval of the county commission, or the appeal of a conditional use, or the use subject to approval of the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment or other zoning decisions by the board of commissioners shall become effective unless said approval or denial is conducted at a public hearing. 
8.  The approval of any application for a use subject to approval of the county commission shall be effective for a period of no longer than 12 months from the date of approval unless action is taken by the applicant to implement the use proposed in the application by obtaining the proper permit and/or license, and development plat approval, and proceeding with the building, occupancy or establishment of business. 
9.  If a use subject to approval of the county commission or if a rezoning is denied, or if an appeal from the decision of the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment is denied by the board of commissioners, then the same property may not again be considered for any zoning application (rezoning, conditional use, variance, etc.) and no application shall be filed until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the date of the denial of the use or the denial of the appeal and may not be considered for an application of the same type and no application of the same type shall be filed until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the date of the denial of the use or the denial of the appeal. 
(Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 5-22-89; Res. of 7-10-89; Res. of 4-26-91; Code 1991, § 17.370.130; Res. of 1-25-96, § 1; Res. of 4-11-96, § 1; Res. of 12-12-96, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(3), § 1) 
17.380.140. - County approval for withdrawal of applications. 
An application for any request considered by the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time prior to the notification by public advertisement of the adjoining property owners. The application may be withdrawn after said public notice is given and before the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment takes a vote on said application only with the consent of a majority of the members of the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment. For applications requiring a recommendation from the planning commission for final action by the county board of commissioners, after the planning commission has taken a vote on the application, the application may only be withdrawn with the consent of a majority of the board of commissioners voting to allow the applicant's request to withdraw the application. For appeals to the board of commissioners or planning commission or zoning board of adjustment decisions, the application may only be withdrawn with the consent of a majority of the board of commissioners voting to allow the applicant's request to withdraw the appeal. Fees are to be refunded as described in section 17.30.010.E of the county zoning regulations. 
(Res. of 2-22-88; Res. of 7-10-89; Code 1991, § 17.370.140; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.390. - VALIDITY, REMEDIES AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION 

 

17.390.010. - Severability. 
Should any article, clause or provision of this title be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of the title as a whole or any part hereof other than the part so declared to be invalid, each article, clause and provision hereof being declared severable. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 31(A); Code 1991, § 17.380.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.390.020. - Remedies for violation. 
In case any building or structure is (or is proposed to be) erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is (or is proposed to be) used in violation of any provision of this title, the building official, county attorney or other appropriate authority of the county may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. Where a violation of these regulations exists with respect to a structure or land, the county building official may, in addition to other remedies, notify all public utilities and county service departments of such violation and request that service be withheld therefrom until such time as the structure or premises are no longer in violation of these regulations. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 31(B); Code 1991, § 17.380.020; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.390.030. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this title as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this title as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Hall County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. Each and every day that such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 31(C); Res. of 4-27-90; Code 1991, § 17.380.030; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.400. - CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS 

 

17.400.010. - Abrogation and other restrictions. 
Should any requirement or design standard conflict in any manner with any other law, rule or regulation of any local, state or federal governmental body or administrative agency, then the stricter law, rule or regulation shall be applied. It is not intended by this title to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that, where this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of property or premises or upon the height of buildings, or requires greater space than is imposed or required by other resolutions, rules or regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this title shall govern. 
(Res. of 8-28-78, § 32; Code 1991, § 17.390.010; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.410. - STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNAS AND TOWERS[27] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of 3-11-99, § 1, adopted provisions intended for use as ch. 17.400. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as ch. 17.410. Subsequently, Res. of 11-14-02, § 1, repealed Ch. 17.410, in its entirety, and enacted provisions designated as a new Ch. 17.410 to read as herein set out in §§ 17.410.010—17.410.140. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis. 

17.410.010. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of Hall County, telecommunication providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting of telecommunication facilities within Hall County so as to protect the health, safety, property values and integrity of residential neighborhoods and foster, through appropriate zoning and land use controls, a competitive environment for telecommunication carriers that does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, and so as to promote Hall County as a proactive county in the availability of personal wireless telecommunications service. To that end, this chapter shall: 
A.  Provide for the appropriate location and development of telecommunication facilities in Hall County; 
B.  Protect Hall County's built and natural environment by promoting compatible design standards for telecommunications facilities; 
C.  Minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunication facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
D.  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antenna failure through engineering and careful siting of telecommunications tower structures and antennae; 
E.  Maximize use of any new and existing telecommunication towers and alternative structures so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout Hall County; and 
F.  Encourage and promote the location of new telecommunications facilities in areas that are not zoned for residential use. 
(Res. of 11-14-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.410.020. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Alternative structure means clock towers, flag poles, bell towers, church steeples, light/power poles, electric transmission towers, manmade trees and similar natural or manmade alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves for telephonic, radio, television, or personal wireless services. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "antenna" does not include any tower and antenna which is owned, operated and solely used by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, and any device designed for over-the-air reception only of radio or broadcast signals. 
Building official means the individual issuing building permits. 
Director means the planning director of the Hall County Department of Planning or his/her designee. 
Governing body means the board of commissioners for Hall County, Georgia. 
Micro telecommunication facilities are those antenna located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures, where antennae do not project more than 20 feet above the top of the roof line, parapet or top of the structure, whichever is higher, and there are no more than 12 antennae per site. Micro telecommunications facilities may exceed the height limitation specified for the zoning district. 
Monopole tower means a telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
Telecommunications facilities mean antennae or towers, either individually or together. 
Tower means a structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower or monopole tower, constructed as a free-standing structure on which is located one or more antennas intended for transmitting and/or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service, or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes microwave towers, common carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers. 
Tower height means the dimension from the average finish grade adjacent to the tower foundation pad to the top of any antenna, lightening rod or other appurtenance attached to the tower. 
(Res. of 11-14-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.410.030. - Exclusions. 
The following facilities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Any tower and antenna which is owned, operated and solely used by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; and 
B.  Any telecommunications facilities used for public purposes and located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by Hall County or any other governmental entity, provided a license or lease authorizing the telecommunications facility has been approved by the governing body. 
(Res. of 11-14-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.410.40. - Basic criteria for the location, size and design of telecommunications facilities. 
A.  Micro telecommunication facilities shall be allowed in all zoning districts as a use by right following administrative review by the planning department and receipt of a building permit from the building official. 
B.  The placement and installation of all other telecommunications facilities shall be restricted to the AR-III, AR-IV, S-S, H-B, I-I, and I-II zoning districts and shall be subject to county commission approval. 
C.  Preferred location sites. It is the expressed intent to require the installation of micro telecommunication facilities at preferred location sites, rather than permitting the construction of new towers. An exception should be made only when it is clearly demonstrated that no suitable preferred location site exists. 
1.  Co-location sites. Any existing telecommunications towers currently being used for transmitting and/or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication shall be a preferred location site regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site; provided, however, that locations which meet this criteria shall be subject to the design and siting components of this chapter and co-location sites shall not become an "antenna farm" or otherwise be deemed by the director or the county commission to be visually obtrusive. 
2.  Publicly-used structures. Publicly-used structures are preferred locations throughout Hall County because they appear in virtually all neighborhoods, are dispersed throughout Hall County, and due to their institutional or infrastructure uses are generally similar in appearance to, or readily adaptable for micro telecommunications facilities. Therefore, antennae should be less noticeable when affixed to publicly used structures, such as police or fire stations, libraries, community centers, civic centers, courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flag poles, and schools, than when placed on commercial or residential structures. 
3.  Industrial and commercial structures. Wholly industrial and commercial structures, located in zoning districts permitting telecommunication facilities as defined in section 17.410.040 above, such as warehouse factories, retail outlets, supermarkets, banks, garages, or service stations shall be preferred locations particularly where existing visual obstructions or clutter on the roof or along a roof line can and will be removed as part of the installation of the telecommunications facility. 
4.  Alternative structures. Installation on existing alternative structures such as electric transmission towers or billboards, or construction of alternative structures appropriate to the proposed location context such as bell towers, church steeples or flagpoles. 
D.  Disfavored location sites. Any residentially zoned property or residentially occupied structure, or sites within four tower lengths of a residentially zoned property shall be a disfavored site for the location of telecommunications facilities. Any site having a negative visual impact on historically significant structures or designated scenic views. 
E.  Setbacks. Multiple towers that are otherwise justified under the criteria of this chapter may be permitted on the same site provided they meet all setback and separation requirements. The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers: 
1.  Telecommunications towers within the AR-III or AR-IV zoning districts shall be set back a minimum of two tower lengths from the base of the tower to all property lines. 
2.  Telecommunications towers in commercial or industrial districts shall be set back a minimum of two tower lengths from the base of the tower to any residentially zoned property (including the AR-III and AR-IV zones) and a minimum distance equal to the height of the tower from any other property line. 
3.  All telecommunications towers shall be set back from any residential structure either a minimum of four tower lengths from the base of the tower or 500 feet from the base of the tower, whichever is greater. For residential structures on the same property as the tower, the setback shall be one tower length from the base of the tower to the structure. 
4.  Due to circumstances unique to the specific location; the county commission may approve a reduction or increase of any required set back based upon the finding(s) that the adjacent land, including its future development pursuant to zoning and the Comprehensive Plan, will or will not be impacted in an adverse manner. 
5.  All accessory buildings and facilities to a telecommunications facility installation shall meet the minimum zoning district setback requirements for such buildings or facilities. 
F.  Tower height, design and provisions for co-location. When a new tower is being requested, the following height and configuration requirements must be met through the appropriate approval process. 
1.  Tower height. Maximum tower height in the AR-III and AR-IV zones shall be 195 feet. There is no maximum height in other permitted zones, as long as the height is justified as the lowest possible in order to meet the intent of this chapter, and the design criteria of this chapter are met. 
2.  Tower design criteria. 
a.  All new towers shall be of monopole design. Where special circumstances suggest that the construction of a tower of a different design would specifically further the intent of this chapter, the planning commission may recommend and the county commission may approve a tower of a design other than monopole construction. 
b.  Towers and antenna support arms shall be of a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, may be painted a neutral color or color to match the visual background. 
c.  No illumination is permitted on telecommunications facilities unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction, or unless necessary for air traffic safety. Any required lighting shall be restricted to dual lights (medium intensity white strobe lights daylight mode and red obstruction lights nighttime mode) unless the FAA or state aeronautics division requires some other form of lighting. 
d.  No advertising is permitted on telecommunications facilities. However, an antenna installation may be allowed on any legally permitted permanent billboard or outdoor advertising sign as long as the other requirements of this chapter are met. 
3.  Provisions for co-location. All new tower installations of 150 feet in height or less shall provide antenna and support space for at least three (3) carriers. All new tower installations of over 150 feet in height shall provide antenna and support space for at least five (5) carriers. Tower installations of less than 195 feet shall be structurally designed to be extended to a height of 195 feet. 
G.  Design criteria for antenna installation on existing structures. 
1.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
2.  Where feasible, telecommunications facilities should be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
3.  Rooftop mounted equipment or cabinets shall be screened from public view by architectural features compatible with the building design or installed so as to be screened by existing architectural features. Ground mounted equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. Shelters or cabinets must be regularly maintained. 
(Res. of 11-14-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.410.050. - Approval process. 
A.  County commission approval. All new telecommunication facility installations shall be considered a use subject to county commission approval, except as outlined below. 
1.  Application for a use subject to county commission approval shall be made to the director by the person, company or organization that will own and operate the telecommunications facility. The application shall be processed in accordance with the special use provision of section 17.380 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. The Board of Commissioners of Hall County may issue a special use permit under this section provided it shall be determined that all of the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
2.  In order to cover the actual cost to Hall County of obtaining expert opinion and studies, fees in addition to those established in section 17.30.010 are established for those telecommunications facility applications requiring county commission approval. An initial deposit of $1,000.00 shall be paid to Hall County to review the application. If the actual cost to Hall County is greater than this deposit, the applicant shall be billed for the difference and payment shall be made prior to the hearing before the county commission. In no case shall the maximum total charge exceed $3,000.00. If the actual cost is less than the initial deposit, the difference will be refunded to the applicant within 20 days following the county commission hearing. 
3.  In granting a special use permit, the board of commissioners of Hall County may impose additional zoning conditions to the extent determined necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding properties, or lessen the overall impact of the applicant's towers on the county. 
4.  Along with the other requirements of this chapter, the board of commissioners shall consider the following factors in acting upon a new tower construction application under the provisions of this article: 
a.  The height and setbacks of the proposed tower; 
b.  The proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
c.  The nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d.  The surrounding topography; 
e.  The surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
f.  The design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
g.  The proposed ingress and egress; 
h.  The availability of suitable existing towers or other structures for antenna co-location; and 
i.  The impact of the proposed tower upon scenic views and visual quality of the surrounding area. 
B.  Administrative approval is available for the installation of an antenna on any existing tower, alternative structure, or existing buildings, including the placement of support buildings or equipment, so long as the addition does not add more than 20 feet of height to the existing structure or exceed the maximum height allowed in the zoning district, and does not require an unlighted structure to become lighted. Application for administrative review and approval shall be made to the director by the person, company or organization that will own and operate the telecommunications facility. If a request for administrative approval is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision to the planning commission. The denial of an appeal can be appealed to the board of commissioners. 
C.  Application information. The applicant shall provide the following information for all proposed telecommunications installations. Applications will not be considered until they are complete. 
1.  A survey, site plan, and elevation drawings, drawn to scale, showing the location of the tower or other structure, antenna locations, equipment buildings and/or other accessory uses, utilities and drainage lines, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent utilities, ownership, structures and land uses. The plan shall include labeled dimensions of setbacks to property lines, adjacent residential structures and zoning boundaries. 
2.  A landscape plan, drawn to scale, showing existing vegetation proposed to be retained on the site, and indicating size, spacing and type of new plantings required in this chapter. 
3.  A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic view corridors. 
4.  The findings from the state historic preservation officer, based on review of a study conducted by the applicant of the proposed site and structure's impact on historic properties. 
5.  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel and equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
6.  An estimate of the cost of tower removal and site restoration, should the tower be abandoned. 
7.  A report from a qualified, independent engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, documenting the following: 
a.  Height and design of the tower or other structure, including technical, engineering, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
b.  Total anticipated capacity of the tower or other structure, including number and types of antennae which can be accommodated; 
c.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure; and 
d.  Structural failure characteristics of the tower or other structure and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris. 
8.  A complete discussion of the need and intended service area for the facility, including: a map showing the specific area being served, the proposed site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network; how the proposed location covers the intended service area, and whether nearby facilities may be modified after installation of the proposed facility; whether the facility is needed for coverage or capacity; and any anticipated nearby future installations that would further support the network. 
9.  Letters of intent, lease agreements or other documentation from other carriers with interest in co-locating on the proposed structure. 
10.  The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Including name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
11.  Verification that the proposed tower meets one of the location preferences identified in this chapter. If the proposed location is not a preferred location, or is a disfavored site, the applicant shall provide the following: (a) a list of co-location sites or other preferred location sites are located within the geographic service area; (b) an explanation of good faith efforts and measures taken to secure each of these preferred location sites and why each such site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible; (c) how and why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area and county wide network. 
12.  Antenna inventory. Each application shall include an inventory of all antenna installations and towers in Hall County or within one mile of Hall County owned by the carrier, or towers or other structures on which the applicant plans to locate an antenna in the future. The inventory must include the following information for each site: 
a.  The name and contact information for the owner of the structure, latitude and longitude of the antenna, and street address, if applicable; Assessor's block and lot or other applicable ad valorem tax identification number; and zoning district; 
b.  Type of structure supporting the antenna and relevant details of installation (i.e. on monopole tower, on legs of water tower, flush with facade of 5-story office building, inside church steeple); the number of existing and planned antennas at the site; and the names of carriers with antennas at the site. 
c.  The height from grade to the top of the tower or structure, and to each antenna installation. 
13.  Additional information requirements for proposed towers or structures. 
a.  If the proposed site is zoned AR-III, AR-IV, S-S or H-B and there are alternative sites in the I-I or I-II zoning districts, the applicant must justify why those alternate sites have not been proposed. The county commission will review with special care justifications that rely only upon undue expense and/or undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The county commission shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a facility's negative impacts at the proposed site and on the surrounding area. 
b.  Applicants must identify all existing towers and all towers for which there are applications currently on file with the planning department which are located within or near the applicant's search area. Applicant must provide evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed antenna and of the lack of space on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna. If co-location of any such towers would result in less visual impact than the visual impact of the proposed tower, applicant must justify why such co-location is not being proposed. If co-location on any such tower would increase negative visual impact, then the applicant must so state and demonstrate. The county commission will review with special care, justifications that rely only upon undue expense and/or undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The county commission shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site and on the surrounding area. 
c.  In all zoning districts, applicants must demonstrate that they cannot provide personal wireless communication service without the use of a new tower. 
14.  The applicant must provide any other information that may be reasonably requested by the director to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of the proposed telecommunications facility. 
D.  Public notice requirements. All telecommunications facilities to be reviewed as uses subject to county commission approval shall have public notice requirements in addition to those requirements of Section 17.380 of the Hall County Zoning Ordinance. The applicant shall provide the planning department with the names and addresses all abutting property owners and all owners of property lying in whole or in part within a distance of six tower lengths from the proposed tower, or 500 feet from the property line of the parcel on which the tower is to be constructed, whichever is greater. The owners of record shall be as shown on the Hall County Tax Commissioner's records. The planning department shall send these property owners a letter postmarked no later than fifteen days prior to the public hearing by the planning commission informing them of the time and place of the public hearing and a general description of the application. 
E.  Visual simulation. For all towers, the applicant shall contract with a company to fly a balloon at proposed tower height for a period of 4 hours, during normal daylight hours on a Saturday, prior to the planning commission meeting. The applicant will be responsible for notifying the planning commission, county commission, & officially noticed area residents of the date and time of the simulation. The applicant shall provide third party certification to verify the correct location and height was used. The applicant shall provide color photos prior to the planning commission meeting showing a rendering of the proposed tower at the proper height from four locations demonstrating the most significant impact on the view of nearby residents or the traveling public in each general direction from the tower. 
(Res. of 11-14-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.410.060. - Additional general requirements for all telecommunications facilities. 
A.  Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications facilities, the owner of such a facility shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building and safety codes for telecommunications facilities, as amended from time to time. 
B.  Regulatory compliance. All telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed, to the extent required by any such regulations, then the owners of the telecommunications facilities governed by this chapter shall bring such telecommunications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the date established by the agency promulgating the standards or regulations. 
C.  Security. All towers and supporting equipment shall be enclosed by fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with appropriate anti-climbing devices. Fencing shall be of chain link, wood or other approved alternative and must include a secure gate and lock. Each tower shall have posted on the gate a metal sign 12" X 12", black letter, white background identifying owner's name, address, and telephone number. The sign shall be immediately updated for any changes and maintained for legibility. 
D.  Landscaping and buffering. landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the equipment shelters or cabinets from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property. Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be planted so as to, at a minimum, meet the buffer requirements for outdoor retail activities. The county commission may waive or modify the landscaping requirement where lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes, for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms, or where an antenna is placed on an existing structure. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be modified or waived by the county commission. 
E.  Maintenance impacts. Equipment at a telecommunications facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Access to the site shall be provided off of the adjacent street with the lowest functional classification. 
F.  Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
1.  Accessory structures may be installed in direct support of a telecommunications facility, but the site shall not be used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the telecommunications facility. 
2.  Telecommunications facilities may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. 
(Res. of 11-14-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.410.070. - Additional general requirements for towers. 
A.  Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses, and the zoning district as much as possible. Towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
B.  Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area. 
C.  At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the tower and related facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
D.  With the exception of those towers to be located on the same parcel of property, towers shall not be located any closer than 1500 feet from an existing tower unless technologically required or visually preferable, or if the tower has insufficient antennae mounting space or insufficient structural capacity to accommodate co-location. 
E.  Towers shall not be sited where they will negatively affect historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or any state or federal law or agency, or where they will create visual clutter. 
F.  When two or more towers are proposed on the same site, they may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. The clustering of new towers on the same parcel near existing telecommunications facilities is encouraged. 
G.  Towers shall be located in a manner such that all ice-fall or debris from the tower structure or guy wires will not fall outside the parcel under the ownership or control of the applicant and on which the tower is located. 
H.  The use of strobe lights or other visibility lighting shall be the least number and shortest duration of use as required by the Federal Aviation Administration or any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities. 
I.  The county shall have the right to co-locate its own antennas on any approved tower, at no cost, if such installation does not interfere with existing or proposed antennas. 
(Res. of 11-14-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.410.080. - Appeals. 
Appeals from any decision of the director or building official may be taken by any person aggrieved or any official of Hall County affected by the decision of the director or building official. Such appeal shall be made pursuant to section 17.360.020 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. Appeals from any decision of the governing body shall be made to the superior court within 30 days of the decision. Any decision by the director or the building official denying a request to place, construct, or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. Any decision by the governing body denying or approving a request to place, construct, or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. 
(Res. of 11-14-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.410.090. - Nuisances. 
Telecommunications facilities, including, without limitation, power source, ventilation and cooling, shall be operated at all times within the limits of the Hall County Noise Resolution as set out in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, chapter 8.80, and shall not be operated so as to cause the generation of heat that adversely affects a building occupant and shall not be maintained or operated in such a manner as to be a nuisance. 
(Res. of 11-14-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.410.100. - Removal of antennae and towers. 
A.  The facility owner shall post a bond prior to building permit issuance to cover the costs of tower removal and site restoration. The size of the bond shall be calculated to account for cost escalations, and shall be automatically renewable every five years. 
B.  All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. If upon inspection by the building official any such telecommunications facility is determined not to comply with the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property then upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owners shall have 30 days to bring such facility into compliance, provided the owner of the facility shall have such extended period as may be required beyond the 30 days if the nature of the cure is such that it reasonably requires more than 30 days and the owner of the facility commences the cure within the 30 day period and thereafter continuously and diligently pursues the cure to completion. In the event such telecommunications facility is not brought into compliance within the required time period, Hall County may provide notice to the owners requiring the telecommunications facility to be removed. In the event such telecommunications facility is not removed within 30 days of receipt of such notice, Hall County may remove such facility and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. Delay by Hall County in taking such action shall not in any way waive Hall County's right to take action. Hall County may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that telecommunications facilities not in compliance with the code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. Hall County may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower of antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(Res. of 11-14-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.410.110. - Abandoned towers. 
A.  Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunications facility. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within 60 days of receipt of notice from Hall County notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, Hall County may remove such tower and/or antenna and redeem the bond maintained for such removal and place a lien upon the property for any additional unrecovered costs of removal. Hall County may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned telecommunications facilities are removed. Delay by Hall County in taking action shall not in any way waive Hall County's right to take action. Hall County may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
B.  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this chapter as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
(Res. of 11-14-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.410.120. - Preexisting towers/nonconforming uses. 
A.  All telecommunications facilities operative on the effective date hereof shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a nonconforming use and shall be treated as a nonconforming use in accordance with Section 17.340.010 of the Official Code of Hall Code, Georgia. However, any tower which is nonconforming with respect to setback requirements as a result of the enactment of this ordinance may be replaced if destroyed, provided the degree to which the structure is nonconforming does not increase and all other requirements of this chapter are met. Routine maintenance shall be permitted on such existing telecommunication facilities. New construction other than routine maintenance shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  A telecommunications facility that has received Hall County approval as of the effective date hereof in the form of either a building permit or special use permit, but has not yet been constructed or placed in operation shall be considered an existing telecommunications facility so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
C.  Placement of an antenna or co-location on a nonconforming structure, provided the degree to which the structure is nonconforming is not increased, shall not be considered an expansion of the nonconforming structure. 
(Res. of 11-14-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
17.410.130. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate Court of Hall County, and, upon conviction, be punished as provided in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia section 1.50.020 for each violation in the discretion of the court. Each separate violation and each day of any continued violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Res. of 11-14-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1; Res. of 6-10-04(1), § 1) 
17.410.140. - Coordination with federal law. 
Whenever the governing authority finds that the application of this chapter would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, a conditional use permit waiving any or all of the provisions of this chapter may be granted. 
(Res. of 11-14-02, § 1; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.420. - GATEWAY CORRIDORS OVERLAY DISTRICT (GCOD) 

17.420.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the GCOD is: 
A.  To promote the general health, safety and welfare of the community. 
B.  To improve the efficient operation of traffic around the county. 
C.  To promote safe and efficient movement within the Overlay District for persons using all modes of travel - motorized vehicles, bicycles and walking. 
D.  To create a sense of place that is aesthetically appealing and environmentally responsible. 
E.  To encourage innovative development projects that set standards for landscaping, community design and aesthetics. 
F.  To establish consistent and harmonious design standards for public improvements and private property development within the Overlay District so as to unify the distinctive visual quality of the Gateway Corridors. 
(Res. of 3-22-07, § 1; Res. of 8-9-07, § 1) 
17.420.020. - Design guidelines. 
The GCOD Design Guidelines are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter and shall apply to property in the GCOD. Within the GCOD, building design and construction that is not in substantial conformity with the GCOD Design Guidelines is prohibited. In cases of a conflict between the design guidelines and the text of this chapter, the text of this chapter shall govern. 
(Res. of 3-22-07, § 1; Res. of 8-9-07, § 1) 
17.420.030. - Boundaries. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter apply to land parcels of record within the unincorporated portion of Hall County having frontage on the following road segments as of the date this ordinance is adopted. Hereafter, these road segments shall be referred to as the "Gateway Corridors." 
1.  S.R. 211 from S.R. 53 (Winder Highway), south to Thompson Mill Road. 
2.  U.S. 129 (Athens Highway) from the Gainesville City limits, south to Gillsville Highway. 
3.  S.R. 53 (Winder Highway) from S.R. 13 (Falcon Parkway), east to the Jackson County line. 
4.  S.R. 13 (Atlanta Highway and Falcon Parkway) from the Flowery Branch City limits, north to S.R. 53 (Winder Highway). 
5.  McEver Road from the Buford City limits, north to the northernmost intersection with Radford Road. 
6.  Martin Road from S.R. 53 (Winder Highway) to S.R. 13, to continue along a proposed extension of Martin Road to Thurmond Tanner Pkwy pursuant to final alignment approved by GDOT. 
7.  Spout Springs Road from the Flowery Branch City limits, south to Friendship Road. 
8.  Friendship Road from Bogan Road, east to Thompson Mill Road. 
9.  Realigned Thompson Mill Road from Spout Springs Road east to S.R. 211 (Old Winder Highway), pursuant to final alignment approved by GDOT. 
10.  All state roadways within the jurisdiction of Hall County. 
B.  This chapter shall also apply to any land parcel of record within the unincorporated portion of Hall County when a portion of said parcel falls within 300 feet of the centerline of the Gateway Corridors as of the date this ordinance is adopted. Any parcel subject to the ordinance on the date of adoption shall continue to be subject to the provisions of this chapter, even if the parcel is subdivided in the future. 
C.  Upon written application, the director may grant exemptions from the requirements of this chapter for parcels or portions of a parcel that would otherwise be included in the GCOD, based on one or more of the following findings: 
1.  Portions of the subject property to be exempted lie more than 300 feet from the centerline of a Gateway Corridor. 
2.  The property to be exempted does not have access to a Gateway Corridor and will not require access to Gateway Corridor when developed. 
3.  Due to site topography development of the property to be exempted will not be visible from a Gateway Corridor. 
4.  Due to the location, size and shape of the property, development of the parcel under its current zoning and in conformity with the requirements of the GCOD would present a severe and unique hardship. 
If the director does not render a written decision regarding such exemption within 15 working days of receipt of the application required in this paragraph, then the exemption shall be deemed to be approved. 
(Res. of 3-22-07, § 1; Res. of 8-9-07, § 1) 
17.420.040. - Effect of GCOD provisions. 
A.  Application. This Overlay District is supplemental to the underlying zoning district classifications established in the Hall County Zoning Regulations governing all properties and approvals within this Overlay District. The provisions of this chapter shall be overlaid upon and shall be imposed in addition to said underlying zoning regulations and other Hall County ordinances. 
B.  Relationship to standards of the underlying zoning district and subdivision regulations. In any case where the standards and requirements of the GCOD conflict with those of the underlying zoning district or subdivision regulations, the standards and requirements of the GCOD shall govern. 
C.  Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Completion of work subject to preliminary plats, site development plans, construction plans, building permits, or interior finish permits approved prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
2.  Reconstruction, rehabilitation, restoration, repair or addition of an existing non-residential structure, interior renovations or interior finishes within an existing structure, or addition to an existing non-residential structure that was permitted prior to the enactment of this chapter shall not be subject to the provisions of the GCOD, provided that such construction is on a lot of record and does not result in addition or change to more than 75 percent of the floor area of the existing permitted structure. 
3.  Rezonings and planned developments that were approved by the board of commissioners prior to the date of this ordinance with the exception of those approvals with specific reference to the GCOD. 
D.  The following requirements apply to reconstruction, replacement or addition to a legally permitted and existing nonresidential structure when such change consists of more than 75 percent of the floor area of the existing structure: 
1.  The portion of the project that is reconstructed, replaced or added shall meet the Architectural Standards of 17.420.050.H. 
2.  If the reconstruction, replacement or addition includes the addition of 50 parking spaces or more, the newly constructed parking spaces shall meet the parking lot design requirements of section 17.420.050.E. 
3.  If the reconstruction, replacement or addition decreases the distance between the subject building and abutting property that is zoned or used for single-family residential purposes, the property line where the distance abutting residential property has been decreased shall provide a transitional buffer as required in section 17.420.050.C. 
4.  If the reconstruction, replacement or addition includes the reconstruction or addition of loading and service areas adjacent to property that is zoned or used for single-family residential purposes, such loading and service areas shall be screened as required by section 14.420.050.D.3. 
5.  Any new signs shall meet the requirements of section 17.420.070. 
E.  Building plan application. 
1.  All building plans submitted pursuant to an application for a building permit should clearly indicate compliance with all of the proposed landscaping, architectural design, building materials, access management, and signage requirements of this chapter. 
2.  The plans should clearly show the location and calculate the amount/percentages of all building materials per building face as indicated in section 17.420.050.H.2. 
3.  Groups of buildings on the same parcel of land may be reviewed and permitted as a single project rather than individual buildings. 
(Res. of 3-22-07, § 1; Res. of 8-9-07, § 1) 
17.420.050. - Non-residential property development standards. 
A.  Prohibited uses. 
1.  Adult entertainment. 
2.  Junk yards. 
3.  Billboard signs. 
B.  Conditional uses. The following uses are allowed in the GCOD only if such use is permitted in the underlying zoning district and the board of commissioners grants a conditional use for such use pursuant to the procedures of the Hall County Zoning Ordinance: 
1.  Self-storage warehouse. 
2.  Vehicle sales lots, new or used. 
3.  Automobile repair and maintenance. 
4.  Commercial outdoor recreation. 
5.  Car wash. 
6.  Outdoor storage (as per the requirements of section 17.420.050.D.4.d. 
C.  Transitional buffers. 
1.  Applicability. 
a.  Transitional buffers required in this section shall provide an effective visual screen between dissimilar uses or activities. 
b.  A transitional buffer shall be required along and inside the property line of a non-residential property abutting a residentially zoned property. 
c.  Transitional buffers are required along and inside the property line at the perimeter of a planned development district that abuts single-family residential zoning or uses, in accordance with the requirements of this subsection, but no transitional buffers are required between dissimilar uses within the planned development district. 
2.  Width of transitional buffer. 
a.  Where a commercial zoning district abuts property zoned for single-family residential or agricultural use, the minimum width shall be 25 feet. 
b.  Where a commercial zoning district abuts property zoned for multi-family residential use the minimum width shall be 25 feet. 
c.  Where an industrial zoning district abuts property zoned for residential or agricultural use, the minimum width shall be 50 feet. 
d.  Where an industrial zoning district abuts property zoned for multi-family residential or agricultural use, the minimum width shall be 25 feet. 
e.  Public and institutional uses shall comply with the standards in this section that apply to commercial zoning districts. 
3.  Materials for transitional buffer. Transitional buffers that are 25 feet in width or greater shall meet at least two of the three following criteria: be planted with a staggered double row of evergreen trees at least six feet in height, a single row of deciduous shade trees at least two inches caliper dbh, (minimum 30 feet height at maturity) and two staggered rows of evergreen shrubs at least three feet in height, planted a maximum of four feet on center, or other arrangement approved by the director that provides a dense visual screen. 
4.  Adjustments to buffer width. 
a.  If a six-foot high solid wood fence or masonry wall is incorporated into the design of a transitional buffer, the width of the buffer may be reduced by ten feet. The fence or wall shall be located on the inside of the vegetation required in paragraph 3., above, with finished side facing the abutting property. 
b.  Walls or fences required to screen loading and service areas, outdoor storage, and accessory equipment required in section 17.420.D.3. and 4. shall not be used to reduce the width of a transitional buffer required in section 17.420.050.C.2. 
5.  Maintenance of buffer. 
a.  A transitional buffer required in this section shall be maintained in a healthy condition so as to provide an effective visual screen from the ground to a height of eight feet at maturity. Should vegetation die or be removed such that the buffer no longer functions as required in this section, that vegetation shall be replaced by the property owner. 
b.  A fence that is provided pursuant to paragraph 4., above, shall be maintained by the property owner so that it is structurally stable and provides a solid visual screen. 
D.  Other landscape and screening standards. 
1.  Building perimeter walls. Shrubs shall be planted within ten feet of the foundation of the primary structure along each building facade at the rate of at least 20 shrubs per 100 lineal feet of building facade except for sides or rear of building used for loading or service areas. Foundation plantings may be clustered to provide visual interest. 
2.  Street frontage. 
a.  Along each street frontage there shall be a ten-foot wide landscape strip, continuous along the frontage except for perpendicular crossings for driveways and utilities. The landscape strip shall be planted with shade trees (six feet tall, two inches caliper, dbh, at time of planting, and not less than 35 feet tall at maturity) planted not less than 40 feet on center, and shrubbery forming an intermittent hedge not less than three feet in height designed to provide an adequate screen. 
b.  The planning director shall have authority to approve alternative methods for landscaping and screening parking lots that include at least the same amount of landscape material or screening effect when viewed from the street. 
3.  Loading and service areas. In addition to general perimeter landscaping and required buffers, if a loading or service area is located within 50 feet of a side or rear lot line abutting property that is residentially zoned or used for residential purposes, or public or institutional use, then the loading or service areas shall be surrounded by either a six feet high masonry screening wall, or a six feet high solid wooden fence, placed on the inside of the landscaped buffer required in section 17.420.050.C. 
4.  Screening of storage and accessory equipment. 
a.  Waste receptacles. Waste receptacles, including dumpsters, garbage cans, or grease containers shall be located in the rear or side yard and placed at least 20 feet from any street, public sidewalk, or property line that abuts residential zoning or residential use. Such waste receptacles shall be screened from view from all property lines and public areas of the site by a minimum six feet high wall constructed of masonry or solid wood with an opaque gate. 
b.  Rooftop mechanical equipment. Rooftop mechanical equipment, including HVAC and utility equipment shall be screened from adjacent streets, sidewalks, residential, public and institutional uses. Screening shall consist of parapet walls or an opaque enclosure around the equipment that is constructed of one of the materials used on the primary facade of the principal structure. 
c.  Ground or wall-mounted mechanical equipment. Ground-mounted or wall-mounted equipment such as HVAC equipment, transformers, and gangs of multiple utility meters shall be screened from adjacent streets, sidewalks, residential, public and institutional uses. Screening shall consist of a solid masonry wall or wooden fence or other opaque enclosure around the equipment that is constructed of one of the permanent and durable materials used on the primary facade of the building. The height of the fence or wall shall be sufficient to effectively screen the equipment from view. 
d.  Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage or sales displays shall be prohibited from front yards except when permitted in the underlying zoning district and further authorized by a conditional use permit pursuant to the procedures of the Hall County Zoning Ordinance. Outdoor storage or sales displays shall be screened from view from public streets and adjacent property by a permanent opaque enclosure consisting of a minimum eight-foot high solid fence or wall, except as follows: 
e.  Temporary sale of seasonal goods may be permitted on properties other than residentially zoned property, if such temporary sales are authorized by the director for a period not to exceed 60 days, with up to a 30-day extension, to be approved no more than two times in a given calendar year. Such temporary sales shall be limited to sites that: 
a.  Provide adequate off-street parking on approved surfaces; 
b.  Provide safe and adequate vehicular access; and 
c.  Are not adjacent to residentially zoned property. 
Outdoor display and sale of goods shall be prohibited in existing designated parking areas. 
5.  Visual blending of slopes. Cuts and fills shall be terraced to blend into the natural terrain. Cut or fill slopes more than ten feet in height shall be landscaped with evergreen shrubbery planted at the rate of ten shrubs per 100 lineal feet. 
E.  Parking lot design. 
1.  Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be required as in Chapter 17.250 of the Hall County Zoning Regulations, except as provided in this subsection: 
a.  Shared parking. The director may approve a reduction of up to 25 percent in the number of parking spaces required for a specific use where inter-parcel access is provided and a shared parking analysis approved by the director demonstrates that adequate parking will be provided with the approved reduction. 
b.  Maximum number of parking spaces. The maximum number of parking spaces that may be constructed on impervious surfaces shall be no more than 125 percent of the minimum number of required parking spaces required in Chapter 17.250 of the Hall County Zoning Regulations. 
2.  Pedestrian circulation. Parking areas shall be designed to facilitate safe and convenient use by pedestrians. Commercial and multi-family developments shall provide designated pedestrian pathways or sidewalks connecting parking aisles to the front entrance of the principal building. 
3.  Paving materials for parking lots. All parking areas shall be paved with asphalt, concrete (or pervious materials approved by the director.) 
4.  Parking lot landscaping. 
a.  Each parking area of over 50 spaces shall include landscaped islands within the parking area equivalent to not less than five to ten percent with planning director discretion of the total paved area of the parking lot, not including pervious paving surfaces. 
b.  Landscaping in parking lots shall contain at least one shade tree (minimum of six feet tall and two inches caliper dbh at time of planting and 35 feet tall at maturity) for each 200 square feet of landscaping. Shade trees shall be planted in a bed of ground cover, sod and/or low shrubbery. 
5.  Perimeter landscaping. 
a.  Where parking lots abut adjacent residentially zoned or residentially used property, a transitional buffer is required as provided in section 17.420.050.C.2. 
b.  Where parking lots abut public streets, a landscape strip is required, as provided in section 17.420.050.D.2. 
c.  Appropriate shade tree species for landscaping parking lots include the following: 
i.  Nuttall Oak. 
ii.  Shumard Oak. 
iii.  Willow Oak. 
iv.  Gingko (Variety: President, Autumn Gold, male gender). 
v.  Princeton Elm. 
vi.  Chinese Elm (varieties Allee, Athena, Drake, Bosque). 
vii.  Bald Cypress (variety: Shawnee Brave). 
viii.  Zelkova (variety Green Vase or Village Green). 
ix.  Northern Red Oak. 
x.  Autumn Maple 
xi.  Other indigenous species approved by the director. 
F.  Outdoor lighting. 
1.  Streetlights. 
a.  Streetlights shall be provided on all public streets. 
b.  The spacing of street lights shall be staggered, 300 feet on-center, along both sides of the roadway. 
c.  All street lighting shall be subject to review and approval of the Hall County Public Works Department. 
d.  All outdoor lighting, shall be the semi-cutoff type. 
2.  Parking lot, sidewalk, and building illumination. 
a.  Lighting shall be designed to avoid intrusion on adjacent properties and away from adjacent thoroughfares. All lighting shall be semi-cutoff luminary fixtures mounted in such a manner that the cone of light is directed downward. 
b.  Only incandescent, florescent, metal halide, low-pressure sodium, or color corrected, high-pressure sodium may be used. The same type of lighting must be used for the same or similar types of lighting on any one site. 
c.  Parking light fixtures shall be the box head type, shall have a maximum height of 35 feet. 
3.  Security lighting. Semi-cutoff luminaries shall be used for all security lighting. 
4.  Sign illumination. 
a.  Internally illuminated signs, automatic changeable copy signs, and externally mounted neon signs are prohibited. 
b.  Signs may be illuminated with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed downward and away from streets and adjacent property and public streets. All lighting shall have recessed luminaries, or be semi-cutoff luminary fixtures. 
G.  Interparcel access. 
1.  Interparcel access, joint driveways, cross access drives and access easements shall be strongly encouraged for adjacent non-residential development along an arterial or collector street, except where the director determines that they are unfeasible because of topographic or other site-specific constraints. 
2.  Joint driveways and cross access easements shall be strongly encouraged for non- residential development that abuts other non-residential development, whether existing or planned. The building site shall incorporate the following: 
a.  Continuous cross-access drive located in a cross-access easement, where necessary to connect adjacent parcels along the thoroughfare. 
b.  A design speed of 15 mph and a two-way travel aisle with a minimum paved width of 22 feet (back of curb to back of curb). Paving, base and curb specifications shall meet Hall County's standards for public streets. 
c.  Driveway aprons, stub-outs and other design features to indicate that abutting properties may be connected to provide cross access via a service drive. 
d.  A five-foot wide sidewalk on one side of the cross-access drive. 
e.  New commercial developments that abut residential property are strongly encouraged to provide a five-foot wide sidewalk connecting the two uses. 
H.  Architectural standards for non-residential buildings. The following design guidelines and standards apply to all newly constructed buildings used for office, commercial, industrial, institutional, and public purposes. 
1.  General architectural requirements. 
a.  Street orientation. Principal building entrances shall be oriented to public streets with the exception of internal buildings not directly fronting on the street. 
b.  Building height. Any non-residential building located within 250 feet of a residential or agricultural use street shall be limited to no more than three stories in height. 
c.  Non-residential buildings shall have at least 1,000 square feet of heated floor space. 
2.  Building materials. 
a.  The use of a common palette of building materials should be maintained for all four sides of principal buildings to create a consistent and traditional architectural identity. For large commercial/retail buildings and multifamily buildings, variation in building materials, texture, and depth should be employed to provide design variation. 
b.  Buildings that are located on outparcels and all accessory buildings shall be constructed of materials complementing the principal building with which they are associated. 
c.  Building materials used for all four sides of new or reconstructed buildings are restricted to the following: 
i.  Brick. 
ii.  Stone. Natural stone such as, but not limited to, granite, limestone, and marble are allowed building materials. Terra cotta and/or cast stone, which simulate natural stone, are also acceptable. Painted stone is prohibited. 
iii.  Split-face block/concrete masonry unit (CMU) is restricted to 50 percent of the surface area of each side of a principal building. 
iv.  Stucco is restricted to 50 percent of the surface area of each side of a building. 
v.  Glass and glass block. 
vi.  Exposed concrete block, painted concrete block, metal, tilt/up and pre-cast concrete are prohibited materials for any exterior wall. 
d.  Restrictions on the use of metal building materials shall not apply to entry doors and/or roll-up doors. 
e.  Calculation of ratios of building materials. 
The amount of permitted material shall be calculated using the gross square footage of wall area for each elevation (side) of the building. See example below. 

 
3.  Roof materials. Materials for pitched roofs shall be limited to architectural grade composition shingles, natural slate, natural terra cotta, natural wood shake, or factory finished metal with standing seams. 
(Res. of 3-22-07, § 1; Res. of 8-9-07, § 1) 
17.420.060. - Signs. 
The following signs shall be permitted for office, institutional, commercial, industrial and non-residential use, in addition to other signs permitted for these uses in Chapter 17.270 of the Zoning Regulations. 
1.  Monument signs. 
a.  One ground mounted, monument sign shall be permitted on each lot, except that in the case of a corner lot, the provisions of this section shall apply separately to each street frontage. However, no sign on a corner lot shall be closer than 50 feet from the lot corner, defined by the lot lines extended. 
i.  The sign structure shall be constructed of the same materials that are used in the facade of the principal building. 
ii.  Dimensional standards for monument signs are set forth in the table below: 
Maximum Monument Sign Dimensions for Non-Residential Uses 

 
2.  Pole signs. Pole signs are prohibited. 
3.  Wall signs and marquee signs. One wall sign or marquee sign shall be permitted for each building or for each tenant in a multi-tenant building. The maximum sign area shall be 64 square feet per building, or one square foot per linear foot of storefront, whichever is greater. Wall signs and marquee signs are only permitted on the side of a building that includes the primary public entrance. A tenant that has less than 16 lineal feet of storefront shall be a permitted a wall sign or marquee sign with a maximum area of 16 square feet. 
4.  Master plan for signs in multi-tenant developments. For all multi-tenant buildings or developments, a coordinated program of wall signs shall be developed and approved by the county at the time of site plan approval. The signage master plan shall specific the sign type, design, height, colors, illumination, and other specifications to give a coordinated appearance to the building or development. The county's review and approval of the signage master plan shall be based on the compatibility of the proposed signage with the siting and architecture of the subject building or development and the compatibility of the signage with surrounding land uses. 
(Res. of 3-22-07, § 1; Res. of 8-9-07, § 1) 
17.420.070. - Appeals and modifications. 
A.  Procedures for appeals. 
1.  It is the intent of the board of commissioners that all development shall conform to the standards and procedures set forth in this chapter. In the event that the intent of this chapter can be achieved with minor deviations that do not substantially impair the purpose or intent of this chapter, the Hall County Planning Director has the authority to modify the specific provisions to allow for such minor deviations. 
2.  If substantial modifications or changes are necessary, any person, firm, group or organization may apply for relief from the requirements set forth in this chapter to the Hall County Planning Commission, unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
3.  Appeals from requirements set forth in this chapter can be heard by the planning commission as provided in Chapter 17.360 of the Hall County Zoning Regulations. 
(Res. of 3-22-07, § 1; Res. of 8-9-07, § 1) 
17.420.080. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Cross-access drive: A drive created for the purpose of providing vehicular or pedestrian access between properties. 
Cross-access easement: A private covenant or easement between owners of abutting properties that allows driveways for public access by vehicles and pedestrians connecting two or more properties having different owners. 
Diameter at breast height (DBH): A standard measure of the diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet, then the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. Externally mounted neon signs. 
Drive-through window: An opening in the outside wall of a commercial building or structure intended to be used to provide for sales and/or service to patrons who remain in their vehicles. 
Facade: The exterior side of a building that faces, and is most nearly parallel to, a public street. The facade includes the entire area of a building, extending from the roof or parapet to the ground, and from one corner of the building to another. Buildings generally have one facade for each street frontage. 
Joint access driveway: A driveway that provides direct vehicular access to two or more abutting properties from a public street. 
Modulation: The rhythmic variation in the massing and architectural treatments of a building that divides its roofline and facade into small harmonious components that create visual interest, as distinct from the appearance of a large building with a featureless facade built on a single plane with a single roof line. Modulations of a facade should break the vertical plane with variations that are at least two feet in depth, measured from the forward plane of the facade. 
Sign area: That portion of the surface of a sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the sign has been erected or placed. The sign face may be composed of two or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by open space or by portions of a sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
Sign, automatic changeable copy: A sign on which the copy changes automatically on a lamp bank or through mechanical means, e.g., electrical or electronic time and temperature units. Copy shall mean words and numbers. 
Sign, internally illuminated: Any sign that is illuminated by an artificial light source from within the sign structure over any or all of its sign face. 
Sign, pole: A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole, columns, or similar support such that the bottom of the sign face or lowest sign module is not in contact with the ground. 
Storefront: That elevation of a commercial building having a single tenant (or that portion of the elevation of a multi-tenant building that is occupied by a single establishment) and that contains the principal public entry to the establishment. 
Transitional buffer: An area of natural vegetation or manmade construction, which is intended to provide a visual and dimensional separation between dissimilar land uses. 
Vehicle sales lot: An open premises arranged, designed, or used for outdoor storage and display for sale or lease of automobiles, vans, trucks, motorcycles, lawnmowers, sports utility vehicles, recreational vehicles, all terrain vehicles, trailers, boats, manufactured homes, mobile homes, outdoor storage structures, tractors, fork lifts, construction equipment, or other similar vehicles or structures, but not including plant nurseries, building materials or lawn and garden supplies. 
(Res. of 3-22-07, § 1; Res. of 8-9-07, § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.430. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION DESIGN OPTION 

17.430.010. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is intended to allow for the development of conservation subdivisions that cluster development and provide for preservation of open space, as an alternative to conventional subdivision development. This chapter is specifically intended: 
A.  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure; 
B.  To provide a residential development option that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land; 
C.  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat; 
D.  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development; 
E.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development; 
F.  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community; 
G.  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions; 
H.  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood; 
I.  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries; 
J.  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles; 
K.  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space; and 
L.  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
(Res. of 4-12-07(2), § 1) 
17.430.020. - Applicability of regulations. 
This design option is available as an alternative for the development of subdivisions that are served by public sewer or an approved private sewer system as provided for in Chapters 13.20 and 13.30 of Title 13 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, as permitted by right in the R-I, R-II and V-C districts. The applicant shall comply with all other provisions of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained in this chapter. 
(Res. of 4-12-07(2), § 1) 
17.430.030. - Ownership of development site. 
The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(Res. of 4-12-07(2), § 1) 
17.430.040. - Maximum yield and housing density determination. 
A.  The maximum yield in a conservation subdivision is the total number of lots on which dwelling units shall be constructed. The maximum yield shall be determined by dividing the total area in the tract of land to be subdivided by the minimum lot area specified in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 17.240.010 for the zoning district for that tract of land. 
B.  The housing density per lot shall be as specified in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 17.240.110 for the zoning district applicable to the track of land being subdivided. 
C.  A preliminary plat shall be prepared by the applicant. The design must be capable of being constructed given site features and the requirements of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia and all other applicable laws. 
(Res. of 4-12-07(2), § 1) 
17.430.050. - Minimum lot size. 
Once the maximum yield is determined pursuant to section 17.430.040 above, the preliminary plat is to be developed by meeting the requirements of this chapter and Title 16 of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. The minimum lot size shall be determined by dividing the total area of the land to be subdivided less the area of the open space to be protected with a legal instrument of permanent protection by the maximum yield. The lots in a conservation subdivision may be less than the minimum lot size required by Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 17.240.010 for the zoning district for that tract of land, but shall be at least 10,000 square feet each. 
(Res. of 4-12-07(2), § 1) 
17.430.060. - Application requirements—Site analysis map. 
Concurrent with the submission of a preliminary plat, the applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this chapter. The site analysis map shall include the following features: 
A.  Property boundaries; 
B.  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
C.  Topographic contours of no less than five-feet intervals for hilly terrain (slopes greater than ten percent), two feet intervals for rolling terrain (two percent to ten percent), and one foot for flat terrain (slopes less than two percent) as referenced in the Hall County, Georgia subdivision regulations; 
D.  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 17.430.110(B) and (C); 
E.  General vegetation characteristics; 
F.  General soil types; 
G.  The planned location of protected open space; 
H.  Existing roads and structures; and, 
I.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(Res. of 4-12-07(2), § 1) 
17.430.070. - Application requirements—Open space management plan. 
An open space management plan, as described in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 17.430.140(B), shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(Res. of 4-12-07(2), § 1) 
17.430.080. - Application requirements—Instrument of permanent protection. 
An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant, as described in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 17.430.150, shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(Res. of 4-12-07(2), § 1) 
17.430.090. - Application—Other requirements. 
The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning, the Hall County Subdivision Regulations, and all other applicable provisions of the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 4-12-07(2), § 1) 
17.430.100. - Open space. 
Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
(Res. of 4-12-07(2), § 1) 
17.430.110. - Standards to determine open space. 
A.  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 40 percent of the gross tract area. 
B.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this chapter: 
1.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
2.  Buffer zones of at least a 75 feet width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
3.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
4.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
5.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and, 
6.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
C.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
1.  Important historic sites; 
2.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
3.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
4.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
5.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area; and, 
6.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
D.  Above-ground utility right-of-ways and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
E.  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
F.  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(Res. of 4-12-07(2), § 1) 
17.430.120. - Permitted uses of open space. 
Uses of open space may include the following: 
A.  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
B.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
C.  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
D.  Passive recreation areas; 
E.  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
F.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
G.  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
H.  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines including underground drip-emitter lines; 
I.  Golf courses; or 
J.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this chapter. 
(Res. of 4-12-07(2), § 1) 
17.430.130. - Prohibited uses of open space. 
Use of open space do not include the following: 
A.  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in Official Code of Hall County, Georgia § 17.430.110 and § 17.430.120; 
B.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted Best Management Practices; 
C.  No above ground parts, facilities, impervious surfaces and other apparatus associated with public sewer and approved private sewer systems; and, 
D.  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(Res. of 4-12-07(2), § 1) 
17.430.140. - Ownership and management of open space. 
A.  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a Homeowners' Association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a Homeowners' Association is the owner, the Homeowners' Association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
B.  Management plan. Applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that: 
1.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
2.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
3.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the Hall County, Georgia Board of Commissioners; and, 
4.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
C.  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, Hall County, Georgia may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, Homeowners' Association, or to the individual property owners that make up the Homeowners' Association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
(Res. of 4-12-07(2), § 1) 
17.430.150. - Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
A.  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
1.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
a.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
b.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this chapter. 
If the entity accepting the easement is not Hall County, Georgia, then a right of enforcement favoring Hall County, Georgia, shall be included in the easement; 
2.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or, 
3.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by Hall County, Georgia. 
B.  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this chapter, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(Res. of 4-12-07(2), § 1) 
CHAPTER 17.440. - BLACK AND COOLEY DRIVE OVERLAY DISTRICT (BCOD)[28] 

Footnotes: 
--- (28) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of June 26, 2008, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as a new Ch. 17.440, to read as herein set out. Exhibits A and B referenced herein are not set out, but are on file in the offices of the county. 

17.440.010. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is in the public interest to maximize efficiency of the utilization of public services, infrastructure, and facilities as a means to achieve balanced growth and to provide opportunities for development and redevelopment of challenged residential areas. 
(b)  Within the residential areas of Hall County, there exists an opportunity to achieve maximum utilization of land resources that have been by-passed or under-utilized in the development of the urban area. An increase in the density normally allowed by the underlying zoning district is deemed an appropriate incentive to promote infill development and redevelopment within this urban core for single-family residential detached districts. 
(c)  The specific objectives of this chapter as related to infill development and redevelopment in the identified boundaries of Black Drive, Cooley Drive and Jordan Drive (Exhibit A). This area has been previously designated an Urban Redevelopment Area. The intent of the proposed Overlay District is to: 
(1)  Accommodate growth by encouraging and facilitating new development on vacant and underutilized land in areas that already have infrastructure, utilities; 
(2)  Encourage efficient use of land and public services in the context of existing communities; 
(3)  Provide flexibility in development standards to facilitate infill development and redevelopment; 
(4)  Encourage construction of housing in close proximity to employment and services; 
(5)  Promote neighborhood preservation and enhancement through redevelopment of blighted, distressed and underutilized properties. 
(Res. of 6-26-08(2), § 1) 
17.440.020. - Boundaries. 
(a)  This district implements the Black and Cooley Drive Overlay District also referred to as "BCOD". The provisions of this district apply to all parcels designated within the BCOD on the attached map (Exhibit B). 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new residential development and associated uses where the primary structure is built subsequent to the date of the adoption of the Black and Cooley Overlay District Resolution or when at least 75 percent of an existing primary residential structure is redeveloped. 
(c)  All land uses and development, including but not limited to buildings, driveways, streets, buffers, landscaping, shall be located and/or provided in accordance with the provisions of the zoning regulations and land development regulations, except as modified by this chapter. 
(Res. of 6-26-08(2), § 1) 
17.440.030. - Effect of Black and Cooley Overlay District provisions to existing zoning districts. 
The standards set forth in this chapter shall take precedence over those of the underlying zoning regulations and other sections pertaining to zoning regulations. For existing development, the standards of this chapter will not apply unless at least 75 percent of the primary structure is redeveloped. 
(Res. of 6-26-08(2), § 1) 
17.440.040. - Permitted uses for the Black and Cooley Overlay District. 
Permitted uses for properties using this chapter shall be the same as those allowed under the R-II zoning designation with the exception of those noted herein. 
(Res. of 6-26-08(2), § 1) 
17.440.050. - Conditional uses permitted by the planning commission for the Black and Cooley Overlay District. 
Conditional uses permitted by the planning commission for properties using the Black and Cooley Drive Overlay District (BCOD) shall be the same as those allowed under the R-II zoning designation unless otherwise noted. 
(Res. of 6-26-08(2), § 1) 
17.440.060. - Conditional uses permitted by the county commission for the Black and Cooley Overlay District. 
Conditional uses permitted by the county commission for properties using the Black and Cooley Drive Overlay District (BCOD) shall be the same as those allowed under the R-II zoning designation unless otherwise noted. 
(Res. of 6-26-08(2), § 1) 
17.440.070. - Accessory structures for the Black and Cooley Overlay District. 
(a)  Accessory structures for properties within the BCOD shall be the same as those allowed under the R-II zoning designation, except that all accessory structures shall be setback at least five feet from the side and rear lot lines. 
(b)  In no case may the accessory structure be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
(c)  No more than two accessory structures shall be allowed on one lot. 
(d)  All accessory structures shall be consistent with the decor and architectural styling of the primary structure. In cases where the accessory structure is more than 15 feet in height, it is strongly recommended that any window that has visibility to a directly adjacent property shall have obscured windows that do not allow visibility to the directly adjacent property. 
(e)  In addition, it is recommended that any stairs, doors, porches, and similar structures on accessory buildings not face an adjacent property. 
(Res. of 6-26-08(2), § 1) 
17.440.080. - Lot of record standards for Black and Cooley Overlay District. 
Any residentially zoned property within the BCOD that was recorded by subdivision plat or deed (prior to August 28, 1978), using the proper county process at that time, as well as any lot recorded by plat subsequent to August 28, 1978 shall be considered a lot of record, even though the lot may have less than the minimum area for any residential zone. 
(Res. of 6-26-08(2), § 1) 
17.440.090. - Prohibited structures for the Black and Cooley Overlay Districts. 
The following residential dwellings are prohibited in the BCOD: 
(1)  Manufactured homes. New permits for Class B manufactured homes (single-wide) would be prohibited. Existing mobile homes may be upgraded with a Class A manufactured home (double-wide) per new standards. 
(2)  Duplexes. New permits for duplexes would be permitted. 
(Res. of 6-26-08(2), § 1) 
17.440.100. - General standards. 
(a)  Building height: None. 
(b)  Minimum front setback: The front setback shall be 20 feet from the property line. 
(c)  Minimum side setbacks: Primary and accessory structures shall be setback five feet from side property lines. 
(d)  Minimum rear setback: Primary structures shall be ten feet from rear property line. 
(Res. of 6-26-08(2), § 1) 
17.440.120. - Resubdivision of lots. 
Lots which have been combined as a result of development crossing a property line may be resubdivided to the original platted lots. 
(Res. of 6-26-08(2), § 1) 
17.440.130. - New residential construction standards. 
The following shall be required for all new home construction or if at least 75 percent of the existing structure is redeveloped. 
(1)  Front porches would be required 
(2)  All new homes constructed would be required to have outside lighting on the front facade. 
(3)  Minimal plantings required along the front facade of the home 
(4)  Sodded front lawns shall be required for all new home construction projects or if 75 percent or more of the structure is redeveloped. 
(5)  Off street parking for a minimum of two vehicles shall be provided. 
(6)  Any new attached carport and/or garage would be required to be consistent with the architectural styling of the home. 
(7)  New accessory buildings would be required to match the architectural style and decor of the home and would be limited to no more than two per primary residence. 
(Res. of 6-26-08(2), § 1) 
17.440.140. - Architectural design development standards. 
All new development created under the BCOD shall include a number of minor design and site planning elements to ensure quality, compatibility, and sustainability with the area. The standards are as follows: 
(1)  Front porches shall be required. 
(2)  Accessory structures shall be required to have consistent design features of the primary structure. 
(3)  The following design features are recommended: 
a.  Optimize privacy of residents and minimize infringement on the privacy of adjoining land uses through the strategic placement of windows, door entrances, porches, and similar structures, especially as it relates to accessory structures; 
b.  Building orientation should maintain the integrity of the streetscape and provide direct, safe access to the street; and 
(4)  Residential structures should seek to incorporate the following design elements: 
a.  Gables (pitch not less than 4:12) along the facades facing public streets; 
b.  Recessed entries along the facades facing public streets; 
c.  Covered porch or entries with decorative pillars or posts along the facades facing public streets; 
d.  Window shutters along the facades facing public streets; 
e.  Bay or bow window (minimum 12-inch projection) along the facades facing public streets; 
f.  Eaves (minimum six-inch projection) along the facades facing public streets. 
(Res. of 6-26-08(2), § 1) 
17.440.150. - Appeals and modifications. 
(a)  Procedures for appeals. 
(1)  It is the intent of the board of commissioners that all development shall conform to the standards and procedures set forth in this chapter. In the event that the intent of this chapter can be achieved with minor deviations that do not substantially impair the purpose or intent of this chapter, the Hall County Planning Director has the authority to modify the specific provisions to allow for such minor deviations. 
(2)  If substantial modifications or changes are necessary, any person, firm, group or organization may apply for relief from the requirements set forth in this chapter to the Hall County Planning Commission, unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(3)  Appeals from requirements set forth in this chapter can be heard by the planning commission as provided in Chapter 17.360 of the Hall County Zoning Regulations. 
(Res. of 6-26-08(2), § 1) 
APPENDIX A. - RELATED SECTIONS OF COUNTY CODE 
CHAPTER 2.60. - PLANNING COMMISSION[30] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (30) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of March 27, 2003, § 2, repealed Ch. 2.60, in its entirety, which pertained to the planning commission. Section 3 of said resolution added provisions designated as a new Ch. 2.60, to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. Section 4 of said resolution provided for inclusion in Title 17, App. A. Also, it should be noted that the provisions of Ch. 2.60 are printed both in title 2 and in appendix A to title 17. When future amendments to the chapter are incorporated in the Code, the provisions should be updated at both locations. 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, tit. 16; zoning regulations, tit. 17; uses subject to approval of planning commission or zoning board of adjustment, ch. 17.350. 

2.60.010. - Membership. 
The Hall County Planning Commission shall consist of five members, who shall be residents of the county, appointed by the board of commissioners. The current members are reappointed to terms expiring on January 31, 2005. Beginning February 1, 2005, and every two years thereafter, each member of the Hall County Board of Commissioners shall appoint one member for a two-year term to the Planning Commission. Each two-year term will begin February 1, and expire January 31, or continue until his or her successor is appointed. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the board of commissioners who shall have the authority to remove any member for cause on written charges after a public hearing. The unexcused absence of a planning commission member from three consecutive regularly scheduled meetings without prior notice to the chairman of the planning commission or the planning commission staff office shall terminate said member's appointment. Members of the planning commission shall be reimbursed and/or compensated for their services pursuant to direction and approval of the Hall County Commission. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
2.60.020. - Organization; proceedings. 
The chairman of the planning commission shall be elected from its members and approved by the board of commissioners. The term of the chairman shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the county. The planning commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
2.60.030. - Powers and duties. 
The planning commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  To accept applications and make findings and recommendations at a public hearing for all amendments to Title 17 and forward said recommendations to the county board of commissioners. (See Chapter 17.370 of this Code); 
B.  To grant application for all conditional uses, site plan review as specified by Title 17 and uses subject to the approval of the planning commission, provided that the standards and requirements of Title 17 are met. (See Chapter 17.350 of this Code). If a public hearing is required by Title 17 for a particular use or amendment, a sign shall be posted at least 15 days prior to said public hearing in a conspicuous place on the property and shall state the nature of the request and the time and place of said public hearing. Further, the staff shall notify each adjoining property owner at their address, as shown by the records of the board of tax assessors, by mail postmarked at least five days prior to said planning commission hearing on the application; 
C.  To review preliminary subdivision plats and grant development approval for same when required under the provisions of Titles 16 and 17; 
D.  To review final subdivision plats and grant recording and approval permits for subdivision when required under the provisions of Titles 16 and 17; 
E.  To initiate, direct and review from time to time a study of the provisions of Title 17 and to make reports of its findings and recommendations as to amendments to the board of commissioners of the county; 
F.  To investigate and make recommendations to the county commission regarding the acceptance and classification of county roads; 
G.  To accept and determine requests regarding unclassified uses as per Chapter 17.330; 
H.  To hear and take action on appeals of determinations and decisions made by the planning department as specified by Title 17; 
I.  The planning commission shall make such determinations, shall investigate such matters relating to the planning and development of the county and take such action as required by Title 17 and the laws of the state. 
J.  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of Title 17 will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of Title 17 shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. In cases involving requests for variances from the building setback standards, a plat or survey of the property is required. In cases involving setback variances for commercial or industrial uses of land, a site plan of the property in question prepared by a registered land surveyor, architect, landscape architect or engineer shall be required. The authority to grant such variances shall be limited to variances from the following requirements: 
1.  Setbacks from property lines. 
2.  Planted buffers and vision clearance requirements. 
3.  Off-street parking space requirements. 
4.  Other requirements where the granting of a variance is specifically authorized. 
K.  Such variances may be granted in such individual cases of unnecessary hardship upon a finding of the board that: 
1.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular lot in question because of its size, shape or topography (the hardship must relate to the physical character of the lot and not to a personal or economic hardship); 
2.  The application of the requirements of this Title 17 to this particular piece of property would create an unusual hardship; 
3.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved and are not common to other properties in the neighborhood; and 
4.  Such conditions are not the result of any actions of the property owner; and 
5.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of Title 17; provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by Title 17 or for a conditional use which has been denied by the county planning commission. 
L.  To hear and decide such conditional uses as the board is required to act upon under the terms of Title 17. 
M.  To receive and act upon applications for the change, continuance and/or enlargement of a nonconforming use as provided in Chapter 17.340 of these regulations. 
N.  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of Title 17. 
O.  To perform other duties as from time to time may be delegated by the Hall County Commission. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
2.60.040. - Actions by planning commission. 
A.  From the effective date of this chapter, forward, all references to the zoning board of adjustment as found in the Official Code of Hall County, Georgia, shall be understood to refer to the Hall County Planning Commission. 
B.  In all actions or decisions of the planning commission, three members being present shall constitute a quorum with a majority vote of the quorum constituting an official action or decision of the planning commission. Each official action, with the full text of the motion and record of members' votes shall be incorporated in the minutes of the planning commission. If an application for a conditional use or a use permitted subject to approval of the planning commission is denied by the planning commission, then the same property may not again be considered for any zoning application and no application shall be filed until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the denial of the application and may not be considered for an application of the same type, and no application shall be filed (conditional use, etc.) until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the denial of the application. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
2.60.050. - Deadline for applications for appeals. 
All applications for proposed appeals, whether an appeal for a variance from the building setback standards, conditional use, a nonconforming use or an appeal of a decision by an administrative official, shall be submitted to the office of the planning department at least 15 working days in advance of the next regular meeting of the planning commission. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
2.60.060. - Effective period of approved applications. 
All applications approved by the board, whether a request for variance from the terms of Title 17, a request for conditional use, a request for the enlargement, change or continuance of a nonconforming use or a request to appeal a decision by an administrative official in the enforcement of Title 17, shall be effective for a period of six months. If no action is taken by the applicant to implement the purpose of the application by obtaining the proper permit and/or license and proceeding with the building, occupancy or establishment of business within six months from the date of approval by the board, said approval shall become null and void. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
2.60.070. - Exercise of planning commission powers. 
In exercising the above powers, the planning commission may, in conformity with the provisions of Title 17, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may have all powers of the officer from whom the application is taken, and may direct the issuance of a building permit, occupancy permit or certificate of zoning compliance. In no case shall the powers of the board be construed to include authority to reclassify use zones. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
2.60.080. - Conditions of planning commission decisions. 
In exercising the above powers, the planning commission may place any reasonable conditions or stipulations upon a conditional use, variance, etc., as deemed necessary (such as hours of operation, parking, maximum building size, outside displays, time limits, etc.) to further insure the orderly operation of the proposed use and its compatibility with the surrounding properties. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
2.60.090. - Appeal of planning commission decisions. 
Any decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the board of commissioners in accordance with Chapter 17.370 of this Code. 
(Res. of 3-27-03, § 3) 
APPENDIX B. - REFERENCE MATERIALS 
ARTERIAL ROADS  (Referenced in Section 17.240.060.A [17.240.040]) 

 
(Res. of 11-11-91; Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
COLLECTOR ROADS AS OF JANUARY 20, 1994 

 
(Res. of 2-27-03(1), § 1) 
PART II - SPECIAL ACTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are special acts which relate to Hall County. The acts are included herein substantially as enacted, with the following exceptions: The acts were grouped by subject, and section numbers corresponding with this volume were added by the editors. Where necessary for indexing purposes, catchlines were added or enhanced by the editors. For identification purposes, history notes were added following each section. Introductory language, standard effective date and most repealer sections were omitted if not specific. 

Title 100 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Title 200 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 

 
CHAPTER 200.20. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 

 

200.20.001. - Board created. 
That a board of commissioners of roads and revenues in and for the County of Hall is hereby created, to become effective simultaneously with an act to abolish the board of commissioners of roads and revenues for the County of Hall and with the repeal of an act approved December 23, 1886, creating said board of commissioners and defining their powers and duties, and all acts amendatory thereof; which said repealing act was enacted at the session of the General Assembly of 1935. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 1) 
200.20.002. - Composition; election of chairperson. 
(a)  The board of commissioners of Hall County shall be composed of five members, one from each of the four commissioner districts provided for in section 3 [200.20.004] of this act, and one elected from the county at large who shall be the chairperson. 
(b)  Persons qualifying as candidates for membership on the board shall designate whether qualifying for a district membership or for chairperson. In order to represent a district, a person must be a resident of said district. Each district commissioner shall be elected by a majority of the electors voting in such commissioner district and the chairperson shall be elected by a majority of the electors voting in the county. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 2; 1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 439), p. 3305, § 1; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 629), p. 4764; 1993 Ga. Laws (Act No. 56), p. 3904) 
200.20.003. - Terms of office. 
(a)  The chairperson and those commissioners in office on the effective date of this act who represent district 2 and district 4 shall continue to serve until the expiration of their present terms on December 31, 1996. Their successors shall be elected at the general election in November, 1996, from the commissioner districts provided in section 3 [200.20.004] of this act, for terms of office of four years, beginning January 1, 1997, and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  Those commissioners in office on the effective date of this Act who represent district 1 and district 3 shall continue to serve until the expiration of their present terms on December 31, 1994. Their successors shall be elected at the general election in November, 1994, from the commissioner districts provided in section 3 of this act, for terms of office of four years, beginning January 1, 1995, and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 106), p. 4030, § 1(2A); 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 629), p. 4764, § 1; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 661), p. 4958, § 2; 1993 Ga. Laws (Act No. 56), p. 3904, § 1) 
200.20.004. - Commissioner districts. 
(a)  Hall County is divided into four commissioner districts each to be composed of the following precincts: 
Commissioner District: 1 
CANDLER—Part 
FLOWERY BRANCH I 
FLOWERY BRANCH II 
FRIENDSHIP I 
FRIENDSHIP II 
FRIENDSHIP III 
MORGAN I 
MORGAN III 
ROBERTS 
Commissioner District: 2 
BARK CAMP 
CHESTATEE 
CHICOPEE—Part 
FORK 
MORGAN II 
MURRAYVILLE 
OAKWOOD I 
OAKWOOD II 
OAKWOOD III 
WEST WHELCHEL 
WILSON 
Commissioner District: 3 
BIG HICKORY 
CANDLER—Part 
CLERMONT 
GAINESVILLE II—Part 
GILLSVILLE 
GLADE 
LULA 
NEW HOLLAND—Part 
QUILLIANS 
TADMORE—Part 
WHELCHEL—Part 
Commissioner District: 4 
CHICOPEE—Part 
CANDLER—Part 
GAINESVILLE I 
GAINESVILLE II—Part 
GAINESVILLE III 
GAINESVILLE IV 
GAINESVILLE V 
NEW HOLLAND—Part 
RIVERBEND 
TADMORE—Part 
WHELCHEL—Part 
(b)  For purposes of this section: 
The term "precinct" is synonymous with the term "voting precinct" and means a geographical area designated by article 7 of chapter 2 or 3 of title 21 of the O.C.G.A., within which all electors vote at one polling place; 
(c)  Whenever the description of any commissioner district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia; 
(d)  Any part of Hall County which is not included in any commissioner district described in this section shall be included within that commissioner district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia; and 
(e)  Any part of Hall County which is described in this section as being included in a particular commissioner district shall nevertheless not be included within such commissioner district if such part is not contiguous to such commissioner district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that commissioner district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 3; 1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 439), p. 3305, § 1; 1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 291), p. 3574, § 1; 1978 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1052), p. 3802, § 1; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 629), p. 4764, § 1; 1993 Ga. Laws (Act No. 56), p. 3904, § 1; 2012 Ga. Laws (Res. of 7-12-12), § 1) 
Secs. 200.20.005. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A new § 3A, pertaining to a candidate's declaration of candidacy, was enacted by 1953 Ga. Laws (Jan.—Feb. Sess.) (Act No. 94), p. 2224, § 1. This section was subsequently repealed by 1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 439), p. 3305, § 1. 
200.20.006. - Qualifications of members; vacancies; quorum. 
No person shall be elected as a member of the board unless such person is at least 25 years of age, of good moral character, and experienced and qualified in the transaction of business. In the event a vacancy occurs on the board, it shall be filled in the same manner as provided for filling vacancies in the recall provisions of this act. Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the business of the county and three members must concur to pass any order, let any contract, pledge the credit of the county, grant or allow any claim against the county or direct the payment of any warrant against the public funds belonging to the county. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 4; 1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 439), p. 3305, § 1) 
200.20.007. - Meeting days. 
That said board shall have regular meetings on the second and fourth Thursdays of each month for the transaction of such business as may legitimately come before it with the power to adjourn over from day to day until the business necessary to be considered has been completed. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 5; 1963 Ga. Laws (Jan.—Feb. Sess.) (Act No. 94), p. 2224, § 2; 1957 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), p. 2269, § 1; 1961 Ga. Laws (Act No. 44), p. 2123, § 1; 1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 5194), p. 3) 
200.20.008. - Special or called meetings. 
Said board may have a call meeting for specific purposes but no business shall be transacted at the call meeting that was not specifically provided for in the call, and each person composing the board shall have at least five days' notice of the time of any special or call meeting which notice shall be in writing and entered on the minutes of the board. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 6) 
200.20.009. - Election of clerk; duties. 
That said board be and it is hereby empowered to elect a clerk and prescribe his or her compensation whose duties shall be to keep a correct and accurate minute of the proceedings of said board and record all contracts and other documents required by law to be recorded on the minutes of said board, to keep a correct and accurate account of the monies received and disbursed by said board, to prepare warrants, checks, vouchers, and other papers necessary for the transaction of the business of said board. He or she shall keep a book of inventory of all county property, including road machinery, livestock, chain-gang outfits, road-working tools and equipment, and every other kind and class of property belonging to said county, together with a fair valuation of the same, where located, and in whose custody, and in what condition, which inventory shall, during the month of January in each year, be carefully revised; and he shall keep all such other books and records as may be necessary, or as the board may order, and shall be open to inspection by any citizen or taxpayer of the county. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 7) 
200.20.010. - Oath of clerk; bond. 
That before entering upon the duties of office the person designated as clerk of the board of commissioners of roads and revenues in and for said county shall take and subscribe the following oath: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am not the holder of any public funds in the State of Georgia unaccounted for and that I will faithfully perform the duties of clerk of the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues in and for the County of Hall, keep an accurate record of the official transactions of said board and faithfully enter the same upon the minutes and keep a true and correct account of the monies received and disbursed by said board." 
In addition to this oath said clerk shall give a bond payable to the board of commissioners of roads and revenues in and for the County of Hall in the sum of $1,000.00 conditioned for the faithful performance of his or her duties as such clerk. The terms of office of said clerk shall be at the pleasure of the board. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 8) 
200.20.011. - Purchasing. 
That said board shall make no contract for service or for the purchase of any article or material whatsoever with any person who is related to any one of its members within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity, and wherever practical, all purchases of equipment, material and supplies shall be purchased by competitive bids, which bids shall be kept on file in the office of the board of commissioners and be open to inspection by the grand jury and other citizens of Hall County. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 9; 1937 Ga. Laws (Act No. 450), p. 1344, § 2) 
200.20.012. - Employment of superintendent; term; compensation; bond. 
That said board may in its discretion employ a county superintendent whose term of office shall be at the pleasure of the board and in no event can such superintendent's term of service be fixed for a longer period in advance that twelve months. His compensation to be fixed by the board not to exceed $2,100.00 per annum. The board shall prescribe the duties of such superintendent and before entering upon the duties of his office he shall take and subscribe the following oath: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of County Superintendent in and for the County of Hall so long as these duties are discharged by me, faithfully account for all the property belonging to said county entrusted to my care and that I will endeavor to preserve and protect the property and interest of said county and that I am not the holder of any public funds in the State of Georgia unaccounted for." 
In addition to this oath such superintendent shall execute a bond payable to the board of commissioners of roads and revenues in and for the County of Hall in the sum of $5,000.00 conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties as such superintendent. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 10) 
200.20.013. - Employment of superintendent deemed discretionary. 
That whether a County Superintendent shall be designated at all is discretionary with the board of commissioners of roads and revenues in and for said county. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 11) 
200.20.014. - Salaries of board members, chairman; expense allowance. 
1.  Each member of the board of commissioners shall receive an annual salary of $5,400.00, payable in equal monthly installments. The chairman of the board of commissioners shall receive an annual salary of $6,600.00 payable in equal monthly installments. 
2.  For each meeting attended by the board which the commissioner attends in his official capacity as a member of the board, the chairman and each member of the board shall be authorized to receive an expense allowance equal to the daily expense allowance provided by law for members of the General Assembly but shall be authorized to receive the same for not more than 12 meetings per month. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 12; 1937 Ga. Laws (Act No. 450), p. 1344, § 3; 1953 Ga. Laws (Jan.—Feb. Sess.) (Act No. 94), p. 2224, § 3; 1961 Ga. Laws (Act No. 48), p. 2121, § 1; 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 242), p. 2640, § 1; 1983 Ga. Laws (Act No. 19), p. 3570, § 1; 1989 Ga. Laws (Ex. Sess.) (Act No. EX 6), p. 50, § 1; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 712), p. 5327, § 1; 2007 Ga. Laws, p. 3951 (Res. of 1-24-13(2), § 1)) 
200.20.015. - Jurisdiction of board, generally. 
That said board when sitting for county purposes shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the following subject matters: 
1.  In governing and controlling all county property, letting, hiring, or leasing county convicts. 
2.  Levying taxes for county purposes in accordance with law. 
3.  In examining, auditing, allowing and settling all claims against the county. 
4.  In examining and auditing the accounts of all officers or persons having the care, management, keeping, collecting, or disbursing of money belonging to the county, or appropriated for its use and bring them to settlement. 
5.  In making such rules and regulations for the support of the paupers of the county and the promotion of the health of the county as are not inconsistent with the laws of the state. 
6.  In establishing, altering, abolishing, or opening roads, bridges, and ferries in accordance with law. 
7.  In the appointment of road commissioners and in the general management of the roads, bridges and revenues of the county, including the exercise of all powers over county matters and officers in said county as may be exercised in other counties of this state by the ordinaries where no county commissioners exist; to grant or refuse to grant license to do or perform any act for which a license from the county or county authorities is required by law. 
8.  They shall generally have and perform all the duties vested by law in the county ordinaries when sitting for county purposes. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 13) 
200.20.016. - Jurisdiction over sanitary sewers. 
The board is authorized to construct, maintain, and extend sanitary sewers within any unincorporated areas of the county where the owners of property having at least 51 percent of the frontage abutting such proposed improvements shall consent thereto. The cost of such improvements shall be assessed against the abutting property owners as well as against such property. The board is hereby empowered to enforce the payment of the assessment provided for in this section by the issuance of executions against the abutting property owners and the abutting property. The assessments against the abutting property owners and property shall be prorated according to the frontage abutting such proposed improvements. Said executions shall be issued and levied like the executions for taxes due the county; and said property shall be sold in the same manner and shall be subject to all of the provisions of Code [Ga. Code Ann.] chapter 92-74, relating to executions, issuance and levy of tax fi. fas., as amended. The amount of the assessment of each piece of real estate shall become due and payable at such time as the board may fix by appropriate ordinance. Such assessments shall be a lien against such real estate from the date of the passage of the ordinance fixing the date for the payment of such assessments. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 168), p. 2565, § 1(13A)) 
200.20.017. - Authority to adopt traffic ordinances. 
The board is authorized to adopt such ordinances, not in conflict with the general laws of this State and the United States, to regulate the traffic upon the streets, roads and highways of Hall County as said board shall deem advisable in order to protect and preserve the health, safety, welfare, and morals of the citizens of said county; provided, however, that no railway or railroad lying within Hall County and passing through said county shall be affected by the provisions of this section or by ordinances enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the board of commissioners of roads and revenues of Hall County by this section. The board is further empowered to prescribe penalties and fix the punishment for the violation of any such ordinances. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 293), p. 2983, § 1(13B)) 
200.20.018. - Authority to construct and repair roads, curbs, gutters, etc., in subdivisions. 
The board shall have the power to construct, grade, pave, repave, and repair roads, streets, curbs, gutters, and sidewalks within any approved subdivision whose plat is on record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Hall County, if the owners of such property having at least 51 percent of the frontage abutting such proposed improvements shall consent thereto. The cost of such improvements shall be assessed against the abutting property owners as well as against such property. The board is hereby empowered to enforce payment of the assessment provided for in this section by the issuance of executions against the abutting property owners or the abutting property. The assessments against the abutting property owners and property shall be prorated according to the frontage abutting such proposed improvements. Said executions shall be issued and levied in accordance with the provisions of section 13A [200.20.016] above. The amount of the assessment of each piece of real estate shall become due and payable at such time as the board may fix by appropriate ordinance. Such assessments shall be a lien against such real estate from the date of the passage of the ordinance fixing the date for the payment of such assessments. The board is authorized to issue revenue bonds in accordance with the provisions of the "Revenue Bond Law," approved March 31, 1937 (Ga. L. 1337, p. 761), as amended, for the purpose of financing such improvements. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 294), p. 2985, § 1(13C)) 
200.20.019. - Police powers. 
(a)  The board of commissioners of Hall County is hereby delegated the police powers of the state with respect to persons and property situated within the County of Hall, except with respect to those persons or property situated within the territorial limits of any municipality in such county, and in the exercise of such powers is expressly authorized and empowered to make and establish by ordinance or resolution such rules and regulations respecting persons or property and all other matters and things affecting the good government of the county as it shall deem requisite and proper for the security, welfare, health, and convenience of said county and for the preservation of the peace and good order of the same; provided, such ordinance or resolution, the violation of which is intended by said board to subject the violator thereof to the punishment provided in subsection (b) of this section, shall be designated as such and shall be read at no less than two (2) consecutive regular meetings of said board before said ordinance or resolution shall constitute a legal basis for the prosecution of any such violator under said subsection (b). 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any rule, regulation, ordinance or resolution made by said board of commissioners and established pursuant to the powers authorized by subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the processes of the superior court of Hall County or the state court of Hall County and, upon conviction of such misdemeanor, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00 or by confinement in the county jail or correctional institution not to exceed three (3) months, either fine or confinement, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(c)  The powers herein conferred are not to be construed as exhaustive of or in conflict with other powers heretofore conferred upon the board of commissioners of Hall County but, on the contrary, shall be construed as cumulative and in aid of such other powers. 
(1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 576), p. 4033, § 1(13.1)) 
200.20.020. - Board to authorize payment of bills. 
That the treasurer of said county, or any person, firm or corporation performing the duties of county treasurer, shall not be authorized to pay out any fund belonging to said county until so authorized in writing by order of said board of commissioners. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 14) 
200.20.021. - Eminent domain powers. 
The said board of commissioners of roads and revenues is hereby given the right and authority to exercise the power of eminent domain by taking private property, whether located either within or without Hall County, for public purposes, whenever needed. Said right and power shall be exercised as provided in the Code of 1933. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 15; 1937 Ga. Laws (Act No. 450), p. 1344, § 4) 
200.20.022. - Commission of board members by governor. 
All members of said board of commissioners of roads and revenues of said county shall be commissioned by the governor as other county officers are commissioned. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 16) 
200.20.023. - Recall procedure. 
Members of the board of commissioners of roads and revenues of Hall County, Georgia, may be recalled from office during the term for which they are elected and vacancies filled in the following manner: 
A.  A separate recall petition must be prepared for each member of said board desired to be recalled from office. 
B.  Said recall petition shall read as follows: 
"We the undersigned qualified voters of Hall County, Georgia, are of the opinion that   (name of Member)   , a member of the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues of Hall County, is inefficient, fails to properly perform the duties of his office, and should be recalled from office. We further pledge that if a recall election is held pursuant to this petition, we will vote in favor of the recall from office of said member." 
C.  Said recall petition must be signed by at least 3,250 of the qualified voters of Hall County who were eligible to vote in the preceding general election, or by a minimum of 20 percent of the qualified voters of Hall County who were eligible to vote in the preceding general election, whichever of the two is lesser in number. 
D.  Said recall petition shall be filed with the ordinary of Hall County and he shall enter thereon the date of filing. 
E.  The ordinary shall have fifteen days from date of filed said petition within which to determine that the requisite number of qualified voters of Hall County eligible to vote in the preceding general election have signed said petition. If the ordinary determines that the requisite number of qualified voters have not signed said petition he shall merely return said petition to the party or parties filing same with him and make a public announcement of that fact. If the ordinary determines that the requisite number of qualified voters have signed said petition he shall, on the fifteenth day after filing, or as soon as practicable after said fifteenth day, issue an order calling a recall election on a date not less than fifteen or more than thirty days from the date of the issuance of the order. The order issued by the ordinary calling such recall election shall be published once a week for two weeks in the official county organ prior to the date set for the holding of such recall election. 
F.  The ordinary shall hold said recall election on the day set in the same manner as special elections are held and the expenses of holding same shall be paid by the county out of the administrative expense funds of the county. The ballots for said recall election shall have printed thereon the following, plus the name of the member being voted on: 

 
If more than one member of the board is being voted on, identical provisions as above-stated shall be placed on the same ballot for voting on the other member or members. 
G.  The ordinary shall tabulate the results of said recall election, and if a majority of the qualified voters of the county voting in said recall election vote in favor of the recall of a member or members of the board, the ordinary shall enter an order and file the same in his office declaring the office or offices of such member or members vacant, and such office or offices shall be and remain vacant after the entry of such order until filled by special election hereinafter provided for. It is provided, however, that if all three offices are declared vacant, the ordinary himself shall act as the governing authority of the county during the interim until said three vacant offices are filled by special election hereinafter provided for. But if only one or two of the offices are declared vacant, the remaining two members or one member of the board shall act as the governing authority of the county during the interim until the vacant office or offices are filled as hereinafter provided for. 
If a majority of the qualified voters of the county voting in said recall election vote against the recall of a member or members, the ordinary shall enter an order and file same in his office declaring the attempted recall of such member or members unsuccessful, and such member or members shall continue to hold the office or offices to which elected. 
H.  If an office or offices on the board shall become vacant in the manner provided for in this act, the board of elections of Hall County shall, within 30 days of the date of the vacancy, issue a call for a special election to fill said vacancy or vacancies to be held not less than 30 or more than 90 days from the date of the issuance of the call. The board of elections shall have published in the official county organ a notice of said special election once a week for two weeks prior to the date on which said special election shall be held. Candidates for said vacant office or offices shall qualify with the board of elections, specifying the office for which they are running and thereupon shall be qualified, if otherwise qualified, to run for such specific office and none other in said special election. No candidates shall qualify with the board of elections later than 30 days prior to the date of holding said special election. 
I.  The ordinary shall conduct said special election in the same manner as other special elections are held and the expenses of holding same shall be paid for by the county out of the administrative expense funds of the county. The ordinary shall tabulate the results of said special election, shall declare the results, and shall enter an order stating which candidate or candidates have received the highest number of votes in each race and that he or they are thereby duly elected to fill such vacancy or vacancies for the remainder of the current term. Such duly elected member or members shall thereupon take office in the same manner as do members elected in a regular general election. 
(1953 Ga. Laws (Nov.—Dec. Sess.) (Act No. 718), p. 2719, § 1; 1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 47), p. 2183, § 1; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 661), p. 4958, § 1) 
Editor's note— 1953 Ga. Laws (Nov.—Dec. Sess.) (Act No. 718), p. 2719, § 1, amended 1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, by adding thereto a new, unnumbered section, which section has been included in this compilation as § 200.20.023. For the current composition of the board of commissioners, see section 200.20.002. 
200.20.024. - Fiscal year; annual audit. 
The board of commissioners is hereby given the right and authority to fix the fiscal year of said county for accounting purposes, and shall have the books and accounts of the county commissioners, the tax commissioner and other county officers that the board may deem advisable audited annually by a certified public accountant of this state within three months after the end of the fiscal year. The board may require audits for such other periods as it may think advisable and proper. Full reports of all audits including statements of assets and liabilities, and of revenues and expenses, and such schedules as may be necessary for a clear understanding of the affairs of the county as of the end of each fiscal year, shall be made, and copies of such audit reports shall be furnished the next succeeding grand jury of the superior court of Hall County. An intelligent statement of each audit, showing the financial condition of the county, its receipts and disbursements, shall be published by the board of commissioners, in the official newspaper for the county, so that citizens and taxpayers may fully and readily understand and know the financial condition of the county; such board of commissioners shall publish each month in such newspaper an itemized statement of receipts and disbursements for the previous month. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 17; 1970 Ga. Laws (Act No. 998), p. 2624, § 1) 
200.20.025. - Repeal of laws in conflict. 
That all laws and parts of laws in conflict with any provision contained in this act be and the same are hereby repealed. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), p. 661, § 18) 
CHAPTER 200.30. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

 
ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 200.30.001—200.30.020. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMPENSATION 

200.30.021. - Salary system, generally. 
Commencing with the terms of office which begin on January 1, 1957, the sheriff of Hall County, the clerk of superior court of Hall County and clerk of city court of Hall County (who shall be one person with one salary), and the ordinary of Hall County shall be paid salaries monthly by Hall County, and said salaries shall be said officers' sole compensation for performing the duties of their respective offices. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 202), p. 2627, § 1) 
200.30.022. - Annual salaries. 
The sheriff of Hall County shall be paid a salary of $14,500.00 per year by Hall County in equal monthly installments at the end of each calendar month. 
The clerk of the superior court of Hall County and the clerk of the city court (now the state court) of Hall County (who shall be one office-holder with one salary) shall be paid a salary of $14,000.00 per year by Hall County, in equal monthly installments at the end of each calendar month. 
The ordinary of Hall County shall be paid a salary of $14,000.00 per year by Hall County, in equal monthly installments at the end of each calendar month. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 202), p. 2627, § 2; 1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 48), p. 2118, § 1; 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 217), p. 2538, § 1) 
200.30.023. - Compensation of employees. 
The sheriff, clerk, and ordinary shall have the sole authority to select, hire, fire, and fix the compensation of their necessary employees. The salaries of said employees and the necessary operating expenses of each office shall be paid by Hall County in addition to the salaries of said officers. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 202), p. 2627, § 3) 
200.30.024. - Collection of fees, costs, penalties, etc., by county; annual audit. 
All fees, costs, percentages, forfeitures, penalties, allowances, and all other perquisites of whatever kind which are now or may hereafter be allowed by law to be received or collected as compensation for service by any of said officers shall be collected by each and all of said officers for the sole use of Hall County and shall be paid by said officers to Hall County by the 15th day of each month following the month during which said sums were collected. The commissioners of roads and revenues of Hall County shall cause a certified public accountant to make an annual audit of the records of each of said officers not later than 90 days following the end of each calendar year. Said audit shall report all funds collected and all funds paid to Hall County by each respective officer and all funds due the county but not collected by each respective officer. The expense of preparing such audit for each respective office shall be paid for by Hall County. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 202), p. 2627, § 4) 
200.30.025. - Collection of unpaid funds due county. 
For all funds due Hall County under the preceding section [200.30.024] of this act but which remain uncollected from the party or parties owing same, the clerk of superior court shall issue an execution in favor of Hall County against the party from whom said funds are due and said execution shall be directed and levied in the same manner as now provided by law for other executions. Such execution shall constitute a lien in favor of Hall County equal in rank to a lien for taxes in favor of Hall County. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 202), p. 2627, § 5) 
CHAPTER 200.40. - PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT 
ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 

200.40.001. - Constitutional authority. 
The general assembly is hereby authorized to provide by law for the creation of a civil service system of personnel administration for all persons, other than officials elected by the people, whose salaries are paid out of the funds of Hall County. 
(1967 Ga. Laws (Act No. 88), p. 968, § 1) 
Editor's note— Section 200.40.001 is a constitutional amendment which was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1009), p. 4324. 
Secs. 200.40.002—200.40.020. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SERVICE SYSTEM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of June 25, 2015(1), § 2(Exh. B), repealed the former Art. II, §§ 200.40.021—200.40.028, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from 1967 Ga. Laws (Act No. 227), p. 2556, §§ 1—8; 1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4178, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, p. 4709, § 1; 1990 Ga. Laws, p. 5294, §§ 1—3; 1991 Ga. Laws, p. 4818, § 1; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1270), p. 6559, §§ 1, 2; 1992 Ga. Laws, p. 7076, § 1; 1992 Ga. Laws, p. 7102, § 1. 

200.40.021. - Purpose. 
This action shall be known and may be cited as the "Hall County Civil Service Act." The general purpose of this act is to establish a civil service system for Hall County, Georgia, providing for the recruitment, selection, development, and retention of an effective work force of capable, diligent, and honest employees. The civil service system shall include policies for employee hiring and advancement, training, career development and performance evaluation, employee relations, and the disposition of employee grievances, discipline, discharge, and related activities. It shall be the purpose of the act to establish a civil service system in which all personnel matters shall be determined solely on the basis of merit and qualifications, without regard to race, color, sex, age, national origin, disability, or political affiliation. 
(Res. of 6-25-15(1), § 2(Exh. B)) 
200.40.022. - Membership and exempt individuals. 
There is hereby created and established a civil service system to be known as the Hall County Civil Service System. All Hall County employees, now employed or hereafter employed, and all employees and deputies, now employed or hereafter employed, of the Hall County Sheriff, the Hall County Probate Judge, the Hall County Clerk of Superior Court, and the Hall County Tax Commissioner shall be members of the Hall County Civil Service System. The following shall not be members of the Hall County Civil Service System: elected officers of the county, employees of the magistrate, juvenile, state and superior courts; the district attorney; the Hall County Solicitor; members of appointed boards, members of commissions and authorities, part-time employees, temporary employees, interns, and all employees, who as of the date of adoption of this amendment, currently have a contractual employment relationship with Hall County and all employees in the future, who, at the time of hire, by agreement with the hiring authority and with approval of the county administrator, will enter into a contractual employment agreement instead of the civil service system. 
(Res. of 6-25-15(1), § 2(Exh. B)) 
200.40.023. - Appointment and compensation of administrative hearing officer. 
A.  The Hall County Board of Commissioners shall select an independent, impartial attorney who has been a member of the State Bar of Georgia for at least five years to serve as administrative hearing officer in matters for which a hearing is allowed under section 200.40.024. The administrative hearing officer shall not be a current or former employee of Hall County and shall receive such per diem compensation, if any, as deemed appropriate by the Hall County Board of Commissioners. The administrative hearing officer shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Commissioners of Hall County. 
B.  Duties of the administrative hearing officer shall include: 
1.  To conduct hearings and render decisions on charges preferred against persons employed in the several departments and offices included in said civil service system and to hear appeals from any employee included in the civil service system who claims to have been improperly suspended without pay, demoted, or dismissed. All testimony before the hearing officer shall be transcribed, rendered under oath or affirmation, by oral testimony, depositions, or interrogatories, and with the right of cross examination. All decisions of the hearing officer shall be entered into a written record which shall be open to inspection by the public during regular office hours. The authority of the hearing officer while hearing employee appeals shall be limited to determining if management's decision is supported by the evidence, lies within the lawful discretion of management, and is consistent with county policies and procedures. 
2.  The administrative hearing officer shall keep and maintain an accurate written record of his/her hearings and proceedings and shall be furnished clerical assistance by the governing authority to keep and maintain his/her records. 
3.  The administrative hearing officer shall be authorized to make recommendations as to amendments, additions to, and changes in the Hall County Government Employee's Handbook and Policy Guidelines from time to time, and when said amendments, changes, or additions are adopted by the governing authority of Hall County, said amendments shall have the force of law and be binding on all parties affected by said civil service system. 
(Res. of 6-25-15(1), § 2(Exh. B)) 
200.40.024. - Administrative hearing officer hearings. 
A.  It shall be the duty, function and responsibility of the administrative hearing officer to represent the interest of the public in the improvement of personnel administration and the selection and retention of qualified personnel. All hearings before the administrative hearing officer shall be open and held in offices provided, therefore, by the governing authority of Hall County. The governing authority of said county is hereby authorized to provide necessary clerical assistance to the administrative hearing officer. Said administrative hearing officer shall conduct scheduled hearings, and may hold additional hearings as may be required for the proper discharge of his/her duties. 
B.  In any appeal by an employee, it shall be the burden of the employee to establish and verify the action in question: 
1.  Does not substantially comply with sound management principles, consistent with the rules and regulations of the Hall County Civil Service Act; 
2.  Is not supported by a preponderance of the evidence; and 
3.  Is not reasonable or relative to the severity of the offense. 
(Res. of 6-25-15(1), § 2(Exh. B)) 
200.40.025. - Hall County Director of Human Resources. 
The duties and functions of the Hall County Director of Human Resources shall be as follows: 
A.  To prepare and submit proposed rules and regulations and standards of the civil service system or amendments thereto and thereafter, recommend to the governing authority of Hall County the adoption of rules, regulations, standards and amendments effectuating the civil service system established under the provisions of this act. If the governing authority shall fail to adopt such rules, regulations and standards within 45 days, they shall become of full force and effect unless the governing authority shall conduct public hearing thereon in which event the governing authority may change, modify, or disapprove such rules, regulations, or standards. Such rules and regulations shall include provisions for the establishment and maintenance of job classification and compensation plans, the conduct of examinations for appointment under the civil service system, the certification of eligible persons, appointment, promotions, transfers, demotions, separations, tenure, service ratings, reinstatements, appeals and such additional regulations as may be deemed to be in the best interest of impartial selection of efficient personnel and improvement of public administration. Such rules and regulations shall prohibit political activity by any employee covered by the civil service system or the administrative hearing officer. Said rules and regulations when adopted by the governing authority of Hall County or otherwise becoming effective, shall have the force of law and be binding upon all departments and offices of the county as may be covered under the Hall County Civil Service System Act. 
(Res. of 6-25-15(1), § 2(Exh. B)) 
200.40.026. - Suspension without pay, demotion, dismissal and appeal. 
A.  No employee of any department or office of the County who is covered under the Hall County Civil Service System Act may be suspended without pay, demoted, or dismissed from employment in said department or office except for good cause and in accordance with the Hall County Government Employee Handbook and Policy Guidelines as approved by the governing authority of Hall County. Any employee who is suspended without pay, demoted, or dismissed shall have the right of appeal pursuant to the terms of the rules and regulations prescribed for appeal. Such appeal shall be heard and determined by the administrative hearing officer within 45 days of the date that said appeal was filed with the Hall County Department of Human Resources; provided, however, that such employee must file his/her appeal with the Hall County Department of Human Resources in writing within ten days from the date of his/her suspension without pay, demotion or dismissal. The decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be binding upon the governing authority of Hall County, the Hall County Sheriff, the Hall County Probate Judge, the Hall County Clerk of Superior Court, and the Hall County Tax Commissioner as to whether such suspension without pay, demotion, or dismissal was for proper cause. 
B.  All appeals under this section 2.120.060 shall be heard by the administrative hearing officer. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing, make evidentiary rulings and prepare final orders of the decision. 
(Res. of 6-25-15(1), § 2(Exh. B)) 
200.40.027. - Expenses of administrative hearing officer. 
All costs for expenses, supplies for the establishment an operation of the civil service system and the administrative hearing officer shall be borne by the county and paid out of county funds as a cost of administration. 
(Res. of 6-25-15(1), § 2(Exh. B)) 
200.40.028. - Effective date. 
The provisions of this act shall become effective July 1, 2015. 
(Res. of 6-25-15(1), § 2(Exh. B)) 
CHAPTER 200.50. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 

 
ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 200.50.001—200.50.020. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK COMMISSION 

200.50.021. - Short title. 
This may be cited as the "Chicopee Woods Area Park Commission Act." 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 1; 1988 Ga. Laws (Act No. 861), p. 3783, § 1) 
200.50.022. - Legal status; composition; vacancies; officers; quorum; compensation; rules. 
(a)  There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Gainesville Area Park Commission (hereinafter "commission"), which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation by that name, style and title and said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the commission or a trustee acting under a trust indenture shall in no event by liable for any torts committed by any of the officers, agents and employees thereof. The commission is hereby granted the same exemptions and exclusions from taxes as are now or hereafter may be granted to cities and counties for the construction, acquisition and operation of facilities similar to facilities to be operated by the commission as provided under the provisions of this act. 
(b)  The body corporate and politic created by subsection (a) of this section and known as the "Gainesville Area Park Commission" is hereby renamed as the "Chicopee Woods Area Park Commission." The change of name or of composition of the commission shall in no way affect the vested rights of any person under this act or impair the obligations of any contracts under this act. 
(c)  The commission shall consist of 11 members, all of whom shall reside within the bounds of Hall County, Georgia. Four of such members shall be appointed by the commissioners of the City of Gainesville (hereinafter the "city"), one of which shall be the mayor of the City of Gainesville, or his designee, who shall be a commissioner of the City of Gainesville, five members shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of Hall County (hereinafter the "county"), one of which shall be the chairman of the board of commissioners of Hall County, or his designee, who shall be a member of the board of commissioners of Hall County, and two members shall be appointed by the commission. The following named persons shall initially serve as members of the commission for the period of time indicated for each person respectively, to wit: 
(1)  From the date of the approval of this act until March 26, 1989, and until their successors are appointed and assume office, Ed Wayne, appointed by the city; Foster Watkins, appointed by the county; and Ray McRae, appointed by the commission; 
(2)  From the date of the approval of this act until March 26, 1990, and until their successors are appointed and assume their duties, Pierce Hancock, appointed by the city; Roger Bower, appointed by the county; and Jack Burd, appointed by the commission; 
(3)  From the date of the approval of this act until March 26, 1991, and until their successors are appointed and assume their duties, James E. Mathis, Sr., appointed by the county; Dr. John Davis, appointed by the city; and Eugene Mooney, appointed by the county; 
(4)  The current chairman of the board of commissioners of Hall County, Jerry Nix, and the current mayor of the City of Gainesville, Ernest Moore, or their respective successors as chairman and mayor, respectively, have been selected and have assumed the duties of such offices. 
Upon the expiration of the term of office of each of the abovenamed members, the vacancies created by the expiration of said terms, except for the position of chairman of the board of commissioners of Hall County and the mayor of the City of Gainesville, shall be filled by an appointment by the respective governing authority who appointed the member who last filled the office that is vacant. Each member so selected shall serve for a term of three years. Vacancies occurring other than by expiration of the term of office shall be filled in like manner for the balance of the term. The commission shall elect one of its members as chairman and another member as vice-chairman and it shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer. Neither the secretary nor the treasurer shall be required to be a member of the commission and, if not a member, he or she shall have no voting rights. A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum necessary for the transaction of business and a majority vote of those present at any meeting at which there is a quorum shall be sufficient to do and perform any action authorized and permitted by law. No vacancy shall impair the right of the quorum to transact any and all business in accordance with the foregoing procedure. The members of the commission shall serve without compensation except that they shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in performance of their duties. The commission shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 2; 1988 Ga. Laws (Act No. 861), p. 3783, § 2) 
200.50.023. - Definitions. 
As used in this act, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  The word "commission" shall mean the Gainesville Area Park Commission created in section 2 of this act. The commission shall have all powers of an authority and everywhere the word "commission" is used it shall include the word authority, as said term is used in the Constitution of the State of Georgia and the statutes relating thereto. 
(b)  The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance and operation of a recreation center and area or centers and areas, including, but not limited to, playgrounds, parks, hiking, camping and picnicking areas and facilities, swimming and wading pools, lakes, golf courses, tennis courts, stadiums, athletic fields and courts, club houses, gymnasiums, auditoriums, gymnatoriums and related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, including real and personal property, so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance and operation of such recreational facilities and areas, deemed by the commission to be necessary, convenient or desirable. 
(c)  The term "cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired and the cost of all conveyances in fee simple of the commission's title thereto and leases thereof, the cost of preparing the land, including the installation of storm and sanitary sewers, the cost of all machinery, equipment and furnishings related to the operation of any project, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for six months after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal and legal expenses, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, and the cost of placing any project in operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the "cost of the project" and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of any funds of the commission, including the proceeds of any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act for any such project or projects. 
(d)  The terms "revenue bonds," "bonds" and "obligations" as used in this act, shall mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. Laws 1957, p. 36 et seq.), as amended, amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (Ga. Laws 1937, p. 761 et seq.), as amended, and such type of obligations may be issued by the commission as authorized under said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereto and in addition, shall also mean obligations of the commission, the issuance of which are hereinafter specifically provided for in this act. 
(e)  Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the commission, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the commission therefrom and all properties used, leased and sold in connection therewith, together with grants which may be received for the benefit of the project from the United States of America or the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality of either of them, will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving and extending the project and to pay the principal of and interest on the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 3) 
200.50.024. - Powers. 
The commission shall have powers: 
(a)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure. 
(b)  To acquire by purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes. 
(c)  To acquire in its own name by purchase or gift, or otherwise, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or rights of easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or disposition of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the commission; and if the commission shall deem it expedient to construct any project on any lands the title to which shall then be in the State of Georgia, the governor is hereby authorized to convey for and in behalf of the state title to such lands to the commission upon payment to the director, fiscal division, department of administrative services for the credit of the general fund of the state of the reasonable value of such lands, such value to be determined by three appraisers to be agreed upon by the governor and the chairman of the commission; and if the commission shall deem it expedient to construct any project on any lands the title to which shall then be in Hall County or in any municipality incorporated in said county, the governing authority or body of said county or of any of said municipalities, is hereby authorized to convey title to such lands to the commission if said property is unserviceable or cannot be advantageously or beneficially used by said county or municipalities upon payment for the credit of the general funds of said county or municipalities the reasonable value of such lands, such value to be determined by three appraisers to be agreed upon by the governing authority or body of said county or municipality and the chairman of the commission. 
(d)  To appoint, select and employ, officers, agents and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations. 
(e)  To make contracts, leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and to dispose by conveyance of its title in fee simple of real and personal property of every kind and character, and any and all persons, firms and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions or agencies of the state are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases or agreements with the commission upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable. 
(f)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds or other funds of the commission or from such proceeds or other funds and any grant from the United States of America or the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality of either of them. 
(g)  To accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality, may impose. 
(h)  To accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision, may impose. 
(i)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute evidences of such indebtedness and to secure the same and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof. 
(j)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state. 
(k)  The commission is specifically authorized from time to time to sell, lease, grant, exchange or otherwise dispose of any surplus property, both real or personal, or interest therein not required in the normal operation of and usable in the furtherance of the purpose for which the commission was created, except as such right and power may be limited as provided in section 17 [200.50.037] hereof. 
(l)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this act. 
(m)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this act, the commission shall exercise its powers only over lands which have heretofore been donated and conveyed by Johnson and Johnson to the City of Gainesville, Georgia, which land the commission is hereby specifically authorized to receive and over lands contiguous thereto, which are donated to the commission at any time in the future by any person, firm, corporation, or governmental entity. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 4) 
200.50.025. - Revenue bonds—Generally. 
The commission, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties and liabilities vested in the commission created hereby, shall have power and is hereby authorized at one time, or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds, for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein defined of any one or more projects and to establish a reasonable debt service reserve in connection with any bond issue. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund herein provided for such payment. The bonds of each shall bear interest from the date of such bonds at such rate or rates as shall be determined by the commission without regard to any limit prescribed in the Revenue Bond Law or any amendment thereto, or any other law. Interest on any such bonds shall be payable semi-annually, principal shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the commission, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the commission, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the commission in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. Such revenue bonds or obligations shall be issued pursuant to and in conformity with the procedures set forth in the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. L. 1957, p. 36 et seq.), as amended, amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (Ga. L. 1937, p. 761 et seq.), as amended, and all procedures pertaining to such issuance, including the issuance of bonds in exchange for outstanding bonds, the validation certificate of the clerk of the superior court, and the execution of the same, shall be the same as those contained in said Revenue Bond Law as now or hereafter amended. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 5) 
200.50.026. - Same—Form; denomination; registration; place of payment. 
The commission shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the commission may determine and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest, and the commission may make such provisions for exchangeability, transfer and the like as the commission may deem proper. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 6) 
200.50.027. - Same—Signatures; seal. 
All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the commission and attested by the secretary and treasurer of the commission and the official seal of the commission shall be affixed thereto and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairman and secretary and treasurer of the commission. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signatures of such persons and any bond may be signed, sealed and attested on behalf of the commission by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of the bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 7) 
200.50.028. - Same—Negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act shall have and are hereby declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under laws of this state. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and the said bonds and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 8) 
200.50.029. - Same—Sale; proceeds. 
The commission may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the commission and the proceeds derived from the sale of such bonds shall be used solely for the purpose provided in the proceedings authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 9) 
200.50.030. - Same—Interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the commission may, under like restrictions issue interim receipts, interim certificates or temporary bonds with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 10) 
200.50.031. - Same—Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The commission may also provide for the replacement of any bond or any coupons which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 11) 
200.50.032. - Same—Conditions precedent to issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions and things which are specified or required by this act. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special meeting of the commission by a majority of its members. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 12) 
200.50.033. - Same—Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of City of Gainesville, Hall County, or the State of Georgia, nor a pledge of the faith and credit of said city, county, or state, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund hereinafter provided for and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate the said city or said county to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 13) 
200.50.034. - Same—Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the commission, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the commission and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside of the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues, earnings or grants to be received by the commission, including the proceeds derived from the sale from time to time of any surplus property of the commission, both real and personal. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the commission in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of projects, the maintenance, operation, repair and insurance of projects, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all monies, including the proceeds derived from the sale of property of the commission, both real and personal, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the commission and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the commission. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee, and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the commission may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 14) 
200.50.035. - Same—To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
The commission shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who or any agency, bank or trust company which shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 15) 
200.50.036. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued and any monies derived from the sale of any properties, both real and personal of the commission, and the proceeds of any grants, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the commission to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the commission as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of: 
(1)  The interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; 
(2)  The principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(3)  Any premium upon bonds acquired by redemption, payment or otherwise; 
(4)  The necessary charges of the paying agent or agents for paying principal and interest; and 
(5)  Any investment fees or charges. 
The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture any surplus monies in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not be reissued, printed and delivered. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 16) 
200.50.037. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this act or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the commission, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 17) 
200.50.038. - Refunding bonds. 
The commission is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of bonds of the commission for the purpose of funding or refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon and premium, if any. The issuance of such funding or refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the commission in respect to the same, shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 18) 
200.50.039. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this act or any suit or action against such commission shall be brought in the superior court of Hall County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 19) 
200.50.040. - Validation. 
Bonds of the commission shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the Revenue Bond Law, as now or hereafter amended. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action the State of Georgia or any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or the United States Government or any department, agency or instrumentality of the United States Government, if subject to being sued and if consenting to same, which has contracted with the commission for the services and facilities of or with respect to the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated and the state or such municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, department, agency, or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as a part of the security for the payment of any such bonds of the commission. The bonds when validated and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds and the security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and against the commission issuing the same, the state and any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, department, agency, or instrumentality, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the commission. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 20) 
200.50.041. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the commission remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of said commission or of its officers, employees or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency or authority will be created which will compete with the commission to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the commission. The provisions of this act shall be for the benefit of the commission and the holders of any such bonds, and upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 21) 
200.50.042. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, income, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this act. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 22) 
200.50.043. - Purpose of the commission. 
Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this act, the general purposes of the commission are declared to be: acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, and operating a recreational center and area or centers and areas, including, but not limited to, playgrounds, parks, hiking, camping, and picnicking areas and facilities, stadiums, athletic fields and courts, clubhouses, gymnasiums, auditoriums, gymnatoriums, and related buildings, golf courses, pavilions, farmers' markets, nature study centers, and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, and the lease or sale of any part or all of such facilities, including real and personal property, so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance, and operation of such recreational facilities and areas; and doing any and all things deemed by the commission necessary, convenient, or desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation of such types of undertakings. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 23; 1988 Ga. Laws (Act No. 861), p. 3783, § 3) 
200.50.044. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
The commission is hereby authorized to prescribe and revise from time to time rates, fees, tolls and charges, and to collect such rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished, including leases, concessions or subleases of its lands or facilities, or contracts for the use of its land and facilities, and to determine the price and terms at and under which its lands or facilities may be sold and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects, to issue revenue bonds as herein provided to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipment, betterment or extension of its lands and facilities and to pledge the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon, all or any part of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects, including the revenues of improvements, betterments or extensions thereto thereafter made or the sale of any of its land and facilities. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 24) 
200.50.045. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the commission to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this act, including the basis on which recreational facilities shall be furnished. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 25) 
200.50.046. - Properties exempt from taxation. 
The properties of the commission, both real and personal, are declared to be public properties used for the benefit and welfare of the people of the State of Georgia, and not for purposes of private or corporate benefit and income, and such properties and the commission shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of any city, county, or the state or any political subdivision thereof; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not prohibit or inhibit the lease or use of commission properties for private purposes which in the sole judgment of the commission support the general purposes of the commission. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 26) 
200.50.047. - Annual audit. 
(a)  At the conclusion of each fiscal year of the commission, the affairs of the commission shall be audited by a certified public accounting firm. A synopsis of the audit shall be published in the official organ of Hall County as soon as the report of the auditors is submitted to the commission. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 27) 
Editor's note— As enacted by 1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 27 contained paragraph (a) only. 
200.50.048. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 28) 
200.50.049. - Liberal construction of act. 
This act being for the purpose of promoting the health, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the United States, of the State of Georgia, of Hall County, and of the City of Gainesville, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 29) 
200.50.050. - Effect of partial invalidity of act. 
Should any sentence, clause, phrase, or part of this act be declared for any reason to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect such remainder of this act or any part hereof, other than the part so held to be invalid, but the remaining provisions of this act shall remain in full force and effect, and it is the express intention of this act to enact each provision of this act independently of any other provision hereof. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 30) 
200.50.051. - Repeal. 
This act does not in any way take from the City of Gainesville, Hall County or any municipality located therein, the authority to own, develop, operate and maintain public parks and recreational facilities, or to issue revenue bonds as is provided by the Revenue Bond Law of Georgia (Ga. L. 1957, p. 36 et seq.), as amended, amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (Ga. L. 1937, p. 761 et seq.), as amended. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1216), p. 4054, § 31) 
Title 300 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 

 
CHAPTER 300.20. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAXES 

 

Sec. 300.20.001. - Levy of taxes and fees by county. 
(a)  [ Authority. ] The governing authority of Hall County is authorized to levy, assess, and collect business and occupational license taxes and license fees from all persons, firms, and corporations doing business in the unincorporated area of Hall County, except those businesses specifically exempted by this act. 
(b)  [ Exemptions. ] The following businesses shall be exempt from taxes and fees imposed under this act: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under chapter 3 of title 46 of the O.C.G.A.; and 
(3)  Those businesses upon which local license taxes or license fees are imposed under general laws authorizing such local license taxes and license fees, unless such general law specifically authorizes local license taxes and license fees other than those to which it specifically relates. 
(c)  [ Classification. ] The governing authority of Hall County is authorized to classify business and to assess different taxes and fees against different classes of businesses being carried on in the unincorporated area of the county. 
(d)  [ Enforcement authority. ] The governing authority of Hall County is authorized to enact ordinances for the enforcement of this act and to provide for the punishment of violations of such ordinances. Any ordinance or ordinances of the Hall County governing authority which relate to the subject matter of this act and which are in effect on the effective date of this act shall continue in effect, and this act shall not affect any rights or liabilities existing under such ordinance or ordinances. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1010), p. 4326, § 1) 
Title 400 - ELECTIONS 

 
CHAPTER 400.10. - IN GENERAL 

 

Sec. 400.10.001. - Authority to hold referendum. 
The commissioners of roads and revenues of Hall County, Georgia, shall, in their discretion by majority vote, have the power and authority to call and provide for the holding not more than once in each calendar year of an advisory referendum in which the qualified voters of Hall County can express their opinion on such issues as the commissioners of roads and revenues may deem advisable to submit to the qualified voters of Hall County. 
(1956 Ga. Laws (Act No. 325), p. 3052, § 1) 
Sec. 400.10.002. - How referendum called. 
Such referendum shall be called by passage of a resolution by the commissioners of roads and revenues of Hall County fixing the date thereof and stating the issues to be placed upon the referendum ballot. 
(1956 Ga. Laws (Act No. 325), p. 3052, § 2) 
Sec. 400.10.003. - Notice of referendum. 
The resolution referred to in the preceding section shall be published at least once in the official publication organ of Hall County not less than 15 nor more than 30 days prior to the date on which the referendum is to be held. 
(1956 Ga. Laws (Act No. 325), p. 3052, § 3) 
Sec. 400.10.004. - Conduct of referendum. 
The commissioners of roads and revenues of Hall County shall in writing instruct the ordinary of Hall County to prepare the ballots, conduct and supervise the holding of the referendum in the same manner as provided by law for holding special elections, tabulate the results, and report the results in writing to the commissioners of roads and revenues of Hall County. It shall be the ordinary's duty to comply with said instructions and the results of the referendum shall be entered on the minutes of the commissioners of roads and revenues of Hall County. 
(1956 Ga. Laws (Act No. 325), p. 3052, § 4) 
Sec. 400.10.005. - Cost of referendum. 
The cost of holding such referendum shall be paid by Hall County as an administrative expense of the county. 
(1956 Ga. Laws (Act No. 325), p. 3052, § 5) 
CHAPTER 400.20. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS[1] 

 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— At the direction of the city, Ch. 400.20, §§ 400.20.001—400.20.017, was deleted and replaced by a new Ch. 400.200, §§ 400.20.001—400.20.020. The former Ch. 400.20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 230), p. 4245, §§ 1—17. 

Sec. 400.20.001. 
Pursuant to subsection (b) of Code Section 21-2-40 of the O.C.G.A., there is created, effective January 1, 2015, the Board of Elections and Registration of Hall County, hereinafter referred to as "the board." The board shall have the powers and duties of the former superintendent of elections of Hall County relative to the conduct of primaries and elections and shall have the powers and duties of the Board of Registrars of Hall County relating to the registration of voters and absentee balloting procedures. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 1) 
Sec. 400.20.002. 
(a)  The board shall be composed of five members, each of whom shall be an elector and resident of Hall County and shall be selected in the following manner: 
(1)  Two members of the board shall be appointed by the chairperson of the county executive committee of the political party whose candidate for President of the United States at the last election for such office preceding such appointment received the next largest number of votes in the county. Two members of the board shall be appointed by the chairperson of the county executive committee of the political party whose candidate for President of the United States at the last election for such office preceding such appointment received the next largest number of votes in the county. Each appointment shall have been ratified by a majority of the members of each of such respective executive committees voting at a regularly scheduled meeting of such respective county executive committees or a meeting duly called and held for such purpose. In the event that such appointments are not ratified by a majority of the members of such executive committees at least 60 days preceding the date on which such members are to take office, then the members of the respective executive committees may appoint such members by a two-thirds' majority of the membership of such executive committee at a regularly scheduled meeting or at a meeting duly called and held for such purpose. In the event that members of such executive committees fail to appoint such members at least 30 days preceding the date on which such members are to take office, such members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Hall County; and 
(2)  The fifth member of the board shall be the person who is serving as chief registrar of the county pursuant to Code Section 21-2-212 of the O.C.G.A. on the effective date of this Chapter and shall be so certified by the commissioners. Successors to such member shall be appointed by the commissioners. The fifth member shall be the chairperson of the board. 
(b)  The initial terms of office of the first members of the board shall expire on December 31, 2018, and upon the appointment and qualification of their respective successors. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 2) 
Sec. 400.20.003. 
Each member of the board shall: 
(1)  Serve for a term of four years and until a successor is appointed and qualified, except that the initial terms of office shall be as provided in subsection (b) of Section 400.20.002; 
(2)  Be eligible to succeed such member and shall have the right to resign at any time by giving written notice of such resignation to the commissioners and to the Clerk of the Superior Court of Hall County; and 
(3)  Shall be subject to removal from the board at any time, for cause, after notice and hearing, by the commissioners. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 3) 
Sec. 400.20.004. 
(a)  The appointment of each member shall be evidenced by the appointing authority filing an affidavit with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Hall County no later than 30 days preceding the date upon which such member is to take office, stating the name and residence address of the person appointed and certifying that such member has been duly appointed as provided in this Chapter. The Clerk of the Superior Court of Hall County shall be notified of interim appointments in the same manner as the regular appointment of members. 
(b)  The Clerk of the Superior Court of Hall County shall record each such certification on the minutes of the superior court and shall certify the name of each member to the Secretary of State and provide for the issuance of appropriate commissions to the members as provided by law for county registrars. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 4) 
Sec. 400.20.005. 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of any member before the expiration of his or her term, by removal, death, resignation, or otherwise, the appointing authority which is required under Section 400.20.002 of this Chapter to make the appointment to the office upon expiration of the term shall appoint a successor to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner set forth in Section 400.20.002 of this Chapter. If a vacancy in office under subsection (a) of Section 400.20.002 of this Chapter is not filled within 60 days after it occurs, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the commissioners. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 5) 
Sec. 400.20.006. 
(a)  The first members of the board under this Chapter shall be appointed as provided in this Chapter to take office on January 1, 2015. The board shall take no official action until all members have been certified to the Clerk of the Superior Court of Hall County. 
(b)  Before entering upon the duties of office, each member shall take substantially the same oath as required by law for county registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 6) 
Sec. 400.20.007. 
(a)  The board shall be empowered with all the powers and duties relating to the conduct of primaries and elections as election superintendents pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
(b)  The board shall be empowered with all the powers and duties relating to the registration of voters and absentee balloting procedures as the board of registrars pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 7) 
Sec. 400.20.008. 
No person who holds elective public office shall be eligible to serve as a member of the board during the term of such elective office, and the position of membership of any member of the board shall be deemed vacant upon such member's qualifying as a candidate for elective public office. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 8) 
Sec. 400.20.009. 
Any rule or regulation promulgated by a county executive committee under the provisions of subsection (c) of Code Section 21-2-111 of the O.C.G.A. with regard to the conduct of primaries shall be null and void if in conflict with a valid rule or regulation of the board. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 9) 
Sec. 400.20.010. 
(a)  Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require or prohibit joint primaries or to require or prohibit the commissioners or any other public agency to bear any expense of conducting primaries not otherwise required by law. 
(b)  The board shall have the authority to contract with any municipal corporation located within Hall County for the holding by the board of any primary or election to be conducted within such municipal corporation. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 10) 
Sec. 400.20.011. 
With the approval of the commissioners, the board shall be authorized to expend public funds for the purpose of preparing and distributing material solely to inform and instruct electors of the county adequately with regard to elections. No material distributed by the board shall contain or express, in any manner or form, any commentary or expression of opinion or request for support with respect to any political issue or matter of political concern. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 11) 
Sec. 400.20.012. 
(a)  The board shall be authorized and empowered to organize itself, may elect from among its membership a vice chairperson, shall determine its procedural rules and regulations, adopt bylaws, specify the functions and duties of its employees, and otherwise take such actions as are appropriate to the management of its affairs; provided, however, that no such action shall conflict with state law. 
(b)  Action and decision by the board shall be by a majority of the members of the board. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 12) 
Sec. 400.20.013. 
(a)  The board shall fix and establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, the directives governing the execution of matters within its jurisdiction. The board shall have regular monthly meetings at the principal office of the board or at the place of meetings of the commissioners. Any specially called meetings held pursuant to the bylaws adopted by the board shall be held only after notification of the time and place of such meeting has been communicated in writing to the person designated by the commissioners to provide public information. All meetings of the board, of whatever kind, shall be open to the public. 
(b)  The board shall maintain a written record of policy decisions that shall be amended to include additions or deletions. Such written records shall be made available for the public to review. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 13) 
Sec. 400.20.014. 
(a)  The chairperson of the board shall be the chief executive officer of the board and shall generally supervise, direct, and control the administration of the affairs of the board pursuant to the law and the duly adopted resolutions of the board. 
(b)  Compensation for the members of the board shall be fixed by the commissioners, but the first chairperson shall receive as a minimum the same compensation as was received by the chief registrar of the county on January 1, 2014, and such minimum may be increased by the commissioners to reflect the additional duties the chairperson will perform under this Chapter and the other members of the board shall receive as a minimum for each day of service on the business of the board the same per diem as provided for registrars, other than than the chief registrar, under Code Section 21-2-212 of the O.C.G.A. 
(c)  All amounts payable under this section shall be paid from the funds of Hall County. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 14) 
Sec. 400.20.015. 
The commissioners shall be authorized to expend public funds to provide the board with such proper and suitable administrative offices and with such clerical assistance and other employees as the commissioners shall deem appropriate. Compensation for such administrative personnel shall be paid by the commissioners under the personnel system wholly from county funds. This section shall not be construed so as to require the commissioners to expend any funds simply because they are authorized to do so under this Chapter. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 15) 
Sec. 400.20.016. 
The board shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, and training of poll workers in elections. Such workers shall be appointed, insofar as practicable, from lists provided by the county executive committee of those political parties whose nominees for President of the United States received at least 10 percent of the vote in Hall County for such office during the most recent general election for that office. It shall be the responsibility of any such political party to provide such list to the board in a timely fashion and to supplement such list upon a reasonable request to do so. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 16) 
Sec. 400.20.017. 
The terms "election," "elector," "political party," "primary," and "public office" shall have the same meanings as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," unless otherwise clearly apparent from the context of this Chapter; and the term "commissioners" means the Board of Commissioners of Hall County, and "county" means Hall County. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 17) 
Sec. 400.20.018. 
Effective on the first day that the board can take official action under Section 400.20.006 of this Chapter the Board of Elections of Hall County and the Board of Registrars of Hall County shall be relieved of all powers and duties to which the board succeeds by the provisions of this Chapter and shall deliver thereafter to the chairperson of the board, upon the chairperson's written request, the custody of all equipment, supplies, materials, books, papers, records, and facilities of every kind pertaining to such powers and duties. On such date, the Board of Registrars of Hall County shall stand abolished. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 18) 
Sec. 400.20.019. 
Effective on the first day that the board can take official action under Section 400.20.006 ofthis Act, an Act to provide for the board of elections of Hall County, approved March 19, 1987 (Ga. L. 1987, p. 4245), and all amendatory Acts thereto shall be repealed. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, § 19) 
Sec. 400.20.020. 
This Chapter shall become effective on July 1, 2014. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Chapter are repealed. 
(2014 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 454), pg. 4149, §§ 20, 21) 
Title 500 - FINANCE AND TAXATION 

 
CHAPTER 500.10. - IN GENERAL 

 

Sec. 500.10.001. - Powers of general assembly. 
The general assembly of Georgia shall have the power, by general, local or special law applicable to Hall County, to: 
(a)  Prescribe the date or time when the fiscal authorities of said county shall make or fix the levy of ad valorem taxes and the amount of assessments and other changes to be made for any purpose against property or property owners; 
(b)  Prescribe the manner in which bills and notices covering taxes or assessments or other charges, including those due to the State of Georgia and Hall County, shall be prepared, the number of such bills or notices, and the information to be shown thereon, or to delegate authority to determine such matters; 
(c)  Provide when the payment of taxes or assessments or other charges, including those due to the State of Georgia and Hall County, shall be due, either in installments or in one sum, and when default in such payment shall occur; 
(d)  Authorize payments or partial payments of taxes, assessments or other charges, or installments thereof, to be apportioned between the State of Georgia and Hall County, in the same proportions that the taxes, assessments or other charges due each shall bear to the whole bill or bills reserving to the taxpayer the right to direct how money paid by taxpayer shall be applied; 
(e)  Prescribe the location of the office or offices, without reference to the courthouse, of any tax or fiscal officer whose duties are connected with the tax or public revenue system, anywhere in said county, or provide how the location of such offices shall be determined; and 
(f)  Prescribe or authorize the use of new or improved forms, records, equipment, devices, or other machinery for collecting, computing, maintaining, distributing or otherwise employing information and data connected with the tax or revenue system of such county. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 158), p. 1735, § 1) 
Editor's note— Section 500.10.001 is a local amendment to Ga. Const. (1945). Such amendment was continued in force and effect by 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1008), p. 4321. 
CHAPTER 500.20. - STATE TAXES 

 

Sec. 500.20.001. - State taxes due semiannually. 
Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, except as provided in Code [Ga. Code Ann.] section 92-2704, all taxes due to the State of Georgia, on taxable property in Hall County, other than motor vehicles, and all taxes due to Hall County on taxable property in Hall County other than motor vehicles, shall become due and payable in two equal installments. At least one-half the total amount thereof shall be paid by August 1; and the balance shall be paid by December 1. Any installment not paid in full by the last day in such installment period shall, notwithstanding any existing law, be in default and shall bear the interest and penalties now or hereafter provided by law for taxes which are delinquent or in default. 
(1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 250), p. 3339, § 1) 
Sec. 500.20.002. - Apportionment between state and county. 
All payments or partial payments of taxes, or installments thereof, shall be apportioned by the tax commissioner of Hall County among the State of Georgia and Hall County, in the same proportions that the taxes due each shall bear to the whole tax bill. 
(1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 250), p. 3339, § 2) 
Sec. 500.20.003. - When books open and close. 
The tax commissioner of Hall County, Georgia, shall open his books for return of taxes on the first day of January and shall close the same on the first day of March of each year. 
(1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 250), p. 3339, § 3) 
Sec. 500.20.004. - Authority for tax; effective date. 
The provisions of this act are enacted pursuant to the terms and provisions of a certain amendment to section 1, article VII, of the Constitution of Georgia of 1945, adopted and passed by the qualified voters of the State of Georgia in the general election of November, 1974, which amendment gives to the General Assembly the power and authority to enact such provisions. This act shall become effective on January 1, 1976. 
(1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 250), p. 3339, § 4) 
Sec. 500.20.005. - Severability. 
If any of the provisions of this act shall be held unconstitutional, it is the intent of the enacting authority that the remaining provisions shall nevertheless remain in full force and effect. 
(1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 250), p. 3339, § 5) 
Sec. 500.20.006. - Taxes defined. 
The taxes referred to herein to be collected by the tax commissioner of Hall County shall mean the ad valorem and all other taxes other than motor vehicles shown to be due on returns filed by the taxpayer. 
(1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 250), p. 3339, § 6) 
Title 600 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 

 
CHAPTER 600.20. - JOINT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

 
ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 600.20.001. - Constitutional authority. 
A.  [Created.] There is hereby created a body corporate and politic in Gainesville and Hall County to be known as the Gainesville and Hall County Development Authority, which shall be an instrumentality of Gainesville and Hall County and a public corporation and which in this amendment is hereafter referred to as the "authority." 
B.  [Members.] The authority shall consist of nine members, four to be appointed by the commissioners of Hall County, four to be appointed by the commissioners of the City of Gainesville, and one to be elected by the members of the authority for a full four-year term, who shall have control, duties, powers and authority as are hereby conferred and as may be prescribed or provided for by the general assembly of Georgia, and such additional powers as may be delegated to the authority by the County of Hall and the City of Gainesville. Members of the authority shall be residents of Hall County, within or without the municipality located therein. The first appointments shall be for terms of one, two, three and four years. Thereafter all terms and appointments, except in case of a vacancy, shall be for four years. The general assembly shall provide for appointment of the authority. The authority shall elect a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary-treasurer. The secretary-treasurer shall not be required to be a member of the authority. 
C.  [Bonds.] All debentures, notes, bonds, and revenue bonds or obligations issued by the authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the obligations and interest on the obligations of Gainesville and Hall County. 
D.  [Powers.] The powers of the authority shall include, but not be limited to, the power: 
(1)  To receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and to administer trusts; 
(2)  To borrow money, to issue notes, bonds and revenue obligations, to execute trust agreements or indentures, and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property, contract rights, and income as security therefor; 
(3)  To contract with political subdivisions of the State of Georgia and with private persons and corporations and to sue and be sued in its corporate name; 
(4)  To have and exercise usual powers of private corporations except such as are inconsistent with this amendment, including the power to appoint and hire officers, agents and employees and to provide their compensation and duties, which officers and agents may or may not be members of the authority, and the power to adopt and amend a corporate seal and by laws and regulations for the conduct and management of the authority; 
(5)  To encourage and promote the expansion and development of industrial and commercial facilities in Gainesville and Hall County so as to relieve, insofar as possible, unemployment within its boundaries, and to that end to acquire by purchase or gift any building or structure within the limits of Gainesville and Hall County, suitable for and intended for use as a factory, mill, shop, processing plant, assembly plant or fabricating plant, including all necessary and appurtenant lands and appurtenances thereto, and all necessary or useful furnishings, machinery and equipment. Such acquisition may be through the acquisition of land and the construction thereon of a building, including the demolition of existing structures, or through the acquisition of an existing building and the remodeling, renovating, reconstructing, furnishing and equipping of such building; 
(6)  No building acquired hereunder shall be operated by the authority but shall be leased or sold to one or more persons, firms, or corporations. If sold, the purchase price may be paid at one time or in installments falling due in not more than thirty (30) years from the date of transfer of possession. The lessee or purchaser shall be required to pay all costs of operating and maintaining the building or buildings and to pay rentals or installments sufficient, together with other revenues which may be pledged for the purpose, to retire all bonds, both principal and interest, and to pay all other expenses which the authority may have incurred in connection with the undertaking. 
(7)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested; 
(8)  To designate officers to sign and act for the authority generally or in any specific matter; 
(9)  To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish the purpose and powers of the authority as herein stated. 
E.  [Debt.] The authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation against the State of Georgia or Hall County, or the City of Gainesville. 
F.  [Members.] The members of the authority shall receive no compensation for their services to the authority. 
G.  [Bonds.] In order to finance any undertaking within the scope of its power or to refund any bonds then outstanding, the authority is hereby authorized to issue bonds bearing rate or rates of interest and maturing at the years and amounts determined by the authority and the procedure of validation, issuance and delivery shall be in all respects in accordance with the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. L. 1937, p. 761), as amended, Ga. Code Ann. Supp. chapter 87-8, as if said obligations had been originally authorized to be issued thereunder; provided, however, that any property, real or personal in existence or anticipated, of the authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered as security for any lawful debt of the authority. The authority may execute any trust agreement or indenture not in conflict with the provisions of this amendment to provide security for any bonds issued as provided herein, and such trust agreements or indenture may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default on such bonds either in payment of principal or interest or under any term or condition under which such bonds are issued. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to create a right to compel any exercise of the taxing power of the City of Gainesville or of Hall County to pay such bonds or the interest thereon nor to enforce payment thereof against any property of the City of Gainesville or Hall County. 
H.  [Additional bonds.] The authority may authorize additional bonds, for extensions and permanent improvements to any industrial building acquired hereunder, to be placed in escrow and to be negotiated from time to time as proceeds for that purpose may become necessary. Bonds so placed in escrow shall, when sold and delivered, have such standing with the bonds of the same issue as may be provided in the authorizing proceedings. 
I.  [Gifts.] No moneys derived by the authority from any source other than gifts and contributions from private individuals, firms or corporations shall at any time be used for entertainment, or other promotional expenses. 
J.  [Property.] Should said authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to Gainesville and Hall County, subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time. 
K.  [Purpose.] This amendment is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare industry and trade within Gainesville or Hall County and reducing unemployment to the greatest extent possible, and this amendment and any law enacted with reference to the authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes. 
L.  [Effective date.] This amendment shall be effective immediately upon proclamation of its ratification by the governor, and the first members of the authority shall be appointed within thirty (30) days after such proclamation. 
M.  [General assembly.] The general assembly may by law further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the authority and the exercise thereof, and may enlarge and restrict the same, and may likewise further regulate the management and conduct of the authority. The authority shall be an instrumentality of Gainesville and Hall County and the scope of its operation shall be limited to the territory embraced within said city or county. The general assembly shall not extend the jurisdiction of the authority nor the scope of its operations beyond such limits. 
[N.  Effect on 1962 amendment.] The provisions of this amendment shall supersede an amendment creating the Gainesville and Hall County Development Authority ratified at the November 1962 general election and found in Georgia Laws 1961, p. 600. All actions and proceedings taken under the provisions of any law passed pursuant to the aforesaid amendment are hereby ratified and confirmed in the same manner as if the provisions contained herein had been in effect. The authority created hereunder shall be the successor to the authority crated pursuant to the aforesaid amendment and shall succeed to all the powers of the authority created pursuant to the aforesaid amendment and the assets and obligations of such authority shall be the assets and obligations of the authority created herein. 
(1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 121), p. 866, § 1) 
Editor's note— Section 600.20.001 is a local amendment to Ga. Const. (1945). Such amendment was continued in force and effect by 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1008), p. 4321. 
Secs. 600.20.002—600.20.020. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GAINESVILLE AND HALL COUNTY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 600.20.021. - Short title. 
This act may be cited as the "Gainesville and Hall County Development Authority." 
(1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 635), p. 2282, § 1) 
Sec. 600.20.022. - Creation; status; membership. 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the "Gainesville and Hall County Development Authority" which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, and by that time, style and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The authority shall consist of nine (9) members who shall be residents of Hall County within or without the corporate limits of the City of Gainesville, and not less than thirty (30) years of age at the time of appointment. In making the nominations and appointments of members of the authority, not more than one member should be selected from any one family, partnership, or other business organization. The members shall be selected in the following manner: Immediately after the approval of this act the directors of the Gainesville-Hall County Chamber of Commerce shall select and nominate persons for appointment and submit eight or more names to the county and eight or more names to the city. From such lists of nominees the commission of the City of Gainesville and the commissioners of Hall County each shall appoint four members of the authority. The eight appointed members shall select a ninth member to serve a full term. For the first appointments the county and the city shall each appoint one person for one year, one for two years, one for three years, and one for four years. Thereafter all terms and appointments, except in case of a vacancy, shall be for four years. In the event any vacancy occurs in the county group, the county shall fill by appointment such vacancy for the unexpired term. In the event a vacancy occurs in the city group, the city shall fill by appointment such vacancy for the unexpired term. In making any appointment for a vacancy or after the expiration of a term the city and county shall request two nominations for each member to be appointed from the directors of the chamber of commerce. The governing authorities of the County of Hall and/or the City of Gainesville may, in their discretion, request the directors of the chamber of commerce to submit additional names before making the first appointments or any subsequent appointment to the membership of the authority. If no nomination is made within ten days after such request, the appointment shall be made without any nomination. A member who has served a full four-year term shall not be eligible for reappointment until the lapse of one year after the expiration of his four-year term. The authority shall elect a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary-treasurer, or a secretary and a treasurer. Neither the secretary nor the treasurer shall be required to be a member of the authority. One city commissioner selected by the city commission and one county commissioner selected by the county commissioners shall be the ex-officio members of the authority. The members of the authority shall be entitled to no compensation. However, all members shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 635), p. 2282, § 2) 
Sec. 600.20.023. - Definitions. 
As used in this act, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(a)  The word "authority" shall mean the "Gainesville and Hall County Development Authority" created by this act and by and under article VII, section V, paragraph I of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition of lands, properties, and improvements for development, expansion and promotion of industry, commerce, agriculture, natural resources and vocational training; the construction of buildings and plants for the purpose of selling, leasing or renting such structures to private persons, firms or corporations. The word "project" shall also mean and include the acquisition, development and management of a site or sites deemed suitable for an industrial park or parks. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term "development" shall include making provision for water, sewage, drainage, transportation, power, communication and/or similar facilities which are incidental to the use of a site as the industrial park. 
(c)  The term "cost of project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, easements, rights and franchises acquired, the cost of machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural and legal expense, and plans and specifications and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project and placing the same in operation. 
(1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 635), p. 2282, § 3; 1978 Ga. Laws (Act No. 920), p. 3579, § 1) 
Sec. 600.20.024. - Authority to enter into contracts. 
The County of Hall and the City of Gainesville are expressly authorized to enter into contracts with the authority as a public corporation. 
(1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 635), p. 2282, § 4) 
Sec. 600.20.025. - Quorum. 
Any five members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the ordinary business of the authority; however, any action with respect to any project of the authority must be approved by not less than five affirmative votes. 
(1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 635), p. 2282, § 5) 
Sec. 600.20.026. - General powers. 
The authority shall have powers: 
(a)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure. 
(b)  To acquire, hold and dispose of personal property, including the stock of other corporations, for its corporate purposes. 
(c)  To enter into contracts with the County of Hall and the City of Gainesville. 
(d)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions, and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or liens or easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of same in any manner the authority deems to its best advantage. If the authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project or use any project already constructed on lands, the title to which shall then be in the County of Hall or the City of Gainesville, the governing authorities of Hall County and the City of Gainesville are authorized in their discretion to convey title to such lands, including any improvements thereon, to the authority. 
(e)  To appoint and select officers, agents, and employees including engineers, architects, builders, and attorneys, and to fix their compensation. 
(f)  To make contracts, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases and rentals and sales of projects, or contracts with respect to the use of projects, which it erects or acquires. The County of Hall and the City of Gainesville are hereby expressly authorized and empowered to enter into agreements with the authority for use by the authority of funds collected by special tax levies by the county and city for development purposes. 
(g)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, self-liquidating or otherwise, located on property owned or leased by the authority, and to pay the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue anticipation certificates of the authority or from any grant from the County of Hall or City of Gainesville, or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms, or corporations, all of which the authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use. 
(h)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute notes, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds and such other instruments as may be necessary or convenient to evidence and secure such borrowing. 
(i)  To exercise any power granted by the laws of the State of Georgia to public or private corporations, performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. 
(j)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly conferred by this act. 
(k)  To adopt, alter or repeal its own by-laws, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and in which the power granted to it may be enjoyed, as the authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. 
(l)  To issue revenue anticipation certificates for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project of the authority. Such revenue anticipation certificates shall be issued and validated under and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the act of the General Assembly of 1937 (Ga. Laws 1937, pp. 761—774), and as subsequently amended, providing for the issuance of revenue anticipation certificates. 
(1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 635), p. 2282, § 6) 
Sec. 600.20.027. - Additional powers under Development Authorities Law. 
In addition to any other powers granted to the Gainesville and Hall County Development Authority and without limiting any such powers, said authority is hereby granted all powers granted to the authorities under the Development Authorities Law, approved March 28, 1969 (Ga. Laws 1969, p. 137 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
In addition to any other projects regarding which the Gainesville and Hall County Development Authority may exercise its powers and duties and without limiting any such projects, such powers and duties may also be exercised regarding any "project" and "cost of project" as defined in the Development Authorities Law, approved March 28, 1969 (Ga. Laws 1969, p. 137 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
(1982 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1066), p. 4300, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 600.20.028. - Notes, bonds, etc. 
All debentures, notes, bonds, and revenue anticipation certificates issued by the authority shall be exempt from state and local taxation. 
(1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 635), p. 2282, § 7) 
Sec. 600.20.029. - Debts. 
The authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create a debt as against the State of Georgia, the County of Hall or the City of Gainesville. 
(1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 635), p. 2282, § 8) 
Sec. 600.20.030. - Annual audit. 
The books and records of the authority shall be audited at least annually, at the expense of the authority, by a competent auditor. The authority shall furnish copies of said audit to the County of Hall and the City of Gainesville. 
(1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 635), p. 2282, § 9) 
Sec. 600.20.031. - Intent; construction. 
This act being for the purpose of developing and promoting the public good and the welfare of the County of Hall and the City of Gainesville and their inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 635), p. 2282, § 10) 
Sec. 600.20.032. - Severability. 
The provisions of this act are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
(1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 635), p. 2282, § 11) 
Title 700 - PUBLIC SERVICES 

 
CHAPTER 700.20. - FIRE DISTRICTS 

 

Sec. 700.20.001. - Constitutional authority. 
(a)  The governing authority of Hall County is hereby granted authority to district areas in said county for fire prevention purposes, and the authority to levy a tax upon the taxable property of each such district to defray all cost of fire protection in each respective district. 
(b)  The authority hereby granted shall include authority to include municipalities located in Hall County, within any fire district created hereunder. 
(c)  Hall County and each municipality now existing, or hereafter created in said county, are hereby authorized to contract with each other for furnishing property of any kind, materials, supplies, equipment and money for the purpose of carrying out the authority hereby granted. 
(d)  Each municipality now existing, or hereafter created in Hall County, is hereby granted authority to operate its fire department, including equipment and personnel, outside its corporate limit within Hall County. 
(e)  Hall County is hereby granted authority to levy a tax for the creation, maintenance and operation of any fire prevention organization created hereunder, and to pay any bonds issued by the fire districts created hereunder for the purpose of establishing fire prevention organizations. 
(f)  The fire prevention districts authorized hereby are hereby granted authority to issue bonds for the purpose of acquiring property of any kind, material, equipment and supplies required for fire prevention purposes. 
(g)  Before any fire prevention district is created hereunder, the governing authority of Hall County shall designate the area to compose said district and establish the boundaries thereof. After said area is designated and boundaries established, the governing authority of Hall County shall submit to the voters in said proposed fire prevention district who are qualified to vote for members of the General Assembly the question of whether or not said district shall be created. A proposed fire protection district shall be created only when approved by a majority of the qualified voters voting in said election. 
(1960 Ga. Laws (Act No. 163), p. 1303, § 1) 
Editor's note— Section 700.20.007 is a local amendment to Ga. Const. (1945). Such amendment was continued in force and effect by 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 82), p. 3661. 
CHAPTER 700.30. - WATER AND SEWAGE 

 
ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 700.30.001—700.30.020. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWERAGE AUTHORITY 

Sec. 700.30.021. - Short title. 
This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Hall County Water and Sewerage Authority Act." 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 1) 
Sec. 700.30.022. - Authority created; status; membership. 
(a)  There is created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Hall County Water and Sewerage Authority, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation by that name, style, and title and said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the authority or the trustee acting under the trust indenture shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of the officers, agents, or employees of the authority. The authority is granted the same exemptions and exclusions from taxes as are now granted to cities and counties for the operation of facilities similar to facilities to be operated by the authority as provided under the provisions of this act. 
(b)  The membership of the authority shall be made up of the following members, all of whom shall be residents of Hall County, Georgia: 
(1)  Each member of the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia, shall be a member of the authority; 
(2)  Each member of the board of commissioners except the chairman shall nominate a member to serve on the authority; and 
(3)  The chairman of the board of commissioners shall serve as the chairman of the authority. 
The members so nominated shall be approved and appointed by action of the board of commissioners. If any member so nominated is not approved, then the commissioner making the nomination not approved shall nominate someone else for approval by the board of commissioners. The terms of the initial members appointed by the board of commissioners shall be staggered terms of one, two, three, and four years; thereafter, such members shall serve four-year terms. 
(c)  Any member of the authority may be selected and appointed to succeed himself. Immediately after such appointments, the members of such authority shall enter upon their duties. Any vacancy on the authority shall be filled in the same manner as was the original appointment of the member whose termination of membership resulted in such vacancy, and the person so selected and appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. The authority shall elect one of its members as vice chairman, and it shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer or a secretary-treasurer, each of which does not necessarily have to be a member of the authority; however, if not a member, the secretary, treasurer, or secretary-treasurer shall have no voting rights. The members of the authority who are not members of the board of commissioners shall be compensated at the rate of $50.00 per authority meeting or at such higher rate as determined by the governing body of Hall County; however, it is expressly provided that they shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. 
(d)  A majority of the members of the authority shall constitute a quorum and, except as provided below, any action may be taken by the authority upon the affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the members, but at least three members of such required majority of a quorum shall be commissioners of Hall County, Georgia. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the authority. A majority vote of the total membership of the authority shall be required for the authority to create any debt or issue any negotiable revenue bonds, but at least three members of such required majority of the total membership shall be commissioners of Hall County, Georgia. 
(e)  The attorney at law for the authority shall be the county attorney appointed by the board of commissioners of Hall County, Georgia. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 2) 
Sec. 700.30.023. - Definitions. 
As used in this act, the term: 
(1)  "Authority" means the Hall County Water and Sewerage Authority created in section 2 [700.30.022] of this act. 
(2)  "Cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired, the cost of all machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal, and legal expenses and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing authorized by this act, the construction of any project, the placing of the same in operation, and the condemnation of property necessary for such construction and operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act for such project. 
(3)  "Project" means and includes the acquisition, construction, and equipping of water facilities for obtaining one or more sources of water supply, the treatment of water, and the distribution and sale of water to users and consumers, including, but not limited to, the State of Georgia and counties and municipalities for the purpose of resale inside and outside the territorial boundaries of Hall County, and additions and improvements to and extensions of such facilities and the operation and maintenance of same so as to assure an adequate water system, the acquisition, construction, and equipping of sewerage facilities useful and necessary for the gathering of waste matter, and the treatment of sewage of any and every type, including, but not limited to, the acquisition and construction of treatment plants, ponds, and lagoons inside and outside the territorial boundaries of Hall County, and additions and improvements to and extensions of such facilities and the operation and maintenance of same so as to assure an adequate sewerage system. Said water facilities and said sewerage facilities, at the discretion of the authority, may be combined at any time as one revenue-producing undertaking and operated and maintained as such. 
(4)  "Revenue bonds," "bonds," and "obligations" as used in this act shall mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in article 3 of chapter 82 of title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Revenue Bond Law," and such type of obligations may be issued by the authority as authorized under the "Revenue Bond Law" and any amendments thereto, and, in addition, shall also mean obligations of the authority the issuance of which are specifically provided for in this act. 
(5)  Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom and all facilities used in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving, and extending the project and to pay the principal of and interest on the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 3) 
Sec. 700.30.024. - Powers. 
The authority shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(2)  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise, and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property, or rights or easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or to dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority, the authority being under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this act except from the funds provided under the authority of this act, and in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit action or proceedings as may be just to the authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned, and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this act upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money be deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; and if the authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project on any lands the title to which shall then be in the State of Georgia, the governor is authorized to convey, for and in behalf of the state, title to such lands to the authority upon payment to the State of Georgia for the credit of the general fund of the state of the reasonable value of such land in accordance with the applicable laws of the State of Georgia; and if the authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project on any lands the title to which shall then be in Hall County or in any municipality incorporated in said county, the governing authority of body of said county or of any of said municipalities, if the governing authority of said county or of any of said municipalities consents thereto, is authorized to convey title to such lands to the authority upon payment for the credit of the general funds of said county or municipalities the reasonable value of such lands. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this act, the authority shall have the nonexclusive right, easement, and franchise of laying the necessary mains, pipes, conduits, and drains for waterworks, sewerage, and drainage systems purposes within the rights-of-way of streets, roads, and highways in the County of Hall or within the rights-of-way of streets, roads, and highways in the corporate limits of any municipality incorporated in said county, without cost except that the authority shall repair all damage done by the authority by reason thereof; 
(4)  To appoint, select, and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(5)  To make and execute contracts, leases, and instruments, which shall be necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be constructed or acquired; and any and all persons, firms, and corporations, the state and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and without limiting the generality of the above, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations, counties, and other political subdivisions and to the authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relative to the furnishing of services and facilities by the authority to such municipal corporations, counties, and political subdivisions for a term not exceeding 50 years; 
(6)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and manage projects as defined in this act, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds or other funds of the authority or from such proceeds or other funds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality thereto; 
(7)  To accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(8)  To accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may impose; 
(9)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute notes or other evidences of such indebtedness and to secure the same; 
(10)  To issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for the purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(11)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state; 
(12)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this act; and 
(13)  The authority shall be subject to all of the provisions of chapters 14 and 18 of title 50 of the O.C.G.A., the open meetings and open records laws of the State of Georgia. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 4) 
Sec. 700.30.025. - Revenue bonds—Generally. 
The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the authority created by this act, shall have power and is authorized at one time, or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any one or more projects, as defined in paragraph (2) of section 3 [700.20.023] of this act. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund provided for in this act for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates, shall provide for when interest shall be payable and when principal shall mature, and shall be payable in such medium of payments as to both principal and interest, all as may be determined by the authority, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. In addition, the authority shall have the power to issue revenue bonds or obligations pursuant to and in conformity with article 3 of chapter 82 of title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Revenue Bond Law." 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 5) 
Sec. 700.30.026. - Same—Form; denomination; registration; place of payment. 
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company inside or outside the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form or both as the authority may determine and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 6) 
Sec. 700.30.027. - Same—Signatures; seal. 
All such bonds shall bear the manual or facsimile signature of the chairman of the authority, attested by the manual or facsimile signature of the secretary of the authority, and the official seal of the authority or a facsimile thereof shall be affixed thereto and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairman and secretary of the authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signatures of such persons and any bond may be signed, sealed, and attested on behalf of the authority by such person as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 7) 
Sec. 700.30.028. - Same—Negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act shall have and are declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under laws of this state. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and said bonds and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 8) 
Sec. 700.30.029. - Same—Sale; proceeds. 
The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the authority and the proceeds derived from the sale of such bonds shall be used solely for the purpose provided in the proceedings authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 9) 
Sec. 700.30.030. - Same—Interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the authority may under like restrictions issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 10) 
Sec. 700.30.031. - Same—Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond or any coupons which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 11) 
Sec. 700.30.032. - Same—Conditions precedent to issuance. 
Such revenue bonds shall be issued as required by article 3 of chapter 82 of title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Revenue Bond Law." Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this act shall become effective immediately upon passage; and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the authority by a majority of its members. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 12) 
Sec. 700.30.033. - Same—Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act shall not constitute a debt of Hall County or any municipality in Hall County, nor a pledge of the faith and credit of said county or any such municipality, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund provided for in this act and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the said county or any such municipality to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 13) 
Sec. 700.30.034. - Same—Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company inside or outside of the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues, and earnings to be required by the authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair, and insurance of the project, and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 14) 
Sec. 700.30.035. - Same—To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
The authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who or any agency, bank, or trust company which shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes provided for in this act, subject to such regulations as this act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 15) 
Sec. 700.30.036. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture into a sinking fund, which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of: 
(1)  The interest upon which revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; 
(2)  The principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(3)  Any premium upon bonds acquired by redemption, payment, or otherwise; 
(4)  The necessary charges of the paying agent or agents for paying principal and interest; and 
(5)  Any investment fees or charges. 
The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one or another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, any surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not be reissued, printed, and delivered. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 16) 
Sec. 700.30.037. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights given by this act may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted by this act or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this act or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the authority, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 17) 
Sec. 700.30.038. - Refunding bonds. 
The authority is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of bonds of the authority for the purpose of funding or refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon and premium, if any. The issuance of such funding or refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the authority in respect to the same shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 18) 
Sec. 700.30.039. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this act or any suit or action against such authority shall be brought in the superior court of Hall County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 19) 
Sec. 700.30.040. - Validation. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of article 3 of chapter 82 of title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Revenue Bond Law"; the petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action the State of Georgia or any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated and the state or such municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof shall not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as a part of the basis of the security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds, when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds and the security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and against the authority issuing the same, the state and any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the said Hall County Water and Sewerage Authority. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 20) 
Sec. 700.30.041. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of said authority or of its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the authority. The provisions of this act shall be for the benefit of the authority and the holders of any such bonds and, upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions of this act, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 21) 
Sec. 700.30.042. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, income, fees, and earnings shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this act. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 22) 
Sec. 700.30.043. - Tort immunity. 
The authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as Hall County, and the officers, agents, and employees of the authority when in the performance of the work of the authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents, and employees of Hall County when the performance of their public duties or work of the county. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 23) 
Sec. 700.30.044. - Rates, charges, and revenues; use. 
The authority is authorized to prescribe and revise from time to time rates, fees, tolls, and charges and to collect such rates, fees, tolls, and charges for the services, facilities, or commodities furnished and, in anticipation of the collection of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects, to issue revenue bonds as provided by this act to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipment, betterment, or extension of a water system, a sewerage system, or a combined water and sewerage system, and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon all or any part of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects, including the revenues of improvements, betterments, or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 24) 
Sec. 700.30.045. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this act, including the basis on which water service and facilities, sewerage service and facilities, or both shall be furnished. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 25) 
Sec. 700.30.046. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized by this act and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. This act does not in any way take from Hall County or any municipality located therein or any adjoining county the authority to own, operate, and maintain a water system, a sewerage system, or a combined water and sewerage system or to issue revenue bonds as is provided by article 3 of chapter 82 of title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Revenue Bond Law." This act does not grant the authority the right to condemn a portion of or any municipally owned water and sewer system or its lines. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 26) 
Sec. 700.30.047. - Liberal construction of act. 
This act being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the State of Georgia and their inhabitants shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 27) 
Sec. 700.30.048. - Severability. 
Should any sentence, clause, phrase, or part of this act be declared for any reason to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect the remainder or any other part of this act, other than the part so held to be invalid, but the remaining provisions of this act shall remain in full force and effect, and it is the express intention of this act to enact each provision of this act independently of any other provision of this act. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1364), p. 6986, § 28) 
Title 800 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 

 
CHAPTER 800.20. - LICENSES AND REGISTRATION 

 

Sec. 800.20.001. - Registration, licensing required. 
Effective January 1, 1987, vehicles shall be registered and licensed to operate for the ensuing calendar year and thereafter in Hall County during designated registration periods as provided in Code section 40-2-20.1 of the O.C.G.A. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1572), p. 5616, § 1) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1991 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1991 Code, as updated through June 30, 1995, which are included herein. Sections of the 1991 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - RESOLUTIONS, GENERAL RESOLUTIONS AND ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances adopted since the 1991 Code, as updated through June 30, 1995, which are included herein. Resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1991 Code, as supplemented. Resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances adopted since June 30, 1995, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - SPECIAL ACTS 
This table shows the location within part II of this Code of Special Acts of the Georgia Legislature which are applicable to Hall County. 

 