THE CODE OF HOGANSVILLE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2004 by Order of the Mayor and Council Republished in 2015 
____________ 

OFFICIALS AT REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Bill Stankiewicz 
Mayor 
____________ 
Reginald Jackson 
Jimmy Norred 
Jean Crocker 
George Bailey 
Thomas Pike 
City Council 
____________ 
James A. Woods 
City Manager 
____________ 
Jeff Todd 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Lisa E. Kelly 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS AT RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Wilson St. Clair 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jack Leidner 
Bobby Joe Frazier 
Charlie F. Martin 
Jean Crocker 
Thomas Pike 
City Council 
____________ 
Daniel Lee 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Dianne Carter 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Hogansville, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2004 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2004 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This republication was prepared under the direct supervision of Dennis Sinnett, Vice President, and Stephanie Benesh and April McDermid, Editors, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. James A. Woods, City Manager, and Ms. Lisa E. Kelly, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hogansville, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hogansville, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hogansville, Georgia. 2015. 
15-10-05 
AN ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HOGANSVILLE TO ENACT A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF HOGANSVILLE; TO PROVIDE FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; TO PROVIDE A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; TO PROVIDE FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HOGANSVILLE HEREBY ORDAINS: 
SECTION 1: 
The Code entitled "The Code of Hogansville, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 102, each inclusive, is adopted. 
SECTION 2: 
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 31, 2013, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference herein, are repealed. 
SECTION 3: 
The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
SECTION 4: 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, to labor upon the streets or other public works in said City for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days, or a sentence for said offender to be confined in the jail or other place of imprisonment in the County not exceeding sixty (60) days, either one or more of said penalties. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City of Hogansville may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
SECTION 5: 
Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Mayor and Council of the City of Hogansville to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
SECTION 6: 
Ordinances adopted after December 31, 2013, which amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
SECTION 7: 
This ordinance, after adoption by the Council and upon approval by the Mayor, shall become effective immediately. 
INTRODUCED AND FIRST READING ____________ 
SECOND READING AND ADOPTED/REJECTED ____________ 
SUBMITTED TO MAYOR AND APPROVED/DISAPPROVED ____________ 
;1>BY:  ____________     Mayor 
;1>ATTEST:  ____________     Clerk 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS 
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Printed in this part is the city's Charter as set forth in 1976 Ga. Laws (Act No. 784), page 2588. The title and ordaining clauses of the act have not been published. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following the amended provisions. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1, the term "recorder's court" is changed to "municipal court" and the term "recorder" is changed to "municipal judge." The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II.

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION 

Sec. 1.01. - Incorporation; name, style, designation, authority as body politic and corporate. 
The City of Hogansville, in Troup County, heretofore made a body politic and corporate by acts of the General Assembly of said state, under the name of the City of Hogansville, shall continue [as] a body politic and corporate, known by the corporate name of the "City of Hogansville," hereinafter also referred to as "the city." 
As a body politic and corporate, the city shall have authority to govern itself and its inhabitants by such ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and bylaws for municipal purposes as may be adopted and promulgated under the terms and provisions of this Charter, not in conflict with the constitution or laws of this state or of the United States, with authority in and by its corporate name to sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded in all courts, and have and use a common seal, buy, hold, exchange, sell and convey property, make all necessary and lawful contracts, transact all of its business, and do all other things necessary to promote the municipal corporate purposes of said city. Said corporation, through its city council, shall have all of the authority, powers and privileges incident to municipal corporations under the laws of the State of Georgia, and all other authority necessary and proper to make, regulate, maintain and preserve a proper and legal government for said city. 
Sec. 1.02. - Repeal of prior acts. 
This act shall constitute the whole Charter of the city, repealing and replacing the charter approved March 12, 1941 (1941 Ga. Laws, page 1505), as amended, particularly by the following acts, as well as all prior charters and amendments and the same are hereby repealed; except as provided in section 8.01 and section 7.04. 1967 Ga. Laws, page 2346; 1968 Ga. Laws, page 2525; 1971 Ga. Laws, page 2801; 1972 Ga. Laws, page 2415; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 3400; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 3402; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 3404; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 3447; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 3450; and 1974 Ga. Laws, page 2203. 
Sec. 1.03. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)	As used in this Charter the following meanings, respectively, shall be given to the following terms, unless otherwise specifically provided or a different meaning is apparent from the context: 
Aforesaid means next before. 
Agency shall mean any office, court, utility, board, commission, institution, or other organization in charge of administering any public function or municipal affair of the city. 
City shall refer to the municipal corporation, Hogansville, Georgia, or the territory embraced within the boundaries of the municipality, dependent upon the context. 
City limits shall refer to and mean the territory embraced within the boundaries of the city. 
Company means corporation. 
Council or city council shall mean the persons elected councilmen as provided in this Charter. 
County or this county shall mean the County of Troup, in the State of Georgia. 
Day means a full day of 24 hours, commencing at midnight, Eastern Daylight Saving Time or Eastern Standard Time, whichever applies at the point in time of reference. 
Elector means a person residing within the city who is qualified to vote therein. 
Executive session means a call meeting of city council wherein no voting takes place or minutes [are] kept. 
Following means next after. 
Governing body or governing authority shall mean the city council of this city, or any lawfully constituted legislative body hereafter provided for the city. 
In may be the equivalent of "on." 
Is may mean "shall be." 
May ordinarily denotes permission and not command; where it concerns the public interest or affects the rights of third persons, it will be construed to mean "must" or "shall." 
Mayor means the person duly elected the chief executive officer. 
Month means a calendar month. 
Next means "in the nearest time," "just after," "immediately following." 
Oath includes affirmation. 
Officer shall mean and include the mayor, councilmen, members of boards and commissions, and any other persons classified as public officers by the laws or judicial decisions of this state. An "officer" as herein defined shall fill an office and an employee shall fill a position of employment. 
Or is ordinarily to be understood in the disjunctive sense, but will be construed as "and" when necessary to effectuate a legislative intent manifested by the context and surrounding circumstances. 
Person shall include individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, companies, corporations and all legal entities. When used with reference to the omission or commission of acts required or forbidden, it shall include persons, as above defined, participating in such omission or commission of acts, and their agents, employees and servants, acting within the scope of their authority and so participating. 
Preceding means next before. 
Property includes real and personal property. 
Shall means mandatory. 
State or this state shall mean the State of Georgia, in the United States of America. 
Street means street, sidewalk and public way and places used for travel, and shall include bridges thereon. 
Until a certain day or hour includes all of such day or hour. 
While means "pending" or "during the time." 
Writing includes printing and numerals. 
Year means a calendar year. 
(b)	Terms not defined herein, but which are defined in the laws of the State of Georgia, shall have the meanings given in said laws. 
(c)	The following rules shall govern in the construction of the provisions of this Charter:
(1)	Unless otherwise expressly or by necessary implication provided, the ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or trade or words connected with a particular subject matter, which shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such art, trade or subject matter. 
(2)	The present or past tense shall include the future.
(3)	The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.
(4)	The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly or by necessary implication included. 
(5)	A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(6)	Substantial compliance with a requirement of any provision of this Charter, especially on the part of officers of the municipality, shall be deemed sufficient, unless otherwise expressly or by necessary implication provided. 
(7)	When a number of days, months or years is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted: and if the last day shall fall on Sunday or a legal holiday, another day shall be allowed in the computation. 
(8)	Grammatical errors shall not vitiate; and a transposition of words, phrases and clauses may be resorted to when a sentence, clause or phrase is without meaning as it stands. 
(9)	The object of the construction of this Charter shall be to ascertain the intention of the enacting authority; and to that end there shall be kept in view at all times the old law, the evil, the remedy and the surrounding circumstances. 
Sec. 1.04. - Corporate boundaries. 
The corporate limits of the city shall be as described below: 
(a)	Beginning at a point in the center of Main Street where same crosses the Atlanta and West Point Railroad main line, as the center of said city, measure three-fourths (¾) of a mile in each direction east, south and west and as far north as the south end of the Atlanta and West Point Railroad trestle or bridge where same crosses Yellow Jacket Creek. Then at the ends of said lines drawn toward the east, south and west from said center draw lines at right angles to same until the east and west lines intersect the lines drawn on the south, and then at the end of said trestle or bridge draw a line parallel to the line drawn on the south and extend same until it intersects the east and west lines, thereby making said corporate limits in the form of a rectangle extending one and one-half (1½) miles from east to west and one and nine-twentieths (19/20) miles, more or less, from north to south. 
(b)	All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the Hogansville District, Troup County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point where the eastern boundary of the City of Hogansville intersects with the north edge of Boyd Road and running thence north 79 degrees east a distance of 1,253 feet to a point and running thence north 69 degrees east 235.5 feet; running thence north ½ degree west 257 feet to a point; running thence north 88½ degrees east 77.5 feet to a point; running thence north 2 degrees east 398 feet to a point; running thence north 88½ degrees east 341 feet to a point; running thence north 15½ degrees west 1,350 feet to a point; running thence north 1 degree west 1,641 feet to a point; running thence north 88½ degrees east 1,382 feet to a point; running thence north ½ degree west 2,742 feet to a point; running thence in a westerly direction along the southern boundary of Blue Creek to the south side of the Blue Creek Bridge crossing; thence westerly 80 feet to a point; thence northerly 80 feet to a point; thence easterly 80 feet to a point; thence in a northwesterly direction 770 feet along the western boundary of Blue Creek; thence south 84 degrees west 2,152 feet; thence south 27 degrees east 77 feet to present city limit line. 
(c)	All that tract or parcel of land containing 422.824 acres, more or less, in land lots 128 and 129 of the 11th land district and land lots 8 and 9 of the 12th land district of Troup County, Georgia, more particularly described as follows: Beginning at an iron pin marking the point of intersection of the south line of the existing city limits of the City of Hogansville and west line of the right-of-way of U.S. Highway 29, and running thence in a westerly direction for a distance of 346.6 feet to an iron pin; thence in a southerly direction for a distance of 175 feet to an iron pin; thence in a westerly direction for a distance of 90 feet to an iron pin; thence in a southerly direction for a distance of 1,530.72 feet to an iron pin; thence in an easterly direction for a distance of 642.24 feet to an iron pin on the east right-of-way line of a county road, which is an extension of Oak Street; thence in a southwesterly direction following the curvature of such county road for a distance of 846.67 (feet) to an iron pin; thence in a southwesterly direction along the eastern right-of-way line of said county road for a distance of 1,647.41 feet to an iron pin marking the point of intersection of the east right-of-way line of said county road and the south line of land lot 8 of the 12th land district of Troup County, Georgia; thence in an easterly direction along the south line of land lot 8 for a distance of 1,718.62 feet to an iron pin marking the southeastern corner of land lot 8, which is also on the line dividing the 11th and 12th land districts in Troup County, Georgia, and which is also the western line of land lot 129 of the 11th land district of Troup County, Georgia; thence in a southerly direction along the western line of land lot 129 for a distance of 58.07 feet to an iron pin marking the southwest corner of land lot 129; thence in an easterly direction along the southern line of land lot 129 for a distance of 2,873 feet to the point of intersection of the south line of land lot 129 with the west right-of-way line of the Mountville-Hogansville public road; thence in a northerly direction along the right-of-way line of the Mountville-Hogansville public road for a distance of 4,972.26 feet to the point of intersection of the west margin of the Mountville-Hogansville public road as extended to the north margin of Boyd Road, which point is also on the existing city limit line of the City of Hogansville; thence in a westerly direction along the northern right-of-way line of Boyd Road and the existing city limit line for a distance of 96.75 feet to a concrete monument; thence in a southern direction for a distance of 704 feet along the existing city limit line of the City of Hogansville to a point; thence in a westerly direction along the existing southern line of the Hogansville city limit line for a distance of 4,019 feet to a point on the western right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 29, which is the point of beginning. 
(d)	All that tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in land lot 22 of the 12th land district of Troup County, Georgia, and being contiguous to the city limits of the City of Hogansville and more particularly described as follows, to wit: Beginning at the intersection of the northeastern right-of-way line of West Main Street (also known as State Route 54) and the present existing corporate boundary of the City of Hogansville, Georgia, said point being marked by an iron pin and having plane coordinates of east 267,256.17 and north 1,156,046.95; run thence due north along the present corporate boundary to a point in the centerline of Yellow Jacket Creek, the point is unmarked but has coordinates east 257,256.17 and north 1,157,258.95; run thence southwesterly and following the meander of the centerline of Yellow Jacket Creek to the intersection of Yellow Jacket Creek centerline and northeastern right-of-way of State Route 54, the point is unmarked but has coordinates east 266,723.52 and north 1,157,057.21; run thence in a southeastern direction south 27 degrees 48 minutes east for a distance of 1,142.08 feet to the point of beginning. The above described tract has an area of 7.5 acres and is located in land lot 22 of the 12th land district of Troup County, Georgia. 
(e)	All that tract or parcel of land containing 46.8 acres, more or less, in land lots 22, 23, 42, and 43 of the 12th land district of Troup County, Georgia, more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point where the west line of the existing city limits of the City of Hogansville intersects the centerline of Yellow Jacket Creek and running thence south 27 degrees 48 minutes east along the west line of the existing city limits of the City of Hogansville for a distance of 1,142.08 feet; running thence in a southerly direction along said west line of the existing city limits for a distance of 1,675 feet, more or less; running thence north 88 degrees 15 minutes west for a distance of 861.4 feet to a concrete marker; thence north 1 degree 14 minutes west for a distance of 1,000 feet to a concrete marker; thence north 78 degrees 45 minutes west for a distance of 113 feet to a concrete marker, thence north 13 degrees 30 minutes west for a distance of 322 feet to the centerline of Yellow Jacket Creek; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the meanderings of the centerline of said Yellow Jacket Creek for a distance of 1,450 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning. 
(f)	All those portions of land lots 98, 127, 128 and 129 in the 11th land district of Troup County, Georgia, which were not previously inside the corporate limits and all of land lots 99, 124, 125, 126, and 130 of the said 11th land district of Troup County, Georgia. 
Sec. 1.05. - Form of government. 
The government of the city shall be vested in a city council, constituted and elected as provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 1.06. - Vesting of rights, etc. 
All properties, titles, easements, hereditaments, privileges, related rights and powers belonging or in any way appertaining to the City of Hogansville as heretofore incorporated, are hereby vested absolutely in the City of Hogansville, incorporated under this act in the same manner and to the same extent as they were had by said former city. 
Sec. 1.07. - Assumption of debts, etc. 
The City of Hogansville, created by this act, is hereby made responsible as a corporate body for all legal debts, liabilities and undertakings of said city as heretofore incorporated. 
Sec. 1.08. - Existing ordinances. 
All ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations, now in force in the city, not inconsistent with this Charter, are hereby declared valid and of force and effect until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 1.09. - Continuation in office of mayor and councilmen, and other officers. 
The mayor and councilmen who are serving in these offices of the city at the time of the approval of this Charter, shall continue to serve in their respective offices for and during the full terms for which they were elected. Other officers shall continue in office until removed or replaced as provided by law or ordinance. 
Sec. 1.10. - Vacancy in office on moving from city. 
The removal of the mayor or any councilman or any appointive officer (unless specifically excluded herein) from within the limits of the city shall automatically vacate the office he may hold and said vacancy shall be filled as provided for in this Charter. 
Sec. 1.11. - Conflict of interests. 
No officer of the city shall have any interest in any contract, either directly or indirectly, to which the city is a party; neither shall any member of the council be allowed to vote upon any question that he has any personal interest in whatever, but this section shall not be construed to prevent the council from voting a member reasonable compensation for extra services performed, or expense incurred by him in performing the duties required of him as a member of council. 
No person, holding any office in the city, shall, during the time for which he was elected or appointed, be capable of contracting with the city or its fully constituted officers, for the performance of any work or services or the sale of any goods, which is to be paid for out of the treasury, nor shall any such person be capable of holding or having any interest in such contract, either by himself or by another, directly or indirectly. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL AND MAYOR 

Sec. 2.01. - Composition. 
The governing body of the city shall be the city council, composed of five (5) councilmen, in which is vested all corporate, legislative and other powers of the city, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 2.02. - Qualifications of mayor and councilmen. 
To be eligible for the office of mayor or councilman, elected or appointed, a person shall be at least 21 years of age and shall meet the requirements of a qualified voter of the city, as prescribed by state law, shall have been a bona fide resident of the city for at least one (1) year next preceding the election in which he offers as a candidate and shall continue to reside therein during his term of office. No person shall be eligible to be mayor or councilman who shall have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, unless he has received a full pardon and has all rights of citizenship restored. 
State Law reference— Age of majority, O.C.G.A. § 39-1-1. 
Sec. 2.03. - Holding other office, voting when personally interested. 
(a)	Holding other office. Except as authorized by law, no member of the council shall hold any other elective city office or city employment during the term for which he was elected. 
(b)	Voting when personally interested. Neither the mayor nor any other member of the council shall vote upon any question in which he is personally interested. 
Sec. 2.04. - Organization meeting; official oaths mayor pro tem. 
The council shall meet for organization on the first Monday in January. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered by the city attorney to the newly elected members as follows: "I do solemnly swear that I will well and truly perform the duties of the city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." Following the induction of members, the council by majority vote of all the members thereof shall elect one of their number to be mayor pro tem, who shall serve for a term of one (1) year and until his successor is elected and qualified. 
State Law reference— Official oaths and commissions, O.C.G.A. § 45-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2.05. - Meetings, regular and special. 
(a)	The council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meetings on any weekday or hour it may fix prior to recess of said regular meeting, and may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. 
(b)	Special meetings of the council may be held on call of the mayor or three (3) members of the council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, or shall be left at their residence at least eight (8) hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmen are present when the special meeting is called. Notice of any special meeting may be waived in writing before or after such meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice of any special meeting. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting, except by unanimous consent of all members present. With such consent any business which may be transacted in a regular meeting may be conducted at the special meeting, excluding the final passage of an ordinance previously introduced. 
(c)	All meetings of the council shall be public, except executive sessions.
(d)	A notice of all special meetings shall be posted at city hall immediately after said meeting is called and prior to the beginning of said meeting; said notice shall state the date and time of said meeting and the purpose for which it is called. A copy of said notice shall be affixed to the minutes of said meeting. 
State Law reference— Open meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2.06. - Compelling attendance. 
The council may adopt procedures and penalties for compelling the attendance of absent members. 
Sec. 2.07. - Rules of procedure; journal; punishment for contempt. 
(a)	The council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)	The council may punish for contemptuous behavior conducted before it while in session.
Sec. 2.08. - Quorum, voting. 
Three (3) councilmen shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the council shall have the right to request a roll call vote. The affirmative vote of three (3) councilmen shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution or motion except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 2.09. - Salaries; reimbursement of expenses. 
The salaries of the mayor and each councilman shall be as prescribed by ordinance, subject to any limitations on the taking effect of same as prescribed by law. 
The council may also provide by ordinance for the reimbursement of expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties as mayor and councilmen. 
State Law reference— Municipality may fix salary and compensation of members, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Sec. 2.10. - Removal from office. 
(a)	Grounds for removal. The mayor or any councilman shall be subject to removal from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)	Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office;
(2)	Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;
(3)	Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(4)	Willful violation of any express prohibition of this Charter;
(5)	Abandonment of office or neglect to perform therein; or
(6)	Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by law. 
(b)	Procedure for removal. Removal of an elected officer from office may be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)	By action of two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire membership of the council. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held no less than 10 days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the council to the Superior Court of Troup County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
(2)	By information filed in the Superior Court of Troup County as provided by law.
Sec. 2.11. - Vacancy; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies. 
(a)	Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmen [sic] shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the laws of the state. 
(b)	Forfeiture of office. The mayor or any councilman shall forfeit his office if he: 
(1)	Lacks at any time during his term of office any qualifications of the office as prescribed, by this Charter or the laws of the state; 
(2)	Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; or
(3)	Fails to attend regular council meetings for a period of time as provided by ordinance.
(c)	Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as follows: 
(1)	If the vacancy occurs more than 27 months prior to the expiration of the term of office of the seat vacated, then such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term of office at a special election to be held on the same date as the next general municipal election; and in this case the remaining members of the council shall, by majority vote of those present and voting, select a qualified person to fill the vacancy until the person elected at such special election takes office. 
(2)	If the vacancy does not occur more than 27 months prior to the date of the general municipal election at which a successor to the office will be elected to a new full term of office, then the remaining members of the city council shall, by majority vote of those present and voting, select a qualified person to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(House Bill No. 345, § 1, 5-6-2015)
Editor's note— Section 1 of House Bill No. 345 (GA HB345), passed May 6, 2015, amended subsection (c) of Charter Section 2.11 so as to provide for certain procedures for the filling of vacancies in the office of mayor or councilmembers. 
Editor's note— The Georgia Municipal Election Code has been suppressed by the Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.). 
Sec. 2.12. - Duties generally. 
The members of the city council shall meet at each of the regular meetings and at all special or call meetings, unless providentially prevented from attending, and shall devote as much time as may be necessary to the legislative matters of the city and attend to legislative affairs of the city, and shall perform such other duties as is now required of them by law or ordinances or by the Charter. 
Sec. 2.13. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.14. - Powers and duties of the mayor. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city government, presiding officer of the city council, and responsible for the enforcement of laws, rules, regulations, ordinances and franchises in the city. He shall have such powers and duties as may be provided by ordinance not inconsistent with this Charter. He shall vote on matters before the city council only in case of a tie. He shall have the right to veto any ordinance or resolution, if in his judgment, such is not to be [in] the best interest of the city. He shall have the authority to appoint committees of the council, to investigate the various departments and to supervise the policy formulation of the various departments, if he so selects. 
Sec. 2.15. - City legislation—General authority. 
In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, or the constitution and the laws of the state, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the city, and may enforce the same by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
Sec. 2.16. - Same; enactment and enrollment of measures. 
(a)	Generally. Except as herein provided, every official action of the council which is to become law, shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption and approved in form by the city attorney. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title, except that an ordinance adopting a code of ordinances or a published code may do so by reference, and this requirement shall be deemed to have been met without enumerating the various matters contained in such codes. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Hogansville, hereby ordains …" 
(b)	Introduction, etc. An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the council and read at a regular or special meeting of the council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, ordinances, except emergency ordinances, shall not be adopted until the next regular meeting of the council following the meeting of their initial introduction. No ordinance shall be considered for final adoption unless two (2) weeks has [have] elapsed since the introduction of the ordinance. Upon the introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall distribute a copy to the mayor, and to each councilman, and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the council may designate. 
(c)	Emergency ordinances. To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the council may adopt one or more emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services, or authorize the borrowing of money except as provided by law. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three (3) councilmen shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 60 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(d)	Signing, authenticating, recording, codification, printing. 
(1)	The clerk shall authenticate by his signature and record in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose all ordinances adopted by council. Every ordinance shall be signed by the mayor as a matter of course after adoption. 
(2)	The council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the council and shall be published promptly, together with this Charter and any amendment thereto, and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known as [and] cited officially as "The Code of the City of Hogansville, Georgia." Copies of the Code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the council. 
(3)	The council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the council. Following publication of the first Code of the City of Hogansville and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the Code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code. 
(e)	Submission to mayor. The mayor, within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of an ordinance, shall return it to the clerk with or without his approval, or with his disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the clerk; if the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law at 12:00 noon on the seventh (7th) calendar day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the council through the clerk a written statement of the reasons for his veto. The clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date and time of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the clerk to the council at its next regular meeting and should the council then or at its next regular meeting adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of four (4) members, or three (3) members if any member of the council abstains it shall become law. 
Sec. 2.17. - Boards, etc. 
The city council shall have the power and authority to establish, appoint and maintain such boards, commissions and committees as in its judgment the needs of the city require. All members of said boards, commissions, and committees shall be residents of the City of Hogansville and subject to approval and/or review at the first meeting of the city council in January of each year. 
ARTICLE III. - CORPORATE POWERS 

Sec. 3.01. - Schedule. 
The corporate powers of the city, to be exercised by the city council, shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(a)	General. To exercise all powers and authority provided in section 1.01 of this Charter. 
(b)	Enactment of ordinances, etc. To make, ordain and establish such bylaws, ordinances, rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof, and for preserving the health, peace, order and good government of the city. 
(c)	Codification of ordinances. To edit, revise and codify the general and permanent ordinances of the city and cause such ordinances to be published as the code of ordinances. 
(d)	Emergency situations. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the city. 
(e)	Corporate limits. To fix the corporate limits of the city, subject to the general laws of the state. 
(f)	Departments, offices, etc. To create, alter or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions and agencies of the city, and to confer upon those agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to same; and to make investigations into the conduct thereof as authorized in this Charter. 
(g)	Elections. To provide the manner and time for city elections, and to prescribe the qualifications of all electors and voters therein and to legislate, regulate and administer all matters pertaining to absentee voting in municipal elections. 
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 
(h)	Contracts and agreements for service; lease of personal or real property. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms and corporations providing for services to be furnished and payments to be made therefor. Also, to rent or lease real or personal property owned or held by the city, either in its proprietary or governmental capacity, for adequate consideration and upon such terms and conditions as are deemed by the governing authority to be in the best interests of the city. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. C11-09-06, § 1, adopted Sept. 6, 2011, amended subsection (h) of § 3.01 to include provisions for lease of personal or real property. 
(i)	Intergovernmental cooperation. To cooperate with any department or agency of the state or federal government, or any political subdivision of the state, in making of public improvements and doing the things which contribute to the health, morals, comfort and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and for this purpose may expend such public funds as are necessary to effectuate said purpose. 
(j)	Merit systems, insurance, retirement. To establish and maintain a merit system, retirement system and insurance plans for officers and employees of the city; and to provide the methods of financing such systems and plans. 
(k)	Property acquisition, etc. To acquire, dispose of and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, within and without the city. 
(l)	Appropriations generally, expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city, to authorize the expenditure of money for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the state, and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city. 
(m)	Appropriations and borrowing for payment of debts; issuance of bonds. To appropriate and borrow money for payment of the debts of the city, and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. If a special assessment is levied to retire a particular bond or finance a special project, said assessment shall automatically terminate when said bond is retired or project paid. 
(n)	Property tax levy and collection. To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation and reevaluation of and collection of taxes on, all property subject to taxation; and to contract with any city, county or other governmental or political subdivision for any service in connection with the taxation process authorized by state law, including without limitation, the ministerial acts of billing and collection of city ad valorem taxes. 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 
(o)	Exempting property from taxation. To exempt property from taxation. 
(p)	Back taxes. To provide for the collection of back taxes and penalties thereon. 
(q)	Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements. 
(r)	License fees and taxes. To levy and provide for collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, the trades, and professions and to provide for the manner and method of payment of such license fees and taxes. 
State Law reference— Business and occupational tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 
(s)	Permits and fees. To provide for the issuance of permits and for the revocation thereof, and to prescribe fees for the issuance thereof. 
(t)	Taxes for advertising the city and for hospitals, libraries, etc. To levy taxes and to make appropriations for the purpose of advertising said city and its advantages and resources so as to bring new capital, commercial, manufacturing and other enterprises into the city if approved by a majority of voters voting in a special referendum for said purpose; and also to levy taxes and to make payment from the general revenues and funds of the city for the support of public hospitals, libraries, and other municipal facilities. 
(u)	Laying out etc., public ways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon, or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of and light streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, walkways, and other public ways, provided however no public way shall be abandoned or closed unless a public hearing is held prior to the enactment of said measure by council. 
(v)	Control of public ways. To regulate and control public streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, walkways and other public ways; and to prevent the blocking of streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, walkways, and other public ways, and railroad crossings. 
(w)	Public facilities and improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment facilities, quarries, airports, hospitals, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, communication, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities and any other public improvements, within and without the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933, or other applicable public acts, as are or may be enacted. 
State Law reference— Municipal eminent domain powers, O.C.G.A. § 22-2-1 et seq. 
(x)	Schools. To provide for the appropriation of funds to the school system for the use of schools, for the delegation of authority to the school commissioners or other school administrative body; to provide for the supervision of schools and of school funds; to provide that the city shall not be liable for any obligation of the commissioners or other such body of the school system, without express authority. 
(y)	Traffic regulations. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, walkways and other public ways of the city. 
State Law reference— Local traffic powers, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq. 
(z)	Vehicles for hire. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; and to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in amounts prescribed by ordinance. 
(aa)	Executions. To issue executions for the collection of any debt or claim due said city, arising by ordinance, or by contract, express or implied, by tort, or otherwise. Said executions may issue and be satisfied as provided in article VI of this Charter or as otherwise authorized by law. 
(bb)	Filing claims against city. To provide for the filing of claims against the city and for the barring of such claims unless properly filed. 
(cc)	Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside of the city, for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the city council, under section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia of 1933, or under other applicable public acts, as are or may be enacted. 
State Law reference— Municipal eminent domain powers, O.C.G.A. § 22-2-1 et seq. 
(dd)	Ownership, etc., of utilities generally. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, and maintain public utilities including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility, within and without the city, and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, and regulations for same, and penalties and withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same or to abide by such regulations, and the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced. 
(ee)	Sewer charges. To levy a fee, charge or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewer system and to levy on the users of sewers and the sewer system a sewer service charge, fee or sewer tax for the use of the sewers and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; and to charge, impose and collect sewer connection fees and to change the same from time to: time; such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewer system. 
(ff)	Collection and disposal of garbage, refuse, recyclable materials. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse and to regulate the collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper and other recyclable materials and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; to take all necessary and proper means for keeping the city free from garbage, trash and filth; to levy, fix, assess and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee, for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services, to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees, and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges. 
(gg)	CATV. To acquire rights-of-way and easements for, purchase, construct, own, sell and dispose of, maintain, operate, extend and improve a cable television system, within and without the city, subject to the provisions of applicable state law, and to prescribe the charges, rates, fares, fees, regulations and standards and conditions of service to be provided, and to impose a lien against any property of the persons served, said lien to be enforceable in the same manner and with the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes. 
(hh)	Franchises. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services, but not limited to those stated above, not to exceed periods of 30 years. The council may prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with laws of the state. 
(ii)	Health and sanitation. To prescribe health and sanitation standards and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(jj)	Pollution control. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams, ponds, and other bodies of water within the city or owned by the city. 
(kk)	Zoning, planning and subdivisions. To adopt by ordinance a plan or plans for the zoning of the city in the interest of public health, safety, order, convenience, comfort, aesthetics, prosperity, or general welfare, and for the purpose of regulating the location of trades, industries, apartment houses, dwellings, and other uses of property; or for the purpose of regulating the height and location of the buildings, fences and other structures; for the purpose of regulating the alignment of buildings or other structures near street frontages; for the purpose of preserving buildings, structures or areas having national, regional, state or local historic significance; and for the purpose of maintaining or improving the aesthetic appearance of any buildings, structures or areas. The zoning regulations may be based upon any one or more of the purposes, above described. The city may be divided into such number of zones or districts, and such districts may be of such shape and area as the city council shall deem best to accomplish the purposes of the zoning regulations. The council may prescribe regulations for the subdividing or platting of property. 
(ll)	Fire limits, fire prevention and protection. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof. 
(mm)	Building construction and repair. To establish minimum standards for and to regulate the erection and construction and repair of buildings and other structures, electrical wiring and equipment, gas installation and equipment, plumbing, and housing, for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; to adopt by reference building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, mechanical, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing, building, and building trades, and to license all building trades and to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures. 
(nn)	Dangerous structures. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which may or might become dangerous or detrimental to the public. 
(oo)	Adoption of published codes, etc. To adopt by reference any codes, publication or compilation of rules, regulations, specifications, standards, limitations, or requirements by an agency of the federal or state government or by a municipality, by a trade association or other organization generally recognized as an authority in its field of activity. 
(pp)	Signs, etc. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets, roads or other public ways, or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances. 
(qq)	Police power. To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental or likely to be detrimental to the health, morals, safety, security, peace, convenience, or general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, within the city and on any property outside of the city and owned by the city. 
(rr)	Animals and fowl. To regulate, license, tax or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment thereof for violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for their disposition, by sale, gift, or humane destruction, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violations of ordinances enacted under this subsection. 
(ss)	Nuisances. To define a nuisance in the city and to provide for its abatement, whether on public or private property. 
State Law reference— Abatement of nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. 
(tt)	Alcoholic beverages. To regulate and control the use, manufacture, sale or transportation of alcoholic beverages, and license and tax the same. 
(uu)	Loitering, disorderly conduct, etc. To adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention of loitering, disorderly conduct and disturbing the peace in the city and to prohibit the playing of lotteries therein, and to prohibit or regulate by ordinance such other conduct or activity within the city which, while not constituting an offense against the laws of this state, is deemed by the governing authority to be detrimental and offensive to the peace and good order of the city or to the welfare of the citizens thereof. 
State Law reference— Loitering ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
(vv)	Peddlers, shows, etc. To regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind whatever by taxation or otherwise. 
(ww)	Dangerous activities or conditions. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the use and sale of firearms, and to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property. 
(xx)	Penalty for violation of ordinances, etc. To provide that upon the conviction of the violation of any ordinance, code, rule, regulation, or order the offender may be punished within limitations prescribed by this Charter and the laws of the state. 
State Law reference— Maximum penalty for violations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2)(B), (C). 
(yy)	Arrest and bail. To provide for arrest and appearance bonds or bail of offenders against city ordinances or regulations and to provide for the forfeiture and collection of said bonds; and to exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen. 
(zz)	Working prisoners. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court shall work out such sentences in any public works or on the public streets, and for the commitment of such persons to any county work camp or jail, by agreement with the appropriate governmental officials. 
(aaa)	Additional powers generally. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, morals and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under the constitution and other laws of the state. No enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers; but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution or applicable public acts of the state. 
(Ord. No. C11-09-06, § 1, 9-6-2011)
Sec. 3.02. - Construction. 
The powers of the city shall be construed liberally and in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power of the city as stated in this Charter. It is the intention hereof to grant the city full power and right to exercise all governmental authority necessary for the effective operation and conduct of the city and all of its affairs. 
Sec. 3.03. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provisions therefor, such powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance of the governing authority and as provided by pertinent laws of the state. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 4.01. - Election of mayor and councilmen. 
Beginning with the year 1976, and biennially thereafter, an election shall be held in the city on the first Wednesday in December, at which election a mayor and two (2) councilmen shall be elected who shall serve from the first Monday in January of the year following, for a term of two (2) years, and until their successors are elected and qualified. On the first Wednesday in December, 1977, and biennially thereafter, three (3) councilmen shall be elected, who shall serve from the first Monday in January of the year following for a term of two (2) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
Sec. 4.02. - Qualifications and registration of electors. 
Electors in city elections shall be qualified and registered as provided in title 34A, Georgia Code Annotated [now O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.]. 
Sec. 4.03. - Conduct of elections generally. 
City elections shall be conducted as provided for by title 34A, Georgia Code Annotated [now O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], and as provided for by ordinance or resolution of the council adopted pursuant to said title 34A. 
Challenges to electors shall be determined as provided in title 34, Georgia Code Annotated [now O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.]. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 5.01. - Continuation of existing organization. 
The administrative service of the city shall continue as presently organized, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, and except as otherwise provided hereafter by ordinance. 
Sec. 5.02. - Establishing etc., administrative and service departments. 
(a)	The council by ordinance may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city, as it shall deem necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. The council shall prescribe the functions and duties of existing departments, offices and agencies or of any departments, offices and agencies herein or hereafter created or established, may provide that the same person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment and may transfer or change the function or duties of offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city. 
(b)	The operations and responsibilities of each department now or hereafter established in the city shall be distributed among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided by ordinance of the council. Each department shall consist of such officer, employees, and positions as may be provided by this Charter or by ordinance, and shall be subject to the general supervision and guidance of the city manager and council. 
Sec. 5.03. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall serve at the pleasure of the council and be under the direct supervision and control of the city manager who shall direct and supervise the day to day activities of the city clerk. The city clerk shall be responsible for keeping and preserving the city seal and all records of the council; attending meetings of the council and keeping a journal of the proceedings at such meetings, including the names of members present and absent, the vote of each member on each question, each motion considered, and the text of each resolution or ordinance considered; preparing and certifying copies of official records in his office, for which fees may be prescribed by ordinance; and performing such other duties as may be required by the council or the city manager. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1992)
Sec. 5.04. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney and assistant city attorneys if necessary, who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The city attorney may be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may at the discretion of the council be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the council, city manager and other officers and employees of the city, concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs, and shall perform such other duties as provided by the council. 
Sec. 5.05. - Municipal court. 
(a)	There shall be a court known as the municipal court in said city for the trial of all offenders against the laws and ordinances of said city, to be held by a judge or an acting judge, as in this Charter provided, in the council room or such other place as the council may designate. 
(b)	Said court shall have power and it shall be the duty of the judge, or acting judge:
(1)	To preserve order, compel the attendance of witnesses, resident within or without the limits of the city, to continue cases, assess bail for the appearance of the accused party, to punish for contempt by imprisonment in jail not exceeding 10 days or a fine of not exceeding $10.00, one or both. 
(2)	Upon conviction, to sentence any offender to labor upon the streets or other public works in said city for a period of not exceeding 60 days; to impose a fine of not exceeding $500.00 or to sentence said offender to be confined in the jail or other place of imprisonment in the county not exceeding 60 days either one or more of said penalties. 
(3)	To administer all oaths and perform all other acts necessary in the conduct of said court. 
(4)	In cases where it is made to appear that a state law has been violated, to bind the offenders over to the proper court of Troup County, for trial and to assess bail for their appearance at said court. 
(c)	In the absence of the judge, or his disqualification, or nonappointment, the mayor may act as such, provided he has taken the oath of a judicial officer. 
(d)	The salary of the judge shall be fixed by the council.
(e)	With the approval of the council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the court; provided, however that the council may adopt in part or in total the rules and regulations under the general laws of the state. The rules and regulations made or adopted for said court shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in proceedings in such court at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
(f)	The right of appeal and any bond as may be required to secure the costs on appeal to the Superior Court of Troup County from the municipal court shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals and appeal bonds from the probate court; provided, any person who fails to file his appeal within 10 days of the date of his conviction shall be deemed to have waived any such right. An appeal to the superior court shall be a de novo proceeding. 
Editor's note— As originally enacted, the above court was designated as the "Recorder's Court." 1986 Ga. Laws, page 784 restyled all such courts as "municipal courts." Also see establishment of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1. 
Sec. 5.06. - City manager—Creation of office, appointment, removal. 
(a)	The office of city manager is hereby created.
(b)	The city manager shall be appointed by the city council for an indefinite term or, by a majority vote, may be given a written agreement. He or she shall be chosen solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his or her actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of his or her office as set forth in this Charter. At the time of his or her appointment he or she need not be a resident of the city or the state, but during his or her tenure of office he or she shall reside within the county. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. C11-08-01, § 1, adopted Aug. 1, 2011, amended subsection (b) of § 5.06 to remove the prohibition of an elected official from being appointed city manager under certain circumstances. 
(c)	The city council may remove the city manager at any time by a majority vote adopting a resolution to that effect. The city manager may, within ten days after notice of adoption of such resolution, reply in writing and may request a public hearing, which shall be held not earlier than 20 nor later than 30 days after the filing of such request. The action of the council in removing the city manager, however, shall be final. Upon the city manager's removal as provided for in this section, the city manager shall be paid forthwith any unpaid balance of his or her salary for the calendar month following the month in which he or she is removed and the salary for the next calendar month following. 
(Ord. of 3-20-1995; 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 131), page 3829, § 1; Ord. No. C11-08-01, § 1, 8-1-2011) 
Sec. 5.07. - City manager—Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. He may head one or more departments and shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city. To that end, he shall have power and shall be required to: 
(1)	Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, suspend or remove all officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided by the Charter or law, and except as he may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint, suspend, or remove subordinates in such department or office. He may suspend the head of a department, but all appointments and removals of heads of departments are subject to ratification by the city council; if the city council does not object to said appointments or removals within three (3) days after with notice to the clerk and notice to each member of council it shall be presumed that the city council does not object to said appointment or removal at 12:00 noon of the third day. He shall not have the right to appoint, suspend or remove the city judge, city attorney or city clerk. 
(2)	Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the city council together with a message describing the important features and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(3)	Prepare and submit to the council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year. 
(4)	Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations as he may deem desirable. 
(5)	Recommend to the council a standard schedule of pay for each appointive office and position in the city service, including minimum, intermediate, and maximum rates. 
(6)	Recommend to the council (from time to time) adoption of such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety, or welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services. 
(7)	Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments, or units under his jurisdiction, with the approval of the council. 
(8)	Attend all meetings of the council unless excused therefrom and take part in the discussion of all matters coming before it. He shall be entitled to notice of all regular and special meetings of the council. 
(9)	He shall be purchasing agent of the city, by whom all purchases of supplies shall be made subject to the rules and regulations to be prescribed by the council, and he shall approve all vouchers for the payment of same. In the capacity of purchasing agent he shall also conduct all sales of personal property which the council may authorize to be sold as having become unnecessary or unfit for the city's use. All purchases and sales shall conform to such regulations as the council may from time to time prescribe. Competitive bidding shall be required on all major purchases as defined by ordinance. He may issue checks on the city treasury as authorized in section 6.06 of this Charter. 
(10)	In case of accident, disaster, or other circumstance creating a public emergency, the city manager may award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of meeting said emergency; but he shall file promptly with the council a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures. 
(11)	All formal contracts to which the city is a party shall be executed in behalf of the city by the city manager and attested by the city clerk, after an approving resolution of the council and approval in form by the city attorney. 
(12)	See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced.
(13)	Investigate the affairs of the city or any department or division thereof. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the city, and in regard to service maintained by the public utilities in the city, and see that all franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed. 
(14)	Devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties.
(15)	Perform such other duties as may be required by the council, not inconsistent with this Charter, law, or ordinances. 
Sec. 5.08. - City manager—Compensation; official bonds. 
(a)	The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall fix from time to time. 
(b)	The city manager shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the council, said bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the city. The amount of the bond shall be set by the council. 
Sec. 5.09. - City manager—Vacancy. 
Any vacancy in the office of city manager shall be filled within 60 days after the effective date of such vacancy. During such vacancy, the council shall discharge the duties and functions of city manager. 
Sec. 5.10. - City manager—Designating acting city manager. 
By letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager shall designate subject to approval of the council, a qualified city administrative officer to execute the powers and perform the duties of the city manager during his temporary absence or disability. 
Sec. 5.11. - Mayor and councilmen not to interfere with appointments or removals. 
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the city councilmen shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager and neither the mayor nor any councilman shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately, except in emergency situations or in the absence of the city manager or acting city manager. 
Sec. 5.12. - Personnel policies. 
The council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)	The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment;
(2)	The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)	Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoff shall be effected; and 
(4)	Such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of the personnel affairs of the city. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE AND TAXATION 

Sec. 6.01. - Fiscal year. 
The council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each office, department or institution, agency and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Sec. 6.02. - Official bonds. 
The officers and employees of the city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the council may from time to time require. 
Sec. 6.03. - Annual budget, appropriation. 
(a)	The city manager shall at the first regular meeting of council in each fiscal year, submit a budget estimate of the revenue and expenditures of the city for the current year. This estimate shall be compiled from detailed estimates obtained from the several departments of the city on uniform blanks to be furnished by the city clerk. The classification of the estimates shall be as nearly uniform as possible for the main functional divisions of each department, which shall give, in parallel columns the following information: 
(1)	A detailed estimate of the expenses of conducting each department, division or office, for the current year; 
(2)	Expenditures for corresponding items for the past two fiscal years;
(3)	Amount of material and supplies on hand at the time the estimate was prepared;
(4)	Increase or decrease of appropriations proposed by each department as compared with corresponding appropriations for previous years; 
(5)	Such other information as may be enlightening; and
(6)	Recommendation as to the amounts to be appropriated with reasons therefor in such detail as may be advisable. 
(b)	At the first regular meeting of each fiscal year, or as soon thereafter as may be done, the appropriation resolution for the current year shall be passed in such amounts as may be determined. No expenditures in excess of amounts budgeted may be spent or transfers made to a different department without a resolution amending said budget as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3(d)(1) and (2). 
(c)	At the end of each fiscal year all unexpired balance of appropriations in the treasury shall revert to the general fund and be subject to further appropriations. 
(d)	Any resolution may be passed as may be necessary to carry out these purposes.
(Ord. of 6-6-1994)
Sec. 6.04. - City depositories. 
The city council, in its discretion, may from time to time, name and appoint as city depositories of city funds any bank or trust company which has its deposits insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. At such time as an act becomes effective providing that banks and savings and loan associations shall be taxed in the same manner as other corporations are taxed, the city council may also name and appoint as city depositories of city funds any building and loan association or federal savings and loan association which has its deposits insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation. 
Sec. 6.05. - Contracting procedures. 
All formal contracts shall be made or authorized by the council, and no contracts shall bind the city unless reduced to writing and approved by the council. All contracts, and all ordinances or resolutions making contracts or authorizing the same, shall be drawn by the city attorney or shall be submitted to him before authorization by council. 
Sec. 6.06. - Issuance of checks. 
All checks drawn on the city treasury in payment of discretionary nonbudget items of not over $1,000.00 for a new item and $2,000.00 for a replacement item may be issued if signed by the city manager and attested by the city clerk. 
Payment of an amount over $1,000.00 for a discretionary new item and $2,000.00 for a discretionary replacement item shall have prior council approval and formal contract procedures as defined by ordinance shall be followed. All specific budget item payments may be issued if signed by the city manager and attested by the city clerk. 
Sec. 6.07. - Ad valorem taxes—Authority to levy. 
The council shall be authorized to levy an ad valorem tax not to exceed 15 mills on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of raising revenue to pay the cost of ordinary current expenses and for any other purpose now or hereafter authorized by the constitution and laws of the state, but not including principal and interest on general obligation bonds. The city is hereby exempted from the provisions of the Georgia Code Annotated section 92-4101 through 92-4104 inclusive. 
(Ord. of 8-6-1990)
Editor's note— There are no successor provisions in the state code. 
Sec. 6.08. - Same—Assessment. 
All property subject to taxation for state or county purposes, assessed as of January first in each year, shall be subject to the property tax levied by the city. The council by ordinance may elect to use the county assessment for the year in which the city taxes are to be levied and shall request the county to furnish appropriate information for such purpose. 
Sec. 6.09. - Tax due dates and bills. 
The council shall provide by ordinance when the taxes of the city shall be paid, and provide for payment in installments or one lump sum, and when and how and upon what terms such taxes shall be due and payable, as well as to authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.10. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The council may provide by ordinance for the collection of delinquent taxes by fi. fa. issued by the city clerk and executed by any police officer of the city under the same procedure provided by the laws governing execution of such process from the superior court, or by the use of any other available legal processes and remedies. A lien shall exist against all property upon which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment date of each year, which lien shall be superior to all other liens, except that it shall have equal dignity with those of federal, state or county taxes. In cases of hardship, the council shall have discretionary authority to waive any and all penalties imposed by this Charter on delinquent taxes, fees, assessments, or on other amounts due to the city. 
State Law reference— Willful failure to pay ad valorem tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-2-44. 
Sec. 6.11. - Failure to make returns or furnish information. 
Council shall provide for the punishment of any taxpayer refusing to return property for taxation, or for refusing to comply with a request from the taxing authorities with reference to the producing of any book, paper, record or any other enlightening evidence which may tend to assist the tax assessors in arriving at the true market value of all items returned for taxation, and the council shall fix reasonable rules and regulations for their production. 
Sec. 6.12. - Back taxes. 
In case any property subject to taxation, was not assessed by the tax assessors, or returned for taxation, or for any reason has not been assessed for taxation and taxes collected therein, in any year then passed, the assessors may at any time assess said property for said year or years and double tax, if there has been a failure to return as required by law; and the council may provide for double taxation of defaulters, and may cause execution to issue therefor as in other cases, at the rates for the several years in which no taxes were paid. This right shall apply in like manner to property which in the future may be omitted for any cause from return or assessment, and the collection of taxes thereon omitted in any year, and assessments may be made and execution issued hereunder, as well as for years prior to the passage of this Charter as thereafter. The council may provide by ordinance for the execution of the provisions of this section wherever ordinances are necessary. The council shall provide by ordinance for notice to parties whose property has been, or may be, assessed for back taxes and the hearing of any complaint. All assessments referred to in this section shall be made by the tax assessors for the city. 
Sec. 6.13. - Authority to exempt property from taxation. 
The council shall have the right, power and authority to exempt any real or personal property from taxation, under such terms, restrictions and conditions as may be to the best interest of the city, and not inconsistent with laws of the state, and may exempt property, real or personal, of persons in order to induce such persons to locate new industries in the city, and shall have the right to fix the terms and conditions on which the same may be exempted and to enact such ordinances as may be necessary to accomplish such purpose. 
Sec. 6.14. - Payment of taxes. 
The council shall have the power and authority to provide by ordinance when the taxes of the city shall fall due, and in what length of time said taxes may be paid, when tax executions shall be issued against all persons who have not paid their taxes by the time fixed by ordinance, and to fix a penalty for the nonpayment of taxes when due, and to charge lawful interest from due date until said taxes are paid. The council shall have authority to provide by ordinance for the payment of taxes due to the city in installments, or in one lump sum, and to provide when and how and upon what terms such taxes shall be due and payable; and to authorize the payment of taxes prior to the time when due and allow discounts upon anticipated payments, and in general to fix the terms and methods of payment, and collection of city taxes, in such manner as the council may determine. 
Sec. 6.15. - Executions; how issued, advertised, levied and method of sales. 
Execution for any taxes, fines, licenses, fees, assessments, forfeitures, or demands due to the city, or its corporate authorities, against any person or against any specific property subject thereto, shall be issued by the city clerk, signed by him, bear teste in the name of the mayor and be directed to the chief of police and all and singular the sheriffs, deputy sheriffs and constables of this state, commanding them that of any property belonging to the defendant against whom said execution is issued, or of the certain property described in the execution, they make by levy and sale the amount due on said execution with costs. The council shall provide by ordinance for advertising of, method of conducting, and all other regulations governing, the sales by the chief of police under city executions. The sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, and constables of this state shall have the same power and authority to levy and collect executions issued by the city as they have to levy and collect executions from the various courts of this state. 
Sec. 6.16. - Same—Objections to issuance of fi. fa. 
The council shall cause written notice to be served 10 days before the issuance of any execution, requiring cause, if any, to be shown why an execution should not issue, stating in said notice the time and place of hearing. The council shall hear and pass on all objections to the issuance of executions. Any person being dissatisfied with the action of the council may carry the cause to the superior court of the county, in the manner now provided by law for certiorari. Any person being notified and failing to show cause why an execution should not issue against him shall be estopped thereafter from objecting to the issuance and collection of same. 
Sec. 6.17. - Same—Conduct of sales. 
All sales of personal property made by the chief of police shall be conducted in the same manner as sheriffs' sales. In case of levy upon real estate, he shall advertise same in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, or if none, by posting three (3) or more notices of the sale in conspicuous places in the city for 30 days next before the date of sale. All sales shall be on the first Tuesday in each month at the city hall, except in cases of levy on livestock or anything perishable or liable to deteriorate in value, in which event the property may be sold on order of the city manager after advertisement of same by posting written notice as above described for three (3) days. In case of sale of realty the chief of police is hereby empowered to make the purchaser a deed to same and put him in possession of the premises. 
Sec. 6.18. - Occupation tax. 
The council shall have full power and authority to require all persons, whether a resident or nonresident of the city, engaged in or carrying on, or who may engage in, prosecute or carry on, any trade, business, calling, vocation or profession within the corporate limits of the city, by themselves or their agents, to register their names and business, calling, vocation or profession annually and to require such persons to pay for such registration, and to pay occupation tax to prosecute, carry on or engage in such business, calling, vocation or profession in such amount as the council may by ordinance prescribe. The council may provide by ordinance for the punishment of all persons required by ordinance to pay such occupation tax, who engage in or offer to attempt to engage in, such business, profession or occupation before paying such tax, or who fail to comply in full with all the requirements of the city council in reference thereto. 
State Law reference— Occupation tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 
Sec. 6.19. - Cost of issuing summonses, executions, processes, subpoenas. 
The cost of issuing, serving or executing all summonses, executions, processes, writs or subpoenas shall be the same as now allowed sheriffs for like service and where they are issued shall be paid into the city treasury. 
Sec. 6.20. - General obligation bonds. 
The council shall have the power to issue bonds for purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this Charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance the with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.21. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the council as provided by an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved March 31, 1937, known as the Revenue Bond Law (now O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.), as now or hereinafter amended, or by any other law of the state as now or hereafter provided. 
Sec. 6.22. - Failure of bonds to carry, new election. 
If the election provided for shall be against the issue of bonds, the council may at any time after expiration of six (6) months from the date of the first election order another election on the issuance of said bonds. 
Sec. 6.23. - Shortterm notes. 
Pursuant to applicable state law the city may obtain temporary loans between the first day of the first month and the last day of the last month of the fiscal year as defined by ordinance. 
ARTICLE VII. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS; UTILITIES; SERVICES 

Sec. 7.01. - Paving—Railroad crossings; performing and assessing cost. 
The council shall have power and authority to pave or provide for the paving of railroad crossings within the city and other portions of any street therein, and to assess the cost therefor, or any part thereof, against [the] owner of the roadbed and the adjoining property, and issue executions to enforce the payment of the same. 
Sec. 7.02. - Same—Improvements under bond plan. 
The council is authorized and empowered to make such street and sidewalk improvements, as may be necessary, under the city bond revenue act, as provided in chapter 69, sections 401 to 434 inclusive, of the 1933 Code of Georgia [now O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.]; and all rights and powers therein conferred may be exercised by said governing body, subject to the restrictions, terms, definitions and requirements as are therein set out. Said chapter 69, sections 401 through 434, together with all amendments thereto are made a part of this Charter. 
Sec. 7.03. - Same—Referendum. 
All ordinances, adopting provisions of chapter 69, sections 401 through 434 inclusive, of the 1933 Code of Georgia (now O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.), previously passed, and adopted, as required by law by referendum, and entered on the minutes of the city, are confirmed and shall continue of force until repealed or revoked in a manner provided by law. 
Sec. 7.04. - Extension of utilities beyond city. 
For the purpose of the preservation of the health and comfort of the people, and of the inhabitants of the city, the council is empowered to extend the city system of sewerage, lights, water and gas, beyond the limits of the city, and prescribe provisions as to the construction of and maintenance of such systems, and shall have the right to obtain by purchase, gift or condemnation, such rights-of-way and easements as may be necessary for that purpose as is provided in this Charter. All rights, powers, and authority previously granted to the city with reference to the system of water works, sewerage, electric lights, power and gas shall be and remain in force unless in conflict with the terms of this Charter. 
Sec. 7.05. - Referendum on sale of utilities. 
(a)	No public utility owned by the city may be sold, unless the sale is approved by the majority of the registered and qualified voters of said city in a referendum held for such purpose. 
(b)	The referendum may be held only after four-fifths (4/5) of the city council approve of holding such referendum or 10 percent of the registered and qualified voters sign a petition requesting such referendum. 
(c)	Notice of the referendum stating the date and purpose must be posted in the city hall for 30 days prior thereto. 
(d)	The date and purpose for holding the referendum must be advertised in the official organ of the city at least one (1) time each week for three (3) consecutive weeks during 30 days prior to such referendum. 
(e)	After the above requirements have been met, it shall be the duty of the city election managers to hold and conduct the election. The city election managers shall submit the following to the registered and qualified voters of the city: 
Shall the city council be authorized to sell the (name of public utility) that is owned by the City of Hogansville?" 
"YES ( ) 
 NO ( ) 
All persons desiring to vote in favor of allowing the city council to sell the utility shall vote "Yes." All persons desiring to vote against allowing the city council to sell the public utility shall vote "No." If more than one-half (½) of the voters registered to vote in said election vote in favor of allowing the city council to sell the public utility, the council is authorized to sell such utility, in any manner that such council deems to be in the best interest of said city. The city election managers shall certify the result of such election to the council and the council shall by proper resolution declare the result thereof. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SCHOOLS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local school system, Ga. Const. art. VIII, § V, ¶ I.

Sec. 8.01. - System continued; election of commissioners. 
The Hogansville school system shall be and remain as now provided by the laws incorporating the same, and the school system shall, through its commissioners and/or board of eduction exercise and have all the rights, powers and authority previously conferred upon it by the constitution and laws of the state, and shall, in like manner, be subject to all the responsibilities, restrictions and liabilities as are imposed by law. A candidate for the board of education shall run at large and the candidates with the largest number of votes shall fill the vacancies. The acts providing for election of school commissioners, terms of office, duties, and liabilities, and regulating and incorporating this school system are in no way changed, except as provided in this section. 
Sec. 8.02. - Qualifications of school board commissioners. 
To be eligible for the office, elected or appointed, a person shall be at least 21 years of age and shall meet the requirements of a qualified voter of the city, as prescribed by state law, shall have been a bona fide resident of the city for at least one (1) year next preceding the election in which he offers as a candidate and shall continue to reside therein during his term of office. No person shall be eligible to be a school board commissioner who shall have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, unless he has received a full pardon and has all rights of citizenship restored. 
Sec. 8.03. - Removal from office. 
(a)	Grounds for removal. The school board commissioners shall be subject to removal from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)	Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office;
(2)	Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;
(3)	Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(4)	Abandonment of office or neglect to perform therein.
(b)	Procedure for removal. Removal of a school board commissioner from office may be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)	By action of two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire membership of the school board. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the school board, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held no less than 10 days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the school board to the Superior Court of Troup County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
(2)	By information filed in the Superior Court of Troup County as provided by law.
Sec. 8.04. - Transfer of funds. 
The council shall be empowered to transfer any funds of the city, not already set aside for use for any other specific purpose, to the school funds of the city, to be used by the school authorities of the city for school purposes. 
Sec. 8.05. - Powers which may be granted to board of education as to construction and equipment. 
The council shall have the full right to delegate to the school commissioners and/or the board of education the right and authority to supervise the construction and equipment of all school buildings and improvements incident thereto, which may be constructed with funds belonging to the city or provided through bond issue. 
Sec. 8.06. - Use of taxes for schools. 
The council may in its discretion by proper corporate action, set aside and use for school purposes any and all special taxes and license fees collected by the city, and shall levy a fixed tax, on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the City of Hogansville, not to exceed 20 mills as provided in Article 8, Sec. 6, Paragraph 1 of the Georgia Constitution [Ga. Const. art. VIII, § VI, ¶ I], for the support and maintenance of said schools. Said fixed tax shall be used only for the City of Hogansville independent school system and shall be levied in addition to the 15 mills authorized under section 6.07 of this Charter. 
(Ord. of 8-6-1990)
Sec. 8.07. - Construction supervision. 
The council shall have the right to appoint a committee, or to employ a supervisor, engineer or architect to supervise and direct the construction of any and all school buildings constructed with city funds or funds provided through bond issues, and the council shall have the right to limit and direct the amounts expended therefor; and shall have the right to require the school commissioners and/or the board of education to conform to, obey and carry out such directions as may be given in such matter by the council, its committee and/or supervisor, engineer or architect, and to withhold payment therefor until such directions and instructions are complied with; and the council shall have the full right and authority in the way and manner aforesaid to require reports showing that said funds are being properly expended. 
Sec. 8.08. - No liability of city, etc. 
The council and/or the city shall not, in any manner, be liable for any contract or obligation which may be made by the school commissioners and/or the board of education of the city. 
ARTICLE IX. - LEGAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9.01. - Provisions of Charter severable. 
The provisions of this Charter are severable, and if any part thereof shall be held contrary to the constitution or the laws of the state the same shall not affect the remaining parts thereof. 
Sec. 9.02. - Referendum on Charter adoption. 
Before the provisions of this Charter shall become effective, the council shall hold an election at such time as the governing authorities may determine, after giving thirty (30) days notice thereof by publication of said notice one (1) time each week for four (4) consecutive weeks in a newspaper published in the city, or if no newspaper is published in said city, then for the time and in the manner above fixed in the official organ of the county, in which [the] sheriff's sales are published. Said notice shall briefly state the purpose of the election, the time, place and hours of holding the same. The rules and laws now governing municipal elections shall govern. When the election has been held and a majority of the qualified voters voting shall have voted in favor of such adoption, and after the election managers have duly certified the results of such election to the governing body, said council shall, by proper ordinance and resolution, declare the result thereof and that the Charter is adopted, and shall direct that such ordinance and resolution be entered on the minutes of the city and the Charter shall be of full force and effect subject to passage by the General Assembly of Georgia and approved by the Governor. Should said election not be in favor of adoption, in such event, it may be resubmitted, after six (6) months of said election, to the qualified voters of said city, subject to the same rules, regulations, requirements and restrictions as are above set out. 
Sec. 9.03. - Taking effect; repeal of conflicting law. 
The provisions of this Act shall become operative when the same is passed by the General Assembly of Georgia and approved by the Governor of said state. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act be and the same are hereby repealed. 
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Printed in this article is a compilation of section 1 of the local constitutional amendment creating the Hogansville Development Authority. Such amendment is found is 1964 Georgia Laws, page 794. The sections in this article are derived from paragraphs of such section and have been assigned numeric equivalents of the paragraph letters (A., B., etc.) found in the original. The amendment modified Ga. Const. (1945) art. VII, § V, ¶ I and was continued by 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 55), page 3602. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, capitalization, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets.

Sec. 1. - Creation. 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic in the City of Hogansville in Troup County to be known as the Hogansville Development Authority, which shall be an instrumentality of the City of Hogansville and a public corporation and which in this amendment is hereafter referred to as the "authority." 
(Ord. No. 78-01-03, 1-3-1978)
Sec. 2. - Members. 
The authority shall consist of five members who shall serve for a term of five years and who shall be eligible for reappointment. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hogansville. The first members shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years, respectively, and thereafter their successors shall be appointed for terms of five years. Members shall serve until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the city council. A majority of members shall constitute a quorum and a majority may act for the authority in any matter. No vacancy shall impair the power of the authority to act. No member of the authority shall be the mayor nor a member of the council of the City of Hogansville, but there shall be no other disqualification to hold public office by reason of membership in the authority. 
(Ord. No. 78-01-03, 1-3-1978)
Sec. 3. - Tax exempt status. 
The property, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property, obligations and interest on the obligations of the City of Hogansville. The exemption from taxation herein provided shall not extend to tenants nor lessees of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 78-01-03, 1-3-1978)
Sec. 4. - Powers. 
The powers of the authority shall include but not be limited to the power: 
(1)	To buy, acquire, accept and give options upon, develop, improve, own, operate, maintain, sell, lease as lessor or lessee, and mortgage land, buildings and real and personal property of all kinds within the City of Hogansville. 
(2)	To receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and to administer trusts.
(3)	To grant, loan and lease without adequate consideration or without any consideration and with and without security, any of its funds and property to private persons and corporations operating or proposing to operate any industrial plant or establishment within the City of Hogansville. The provisions of this clause shall not be construed to limit any other power of the authority. 
(4)	To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue notes, bonds and debentures and execute deeds to secure debt, trust deeds, trust agreements or debentures, and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property and income as security therefor. 
(5)	To issue revenue anticipation certificates or bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project of the authority. To exercise all of the rights, powers and privileges and be subject to the same liabilities as a municipality under the provisions of the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (1937 Ga. Laws, pages 761-774), and as amended, with reference to the issuance of such certificates or bonds and validation of same insofar as such pertain to the corporate purposes of the authority. 
(6)	To contract with the City of Hogansville and other political subdivisions of the State of Georgia and with private persons and corporations and to sue and to be sued in its corporate name. 
(7)	To have and exercise usual powers of private corporations except such as are inconsistent with this amendment, including the power to appoint and hire officers, agents and employees and to provide their compensation and duties, which officers and agents may or may not be members of the authority and the power to adopt and amend a corporate seal and bylaws and regulations for the conduct and management of the authority. 
(8)	To encourage and promote the expansion and development of industrial, agricultural, recreational and trade facilities in the City of Hogansville, and to make long range plans therefor, so as to relieve insofar as possible unemployment within its boundaries, and to that end its acquiral [sic] by purchase or gift any building or structure within the limits of the City of Hogansville suitable for and intended for use as a factory, mill, shop, processing plant, assembly plant, fabricating plant, or any other type of structure, including all necessary and appurtenant lands and appurtenances thereto, and all necessary or useful furnishings, machinery and equipment. Such acquisition may be through the acquisition of land and the construction thereon of a building, including the demolition of existing structures, or through the acquisition of an existing building and the remodeling, renovating, reconstructing, furnishing and equipping of such building. All of such acquisitions of property or machinery, equipment or furnishings may be made through the use of funds derived through the issuance of revenue certificates and all expansions of new or existing facilities may be made through the use of such funds. 
(9)	To exercise such other powers and duties, consistent with the purposes of the authority, as may be delegated to it by the mayor and council of the City of Hogansville. 
(10)	To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested. 
(11)	To designate officers to sign and act for the authority generally or in any specific matter. 
(12)	To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish the purpose and powers of the authority as herein stated. 
(Ord. No. 78-01-03, 1-3-1978)
Sec. 5. - Debt restrictions. 
The authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation against the City of Hogansville, the State of Georgia, nor Troup County. 
(Ord. No. 78-01-03, 1-3-1978)
Sec. 6. - Tort immunity; contractual obligations. 
The authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the State of Georgia and the officers, agents and employees of the authority when in performance of the work of the authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents and employees of the State of Georgia when in performance of their public duties or work of the state. The authority may be sued the same as private corporations on any contractual obligation of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 78-01-03, 1-3-1978)
Sec. 7. - Compensation of members. 
The members of the authority shall receive only such compensation for their services to the authority as shall be authorized by the mayor and council of the City of Hogansville but such compensation shall be paid from funds of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 78-01-03, 1-3-1978)
Sec. 8. - Tax to support. 
The City of Hogansville is authorized to levy an annual tax as may be determined by the mayor and council of the City of Hogansville, Georgia, but not to exceed two mills, on all taxable property within the city for the support of the authority and for its use and purposes, and all funds raised by such tax shall be paid and appropriated by the City of Hogansville to the authority and when paid to the authority, shall become a part of its funds and may be used by it for any of its purposes and powers as herein stated or as may be hereafter provided by law, which tax shall be in addition to all other taxes authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 78-01-03, 1-3-1978)
Sec. 9. - Appropriations by city. 
The City of Hogansville is also authorized, in addition to the tax provided above, to appropriate to the authority such amount from its funds each year as its governing authority shall determine to be appropriate, but not exceeding twenty per cent of its total receipts from business licenses for the year, and any funds so appropriated when paid to the authority shall become a part of its funds and may be used by the authority in accordance with its powers and purposes as herein stated or as may be hereafter defined by law. 
(Ord. No. 78-01-03, 1-3-1978)
Sec. 10. - Property subject to debts. 
The property of the authority shall not be subject to levy and sale under legal process except such property, income or funds as may be pledged, assigned, mortgaged or conveyed to secure an obligation of the authority, and any such property, funds or income may be sold under legal process or under any power granted by the authority to enforce payment of the obligation. 
(Ord. No. 78-01-03, 1-3-1978)
Sec. 11. - Purpose; construction of act. 
This amendment is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare of the City of Hogansville and its citizens, industry, agriculture, trade, commerce and recreation within the City of Hogansville, and making of long range plans for such development and expansion and to authorize the use of public funds of the City of Hogansville for such purposes, and this amendment and any law enacted with reference to the authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 78-01-03, 1-3-1978)
Sec. 12. - General Assembly's powers. 
The General Assembly may by law further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the authority and the exercise thereof, and may enlarge and restrict the same, and may likewise further regulate the management and conduct of the authority. The authority shall be an instrumentality of the City of Hogansville, and the scope of its operations shall be limited to the territory embraced within the City of Hogansville. The General Assembly shall not extend the jurisdiction of the authority nor the scope of its operations beyond the limits of the City of Hogansville. 
(Ord. No. 78-01-03, 1-3-1978)
Sec. 13. - Debt incurred by authority. 
There shall be no limitation upon the amount of debt which the authority may incur, but no debt created by the authority shall be a debt of the City of Hogansville, State of Georgia, nor Troup County. 
(Ord. No. 78-01-03, 1-3-1978)
Sec. 14. - Property on dissolution. 
Should said authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of any kind and nature, real and personal, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to the City of Hogansville, subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time. 
(Ord. No. 78-01-03, 1-3-1978)
Sec. 15. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(1)	The word project shall be deemed to mean and include property, real and/or personal, acquired or held by the authority for the assistance, promotion, establishment or development of a new industry or industries, or the assistance, promotion or expansion of existing industry, trade or commerce in Hogansville, or any combination thereof; the acquisition of any such property for any such purpose or purposes; the improvement of any such property or properties; and/or the construction, installation and/or expansion of one or more buildings, plants, and/or articles of equipment for the purpose of using, selling, donating, leasing and/or renting such land, properties, improvements, structures or equipment to public or private persons, firms, corporations and/or associations for such purposes. 
(2)	The term cost of project shall embrace: the cost of lands, buildings, improvements, machinery, equipment, properties, easements, rights, franchises, materials, labor and services acquired and/or contracted for; the cost of financing charges and/or of interest prior to and during construction; architectural, accounting, engineering, inspection, fiscal and/or legal expenses; cost of plans and/or specifications; and/or any other expenses necessary or incident to construction and/or improvements, and/or to determining the feasibility and/or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and/or the acquisition, construction, equipping and/or operating any project or any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 78-01-03, 1-3-1978)
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Georgia Laws and any amendments thereto. 

 

 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of ordinances.

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Hogansville, Georgia," may be so cited. 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(a), (b). 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(5). 
City. The term "city" means the City of Hogansville, Georgia. 
City council and council. The terms "city council" and "council" mean the city council of the City of Hogansville, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of Hogansville, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(3). 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)	The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)	The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)	The term "either … or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Troup County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(8). 
Gender. Words of one gender includes all other genders. 
State Law reference— Gender, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(4). 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(5) 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, whether acting by themselves or acting as a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
State Law reference— Definition of "may," O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(10). 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(11). 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular and plural number include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(6). 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(12). 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, partnership or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
State Law reference— Definition of "person," O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(14). 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(15). 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(16). 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(19). 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street and road. The terms "street" and "road" include any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other public highway in the city, including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof. 
Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
State Law reference— Tense of words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(7). 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(23). 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(24). 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; effect of history notes; references in Code. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)	The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references, Charter references, related law references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)	All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)	All ordinances or resolutions passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. Repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances or resolutions, until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: 
"Section ____________ of The Code of Hogansville, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …" The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: 
"The Code of Hogansville, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________, which section reads as follows: …" The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be, or by setting them out at length in the repealing ordinance or resolution. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances or resolutions inserted into the Code. 
(d)	In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)	In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means:
(1)	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)	Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)	In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)	Except as otherwise provided:
(1)	A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or compulsory labor on the public streets or on such public works as the authorities may direct, for not more than 60 days, or by any one or more of these punishments, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the city. 
(2)	With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)	With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(4)	In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated by the city as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(d)	The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)	Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
Editor's note— The maximum punishments of six months confinement and a fine of $1,000.00 are established in O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2)(B), (C). Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3, the limitations herein imposed by the municipal charter of a maximum fine of $250.00 and maximum confinement of 90 days shall remain in effect until repealed. 
Charter reference— Limitation on fines imposed by municipal court, § 5.05(b)(2). 
State Law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
Sec. 1-8. - Official city time. 
Time referred to in ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city shall mean Eastern Standard Time, or Eastern Daylight Saving Time as applicable and acts and deeds of commission prohibited after a named hour or before a named hour shall be held and understood to mean such hour by Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time as appropriate and wherever any reference to time is made in any of the ordinances and regulations of the city, such rules, ordinances and regulations are hereby amended to provide that the time provided therein shall be and is hereby made Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time as appropriate in accordance with the laws of this state. 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)	The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any the following ordinances or portions of ordinances, which ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code: 
(1)	Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(2)	Authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement.
(3)	Granting any right or franchise.
(4)	Making or approving any appropriation or budget.
(5)	Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code.
(6)	Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan.
(7)	Levying or imposing any special assessment.
(8)	Dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(9)	Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision.
(10)	Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code.
(11)	That is temporary, although general in effect.
(12)	That is special, although permanent in effect.
(13)	The purpose of which has been accomplished.
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement saved from repeal, § 1-12(2); any ordinance making or approving any appropriation or budget saved from repeal, § 1-12(4); courts, ch. 26; elections, ch. 30; administration and enforcement of wetland procedures, § 34-207; administration of flood damage prevention, § 42-31 et seq.; board of review for historic preservation, § 46-38; law enforcement, ch. 50; libraries board of trustees, § 58-31; personnel, ch. 66; administration of personnel, § 66-3; planning and development, ch. 70; municipal planning commission, § 70-31 et seq.; city-county planning commission, § 70-61 et seq.; taxation, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 98; administration of zoning regulations, § 102-31 et seq.; planning commission, § 102-61 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City council and mayor, art. II.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-31. - Compensation. 
The salary of the mayor and councilmembers shall be as established from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 2-1-1)
State Law reference— Compensation, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III; compensation of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Sec. 2-32. - Mayor pro tem. 
During the absence or disability of the mayor, including during a vacancy in the office of mayor, the mayor pro tem, as chosen by the council, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. 
(Ord. No. 12-11-19, § 1, 11-19-2012)
Secs. 2-33—2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Meetings, § 2.05.
State Law reference— Meetings of governing bodies open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.

Sec. 2-51. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the city council are held at the city hall or at such other place as may be designated, on the first and third Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 1988, § 2-1-11)
Sec. 2-52. - Meeting days falling on holidays. 
In the event a regular meeting date for the city council falls on a holiday, the regular meeting shall be canceled and shall be held the next day at 7:00 p.m. at city hall in the council room or at such other place designated by the mayor. 
(Code 1988, § 2-1-12)
Sec. 2-53. - Adjourned meetings. 
If a quorum shall fail to attend any regular or special meeting of the city council or if for any reason any meeting of the council shall fail to complete transaction of the business before it, the meeting may be adjourned to any date prior to the next regular meeting agreed upon by a majority of the members present. 
(Code 1988, § 2-1-13)
Sec. 2-54. - Order of business. 
(a)	The order of business at all regular meetings shall be as follows:
(1)	Invocation;
(2)	Approval of minutes of last meeting, with corrections, if any, to be made in the minutes;
(3)	Old business;
(4)	New business;
(5)	Reports:
a.	City manager;
b.	Committees; and
(6)	Appearances.
(b)	If the city council directs any matter to be the special business of a future meeting, that matter shall have precedence over all other business at that future meeting. 
(c)	No proposition shall be entertained by the city council until it has been seconded, and every proposition shall, when required by the mayor or any member, be reduced to writing. 
(Code 1988, § 2-1-14)
Sec. 2-55. - Rules of procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the procedures of the city council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order. 
(Code 1988, § 2-1-15)
Sec. 2-56. - Reading and adoption of ordinances. 
(a)	An ordinance may be amended, corrected or revised or a substitute ordinance introduced and amended, corrected or revised at any time after the first reading but prior to the vote on its adoption or rejection. 
(b)	Reading of the ordinance shall consist of the reading of the title or caption of the ordinance at the meeting at which the ordinance is introduced and reading of the title or caption of the ordinance at the meeting at which the vote to adopt or reject the ordinance is taken. At either such meeting, the reading of the entire ordinance shall be required when ordered by the mayor or by a majority of the members voting therefor. 
(Ord. No. 07-04-02-A, § 1, 4-2-2007)
Secs. 2-57—2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Creation of city manager's office, duties, § 5.06 et seq.; city clerk, § 5.03; city attorney, § 5.04.
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-12(5); building inspector, § 14-51 et seq.; assistant judges, § 26-48; chief of police, § 50-66 et seq.; zoning administrator, § 102-31.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-81—2-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-96. - Established. 
The following departments of the city are established: 
(1)	Legislative and administrative;
(2)	Personnel;
(3)	Clerk/treasurer;
(4)	Police;
(5)	Fire;
(6)	Ambulance;
(7)	Public works; and
(8)	Recreation.
(Code 1988, § 2-4-1)
Sec. 2-97. - Records management. 
(a)	The clerk/treasurer department is responsible for records management activities and shall designate a person or officer to act for and in behalf of the city council in directing and coordinating all records management matters including maintenance and security of records. 
(b)	No record shall be destroyed except in accordance with approved retention schedules.
(c)	Whenever any records are destroyed, a certificate of destruction shall be prepared and forwarded to the city council which shall show the type of records destroyed, the approved retention schedule number, the dates covered, and the volume destroyed. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-2)
State Law reference— Municipal governments required to adopt records management plans, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq. 
Secs. 2-98—2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Corporate powers, § 3.01 et seq.
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-12(1); taxation, ch. 90.
State Law reference— Local government financial management standards and procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-121. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on July 1 and end on June 30 of each year. 
(Code 1988, § 3-1-1)
Charter reference— Council to set fiscal year by ordinance, § 6.01. 
Secs. 2-122—2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-141. - Purchasing agent; duties. 
The city manager shall be the purchasing agent of the city. Within the limitations imposed by section 6.06 of the Charter, the purchasing agent shall: 
(1)	Arrange and negotiate the purchase of all equipment, supplies and contractual services for the city, and sell or otherwise dispose of all surplus city equipment and supplies; and 
(2)	Maintain an inventory of all materials, supplies or equipment owned by the city.
(Code 1988, § 3-1-2)
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, adopted Feb. 21, 2012, repealed the former ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-3, 6-46—6-59, 6-76—6-95, 6-111—6-119, 6-141—6-168, 6-191 and 6-192, and enacted a new ch. 6 as set out herein. The former ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1988, §§ 9-1-1, 9-2-1, 9-2-3, 9-2-4, 9-2-12—9-2-15, 9-2-17—9-2-20, 9-2-22, 9-2-31—9-2-44; an ordinance adopted Dec. 5, 1994; an ordinance adopted Jan. 6, 1997; and an ordinance adopted May 2, 1997.
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; sale, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited at sexually oriented businesses, § 18-177; malt beverage and wine excise tax, § 90-201 et seq.
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverage code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
(a)	Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, any term used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as when used in a comparable provision of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code (O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.). 
(b)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer licensed pursuant to this chapter who provides alcohol at authorized events or functions, special events, or special events facilities. 
Brewpub means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36, for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. 
Church means any permanent place of public religious worship. 
Eating establishment means an establishment which is licensed to sell or otherwise dispense distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Food caterer means any person engaged solely in the business of planning and conducting special events such as banquets, weddings, receptions, special events, or private parties and as part of the conduct of such events preparing food for consumption on or off the premises, but such term shall not include a restaurant, bar, private club or lounge. 
Immediate family of a person means all persons related to such person by consanguinity or affinity within the first degree, as computed according to the law of the state. 
Interest includes any pecuniary interest and any ownership interest, whether present or future, whole or partial, legal or beneficial, contingent or vested, direct or indirect, and any right, power, or authority of control. 
Registered agent means that individual, who is a resident of the county and at least 21 years of age, required to be designated by a licensee to receive any process, notice, or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon a licensee or owner. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-2. - Penalties for violation. 
Except as may otherwise be provided in this chapter, any person who violates this chapter may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 for each offense and/or up to 60 days' incarceration. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-3. - Purposes of chapter. 
(a)	The purposes of this chapter shall include, without necessarily being limited to, the following: 
(1)	Compliance with and effectuation of the general state law;
(2)	Prevention and control of the sale of alcoholic beverages by unfit persons;
(3)	The protection of schools, homes, churches, parks, and other institutions;
(4)	Promotion of appropriate land use and zoning and the effectuation of the city's land use and zoning policies; and 
(5)	Protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.
(b)	To the maximum extent possible under state and federal law, the business of selling alcoholic beverages shall under this chapter be considered to be a privilege to be accorded in conformity with the foregoing and other public policies of the city, rather than a right. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-4. - Notice. 
Except as may otherwise be specifically provided in this chapter, any required notice may be delivered by hand or posted by certified mail, in which event delivery shall be deemed to take place on the third day following the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-5. - Collection of sums due. 
As to any failure to pay any sum due for fees or taxes under this chapter, the city may issue an execution against the licensee and his property for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax in addition to any other remedies the city may have. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-6. - Sale to or purchase or possession by underage person. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this section:
(1)	No person, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age. 
(2)	No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage.
(3)	No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining unlawfully any alcoholic beverage. 
(4)	No person shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age. 
(5)	No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)	The prohibition contained in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not be violated when a person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, the person's photograph, and the person's date of birth. Proper identification includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. 
(c)	This section shall not prohibit employment of a person under 21 years of age in a licensed premises if such employment is lawful under section 6-162. 
(d)	In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could doubt whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is 21 years of age or older, the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage shall request to see and be furnished with proper identification as provided in subsection (d) of this section. The failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than 21 years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(e)	In any case where a person selling or otherwise furnishing alcoholic beverages checks for a proper identification, such person shall carefully inspect such identification. If a reasonably prudent person could determine that such identification has been altered and if such person sells or otherwise furnishes alcoholic beverages to the holder of such altered identification, then such may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(f)	For purposes of the prohibitions set forth in this chapter, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of bond shall constitute a conviction. 
(g)	With reference to the prohibitions set forth in this section, if there is a change in a majority of a licensee's owners, partners, or shareholders, the offenses under the old ownership shall not count against the new owners; provided, however, a different corporation, partnership, or other association shall be charged with the offenses of the predecessor if a majority of the owners, partners, or shareholders are the same. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-03-02, § 4, adopted March 2, 2015, repealed § 6-7, which pertained to carry-out of alcoholic beverage unlawful and derived from Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, adopted Feb. 21, 2012. 
Sec. 6-8. - Open containers and possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages on public property. 
Except for possession at licensed patios or open sales areas, it shall be unlawful for any person to have possession of an open container or to drink or consume alcoholic beverages on the streets, sidewalks, alleyways or other public thoroughfares of the city or on parks, playgrounds or other public property, either inside or outside of any vehicle, whether moving or parked, or any building or facility thereon, at any time. The prohibition contained in this section shall also extend to and shall include the parking lots, public areas and other outdoor premises of any private business which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or which is otherwise licensed to conduct business where such areas are normally open to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Secs. 6-9—6-30. - Reserved. 
[ARTICLE II. - OPERATIONAL RULES FOR RETAILERS][2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, adopted Feb. 21, 2012, added divisions designated 1—5, but did not specify what article they comprised. For purposes of organization, the editor created an art. II to contain said divisions, entitled "Operational Rules for Retailers," and renumbered subsequent articles accordingly.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-31. - Sales and consumption on public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, or otherwise dispense any alcoholic beverage in a street, alley, or parking lot commonly used by the public or in any other public place or on public property except event facilities. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-32. - Open area and patio sales. 
(a)	Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages outside the licensed premises structure. 
(b)	A consumption licensee may sell, serve, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages in a patio/open area type environment if approved by the city manager to do so. To be approved, the following requirements must be met: 
(1)	The patio/open area must be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the licensed premises main structure, in order to prevent a customer from leaving the outside area with an alcoholic beverage without the licensee's knowledge. 
(2)	The height of such structure shall be a minimum of three feet above ground level, although it does not have to be solid or restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open area. 
(3)	The only exits from the patio/open area are to be through the licensee's main premises and through an approved fire exit, not for general public use unless an emergency exists. The fire exit should sound an alarm when used in order that any unauthorized use shall be known. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Secs. 6-33—6-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-51. - License required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages within the city except under a valid license issued under this chapter and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be a mere privilege subject to being revoked and annulled and is subject to the laws of Georgia and the existing and any further ordinances of the City of Hogansville. 
(c)	The applicant for a license or permit, for which provision is made in this chapter, shall be subject to all state laws and regulations and to all city ordinances and regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages, except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. 
(d)	All holders of licenses under this chapter must, within six months after the issuance of such license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within six months after the issuance of such license shall serve as automatic forfeiture and cancellation of such license and no refund of license fee shall be made to the license holder. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-52. - Retail package licenses. 
(a)	Retail package sales of distilled spirits are prohibited in Hogansville. Applicants may apply for one or more of the following type retail package licenses: 
(1)	Package malt beverage license. Retail sale of malt beverages in the original package. 
(2)	Package wine license. Retail sale of wine in the original package. 
(b)	All applications shall be accompanied by an application fee in such amount as may be approved by resolution of the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-53. - Retail consumption on the premises licenses. 
(a)	Five classes of retail consumption on the premises licenses are available. Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, retail consumption on the premises licenses are available only to eating establishments. 
(1)	Full pouring license. Retail sale of distilled spirits, wine, and beer by the drink. 
(2)	Limited pouring wine and/or malt beverages license. Retail sale of wine and/or malt beverages by the drink. 
(3)	Limited pouring distilled spirits license. Retail sale of distilled spirits by the drink. 
(4)	Brewpub. See section 6-1(b). 
(5)	Food caterer. Retail sale or supply of distilled spirits, wine and beer by the drink. 
(b)	The application shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-54. - Wholesale licenses. 
(a)	Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages who is licensed by the state and who does not have a place of business in the city shall be granted a license to distribute such beverages in the city upon application for such license to the city manager, submittal of an annual renewal affidavit, and a statement that he understands the alcoholic beverage rules and regulations of the city and the conditions under which retail licenses are issued. Distributors whose principal place of business is a location other than the city shall pay an annual license fee of $100.00 as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-5-43. 
(b)	Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages who is licensed by the state and who has a place of business in the city shall procure a license under the same provisions applicable to retail licensees, excluding the requirements as to food service minimums. The application for a resident wholesale dealer's license shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-55. - Food caterers. 
A food caterer license shall authorize a food caterer to sell distilled spirits, wine and beer for consumption on the premises where the food caterer's business is located as part of the conduct of a special event described in the definition of "food caterer" as set out in this chapter; however, such food caterer license shall be licensed only to a commercial undertaking in the city that derives at least 50 percent of its gross revenue from the sale of food. The city shall be authorized to inspect and determine the original of 50 percent of the gross revenue of such licensees. A food caterer's license shall also authorize a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to sell beer or wine for consumption off the premises, provided there is compliance with the requirements below in section 6-56 regarding alcoholic beverage caterers. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-56. - Alcoholic beverage caterers. 
(a)	License requirements for resident caterers. 
(1)	Any caterer who possesses a valid license from the city to sell or otherwise dispense malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink at a fixed location within the city may apply for an off-premises license that permits sales at authorized catered event or function. 
(2)	Each off-premises catering license, authorized herein, shall be valid only for the event for which the license is issued. The fee for each license shall be set by resolution of the city council, and this fee amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(3)	It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function without first having obtained a license as provided herein. 
(b)	Permit requirements for nonresident caterers. 
(1)	A nonresident alcoholic beverage caterer shall submit an application for an off-premises event permit to the city manager. A separate and individual permit is required for each event. The fee for each such permit shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(2)	An application for an event permit shall include the name of the caterer, the date, address, time, and name of the event and the quantity and type of alcoholic beverages to be transported from the licensee's primary location to the location of the authorized catered event or functions. 
(3)	The original event permit shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event or function. 
(4)	It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute, sell, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages off-premises except as authorized by the event permit. 
(c)	Limitation on license. A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or otherwise dispense only that which is authorized by his alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he may sell or otherwise dispense only malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
(d)	Tax on drinks served by nonresident caterers. Excise taxes are imposed upon the total of individual alcoholic beverage drinks served by a nonresident caterer in the amounts set forth in article III of this chapter and shall be paid within 30 days after the conclusion of the catered event or function (see section 6-181). 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-57. - Duration of licenses. 
All licenses, except as otherwise indicated, issued under this chapter shall be issued on a calendar-year basis, and all licenses shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year for which they are issued. License fees shall be prorated as follows: New applications received on and between January 1 and June 30 shall be assessed the full license fee. New applications received on and between July 1 and December 31 shall be assessed one-half of the license fee. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-58. - Individual, business or association entities; named licensee. 
(a)	A license issued to an individual shall be issued in the name of the individual. A license issued to a partnership shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of the partner or employee primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises, who shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the stockholder, officer of the corporation, or employee primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises, who shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a purely nonprofit civic, fraternal, patriotic, private, or social club or corporation which is organized and conducted in the city solely as a mutual benefit membership group shall be issued in the name of the club or corporation and in the name of the individual primarily responsible for the club or corporation's compliance with this chapter, and the named individual shall be named licensee. 
(b)	The individual completing and presenting an application for a license, whether for himself, a partnership, a corporation, or a nonprofit organization, shall meet the requirements of this chapter so as to be the named licensee. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-59. - Joint responsibility. 
If a partnership, each partner shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. If a corporation, the corporation, its officers and directors shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. If a nonprofit organization, its officers, directors, or governing authority shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-60. - Eligibility for license. 
(a)	Every applicant shall, prior to applying for a license, read and familiarize himself with the provisions of this chapter, and the application shall constitute a certification applicant has done so. Every licensee shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the licensed premises and shall instruct each employee engaged in the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages concerning the relevant provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	An applicant shall be active in the operation of the licensed business and shall be personally present on the licensed premises sufficiently to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this section, a licensee shall not be considered active unless he is an owner, stockholder, or fulltime employee of the licensed business and is present on the licensed premises a minimum of ten hours per week. 
(c)	A licensee must be of good moral character and a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. Any such alien shall have been lawfully admitted for permanent residence for at least one year prior to application. 
(d)	A licensee shall not have been convicted within the ten years preceding his application of any felony, any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, any sexual-related crime, or any criminal offense relating to alcoholic beverages, taxes, or gambling. This subsection shall apply with respect to the laws of this state, other states, the United States, and other countries. A plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this subsection. Sentencing as first offender status shall not be considered as a conviction if the sentence was successfully completed without any violation of probation and with no adjudication of guilt ever being entered. 
(e)	A licensee shall not have had revoked, within the five years preceding his application, any license to sell alcoholic beverages issued by any governmental entity. 
(f)	A licensee shall have, and continuously maintain, as a registered agent a resident of the county upon whom may be served any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner. The registered agent must be a resident of at least 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-61. - Distance from churches, schools, etc. 
(a)	With the exception of a food caterer license, no license for the sale of distilled spirits shall be issued under this chapter where the place of business of the applicant is located within 300 feet of any church or within 600 feet of any school building. 
(b)	With the exception of a food caterer license, no license for the sale of wine or malt beverages shall be issued under this chapter where the place of business of the applicant is located within 300 feet of any school building. 
(c)	No person shall knowingly or intentionally sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state, by the county or by the city. 
(d)	Unless otherwise provided by law, all measurements to determine the distances referred to in this section shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)	From the front door of the structure, as determined by the director of community development, from which alcoholic beverages are sold or proposed to be sold; 
(2)	In a straight path of travel by the nearest public sidewalk, street, road, or highway;
(3)	To the front door of the building or to the nearest portion of the grounds, as determined by the director of community development, whichever is applicable under this chapter. 
No license shall be revoked and no application for a license or renewal shall be denied by reason of the method of measurement set out in this subsection, if such license or license application or renewal application is for premises for which a license was granted prior to the enactment of this chapter in reliance on another method of measurement. 
(e)	No application for a license shall be approved which does not include, or have attached thereto, a current certificate from a registered surveyor which shows a scale drawing of the premises and the location at which the applicant desires to operate an alcoholic beverage outlet and which shows, with linear foot measurements where appropriate, such location's compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this section, or a certificate from a registered surveyor which states that the subject alcoholic beverage outlet meets all of the location and distance requirements of this chapter, and shows such location's compliance or noncompliance with linear foot measurements where appropriate or required. 
(f)	When a license application is for premises not yet constructed or not yet completed, a license may be issued if the application includes the plans for the premises and a surveyor's certificate, as required under subsection (d) of this section, clearly showing that the premises will, when completed, meet the requirements of this section. 
(g)	If the distance requirements of this section are met at the time a license is issued, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the prohibited distance shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the issuance of a new license to a subsequent owner of the property; provided, however, that as to any new license, the prior license must have been lawful and validly issued at the location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding the application for the new license. 
(h)	As used in this section, the term "school building" shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings and to such buildings at any other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the schools of this state and which are public schools and private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). The term "school building" includes only those structures in which instruction is offered. The term "church building" as used in this section shall mean the main structure used by any religious organization for purposes of worship. The term "school building" shall not include private or public schools where only specialized subject such as law, stenography, business, music, art, culinary arts, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-62. - Payment of license fees. 
(a)	The annual license fee, as established by a resolution of the mayor and council from time to time, shall be paid in advance, on or before January 1 of each year. 
(b)	No licensee shall continue to be in operation after January 1 of any year unless the required license fee is paid on or before that date and any and all other licenses required by this Code are obtained and the appropriate fees therefor paid by such date. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-63. - Application; investigation consent. 
(a)	All applications for licenses shall be made upon application forms provided by the city. All applications shall contain a full and complete sworn and notarized statement by each applicant of all material facts as determined by the city manager to be relevant to the requirements of this chapter and further shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners and a copy of the partnership agreement; 
(2)	If a corporation, the names of the officers, the name of the manager, and the names of all shareholders holding more than 20 percent of any class of corporate stock and a copy of the articles of incorporation; and 
(3)	The name of any other entity having a financial interest in the establishment for which a license is sought. 
(b)	Each applicant and licensee shall consent to and authorize a fingerprint analysis and investigation. 
(c)	The application form shall be accompanied by a copy of the lease to the premises, or proof of ownership of the premises, or proof of other authorization for use of the premises. 
(d)	Each applicant and licensee authorizes the city and its agents to secure from any court, law enforcement agency, or other public agency his criminal and civil history and to use such information in determining whether the license applied for shall be issued. Each applicant further authorizes the city and its agents to use such information in any public hearing with respect to the license applied for, either before or after the issuance of the license. Each applicant waives any right that he would otherwise have to preclude the city or its agents from obtaining and using such information, and each applicant further waives any liability of the city or its agents for obtaining and using such information. 
(e)	Separate applications must be made for each location, and separate licenses must be issued for each location. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-64. - Procedure for consideration of application. 
The city manager shall promptly refer a copy of each application to the chief of police or his designee for a thorough investigation. The chief of police or his designee shall report his findings to the city manager. Such finding shall include a recommendation as to the qualifications of the applicant. The city manager shall further have the responsibility and authority to request additional information as may be determined to be necessary in order for the city manager to accept the application as complete. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 15-03-02, § 1, 3-2-2015)
Sec. 6-65. - Advertisement of intent to engage in business; signs posted; advertisement of and public hearing on application. 
(a)	All applicants for licenses under this division shall give notice of the making of an application by advertisement at least once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the date of public hearing on such application, in the daily newspaper published in the city in which the legal advertisements of the city are published, which notice shall contain a complete description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant and if a partnership, the names of the partners, whether limited or general, and if a corporation, the name of the principal officer of such corporation in the state and the name of the person who will be the manager of the business to which the license will be issued, and the date, time and location the city manager will hear such application. The advertisement referred to in this section shall be of type not smaller than ten point capital and lower case and shall be at least a two-inch two column advertisement. Said advertisement shall conform to the following: 
"Notice of application for license to sell alcoholic beverages. 
The undersigned has made application to the City of Hogansville for a license to sell alcoholic beverages at ____________. 
A public hearing will be held before the city manager of Hogansville to be held at 400 E. Main Street, Hogansville, Georgia, at ____________ o'clock p.m. on the ____________ day of ____________, 20____________. 
Signed ____________    Applicant" 
(b)	The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign or signs, stating the following: 
"ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSE APPLIED FOR. PUBLIC HEARING BEFORE CITY MANAGER OF THE CITY OF HOGANSVILLE, GEORGIA, 400 E. MAIN STREET, HOGANSVILLE, GEORGIA, AT ____________ P.M. ON THE ____________ DAY OF ____________, 20____________." 
(c)	The sign or signs required by subsection (b) of this section shall not be less than 24 inches by 36 inches and shall face toward all public streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other public property adjoining the proposed location. Such signs shall be placed where they can be easily seen from all public properties adjoining the proposed location. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 15-03-02, § 2, 3-2-2015)
Sec. 6-66. - Action on application. 
(a)	The city manager shall consider all applications and shall act upon same within 60 days of receipt of a completed application. The city manager shall have the authority to approve the application and grant the license, disapprove the application and deny the license, or refer the matter to the mayor and council for final action. Failure of the city manager (or, if deferred, the mayor and council) to act within said 60-day period shall not act as an endorsement of the application, but instead shall be deemed a denial. 
(b)	Should the city manager deny an application, written notice of the denial shall be provided to the applicant by the city manager, shall set forth the reason for the denial, and advise the applicant of the right to appeal. 
(c)	The applicant shall have the right to appeal such denial to the mayor and council by filing a request for hearing with the city manager no more than ten days following the receipt of the denial notice. The hearing before the mayor and council shall be held not more than 30 days from the date the city manager receives the notice of appeal. The applicant shall have the right to be represented by an attorney at the hearing, at his or her expense, and to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. Within ten days from the conclusion of the hearing, the mayor and council shall notify the applicant in writing of their decision. 
(d)	Any decision by the city council upholding denial of an application shall be final unless the applicant applies to the Superior Court of Troup County by filing a petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of the decision rendered by the city council. 
(e)	In all instances in which an application is denied, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 15-03-02, § 3, 3-2-2015)
Sec. 6-67. - Transferability of license. 
(a)	Except as provided in this section, no license shall be transferable to any other person or location. All applications seeking a transfer of a license in any respect shall be made upon application forms provided by the city manager and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(b)	If a licensee seeks to move his place of business from the licensed premises to another place within the city, application shall be made as for an original license. 
(c)	In the case of death of an owner of a license, no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall apply to the city manager for authorization. The establishment shall then be allowed to continue to operate for a period of 60 days from the date of death, until expiration of the license, or until the approval of a new license, whichever shall first occur. 
(d)	A change in ownership status of the licensed establishment that does not change the actual ownership interest shall be eligible to apply for a transfer of license as provided herein. By way of example, a sole proprietor who decides to incorporate and be the sole shareholder of the new corporation, although in such circumstances information required from a corporation in an original application shall be provided. 
(e)	Nothing in this section shall prohibit one or more partners in a partnership from retiring therefrom in favor of one or more of the other partners; provided such withdrawal shall not introduce any new partner or result in any new person acquiring an interest in the licensed business without application for and issuance of a new license. 
(f)	A transfer of license may be permitted by the city manager if the location at issue is the subject of an approved, current license, and if the new named licensee meets all of the requirements of new license applicants. 
(g)	In the circumstances described in subsections (d) and (e) of this section, the license may be revoked if the city manager determines that the change results in a failure to meet requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-68. - License renewal. 
(a)	An application for renewal shall be in the form of a sworn and notarized statement by the named licensee, on a form provided by the city manager, stating that there have been no changes in any of the information contained in the original application. If there have been any substantive changes, the application for renewal shall be in the same form as an original application. 
(b)	An application for renewal shall be filed no later than November 15 and shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in the amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(c)	Renewal applications and payments not received by November 15 shall incur a late fee. Renewal applications and payments received between November 16 and December 15 are subject to a ten percent late fee. Businesses failing to apply for renewal of their licenses prior to December 15 must reapply for a license. 
(d)	Businesses required to reapply for a license, as provided in subsection (c), and filing this application for a new license after January 1 shall pay at the time of filing the required application fee, the annual fee, and the ten percent late fee. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-69. - Display of license. 
Each license issued under this chapter shall at all times be kept in the public area plainly exposed to view upon the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-70. - Suspension or revocation; grounds. 
(a)	A license may be suspended or revoked by the city council for any violation of this chapter; for any violation of state laws and regulations relating to alcoholic beverages; for any material misrepresentation or omission in the application for the license; or if the licensee or the licensed business ceases to meet the eligibility requirements for licensure. 
(b)	When suspension of a license is permitted under this chapter, but no specific period of suspension is mandated, the following guidelines shall apply: 
(1)	First suspension in a 12-month period of time shall not exceed 30 days.
(2)	Second suspension in a 12-month period of time shall not exceed 60 days.
(3)	Third suspension in a 12-month period of time shall cause revocation of the license and result in the inability of the licensee to obtain a license from the city for a term of five years from the date of revocation. 
(c)	Prior to the suspension or revocation of a license by the city council, the city manager shall give written notice to the licensee of the time, place, purpose of the hearing, and a statement of the charges upon which the hearing before the city council shall be held. Service of such notice shall be by personal service on the registered agent. If personal service fails, the notice shall be mailed by certified mail to the registered agent at the address provided and to the named licensee at the licensed premises. Delivery shall be deemed to take place on the third day following deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-71. - Hearings. 
(a)	The city council shall hear applications for licenses, as well as all matters relating to such licenses or otherwise under this chapter, including, but not being limited to, suspensions, revocations, transfers, renewals, changes of ownership, and any other matters affecting such licenses. All applications, whether for an original license, renewal license, or otherwise, must be complete in all requirements of law to be scheduled and heard by the city council. 
(b)	The city council shall have the authority to defer a decision and continue hearings to the next regularly scheduled council meeting, when necessary. 
(c)	Applicants and licensees shall be given written notice of the date, time, place, and purpose when the matter at issue will be heard. In the course of a suspension or revocation hearing, the licensee shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard and present evidence. Ten days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but a shorter or longer period of notice shall be authorized as the city manager deems the circumstances to justify; provided, however, that the initial hearing is scheduled to take place not later than 45 days from the date the matter comes before the city manager for scheduling. 
(d)	Subsequent to the public hearing, the city council shall reach a decision on the matter before it. The decision of the city council shall be spread upon and entered in the city council minutes and shall be final unless the applicant or licensee appeals to the Superior Court of Troup County by filing a petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of the decision rendered by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Secs. 6-72—6-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PREMISES 

Sec. 6-101. - Eligibility for license. 
(a)	A consumption on the premises license may be granted only to the establishments described in this article and subject to the specified conditions. 
(b)	Full-service kitchen as used in this article shall mean a kitchen with a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the county health department and city building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-102. - Restaurants. 
(a)	In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a restaurant must:
(1)	Be used and held out to the public as a place where meals are regularly served to the public for adequate pay; 
(2)	Contain one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary full-service kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests; 
(3)	Have at least 50 percent of its total sales be the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises, exclusive of sales from vending machines. For this purpose, if a restaurant makes a minimum charge or cover charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale. 
(b)	Brewpubs, as defined in section 6-1(b) and O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(3), shall be allowed in eating establishments. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-103. - Special events facility. 
In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a special events facility must: 
(1)	Be available to public or private groups of persons;
(2)	For monetary consideration on a rental, fee, percentage, or similar basis, be used primarily for special occasions, including, but not limited to, receptions, meetings, banquets, auctions, conventions, concerts, parties, catered events, or similar gatherings; 
(3)	Be open to or attended by invited or selected guests or paying patrons; and
(4)	Have at least 50 percent of its total food and beverage concessions sales be the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises, exclusive of sales from vending machines. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-104. - Physical requirements of premises. 
All restaurant areas, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that they may be viewed by those inside the premises. The sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages in any back room or side room that is not open to the general public is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-105. - Live music and dancing. 
Bands or orchestras and patron dancing shall be permitted at facilities licensed for consumption on the premises sales only where: 
(1)	Adequate space exists;
(2)	All fire and safety regulations are met;
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-106. - Purchase of alcoholic beverages by licensee. 
Licensees under this chapter shall purchase distilled spirits in sizes of three-fourths of a liter or larger, except for single-serve bottles, unless a particular brand is not packaged in these size containers, in which case the licensee may purchase such brand in the next smallest size to such size containers. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-107. - Package sales prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any alcoholic beverages to be sold by the package from premises licensed for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Secs. 6-108—6-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONDUCT OF BUSINESS 

Sec. 6-131. - Purchase and sales records. 
(a)	Every licensee shall keep and preserve records of all alcoholic beverages purchased and sold or otherwise dispensed by the licensee. All consumption on the premises licensees shall keep and preserve records of all food and nonalcoholic beverages purchased and sold or otherwise dispensed by them. Such records, more specifically described in subsection (c) of this section, shall at all times be open for inspection by the city manager or his designee. These records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years unless the city manager determines that no such records exist and it is not financially practical based on the net income of the licensee to require the keeping of such records. 
(b)	If the city manager deems it advisable to conduct an audit of the records of a licensee, he shall notify the licensee of the date, time, and place of the audit. The city manager may designate the city's internal auditor or other person to perform the audit, and the licensee shall cooperate with the audit or be subject to having his license suspended or revoked. 
(c)	At the request of the city manager or his designee, the licensee shall make available the following records required to be kept for at least two years: 
(1)	Monthly income or operating statements;
(2)	Daily sales receipts showing liquor, beer, wine, and food sales separately (this requirement does not apply to package beer and wine licensees); 
(3)	Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes or guest tickets;
(4)	Monthly state sales and use tax reports; and
(5)	Federal income tax returns with all form 1099s.
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-132. - Days when sales unlawful. 
No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on any day or during any time of day when such sales are prohibited by state law. For example, the sale of alcoholic beverages on any holiday and Sundays is limited as provided by O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-7 and 3-3-20. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-133. - Hours of operation. 
(a)	Package licensees shall not engage in the sale of malt beverages or wine on Sunday except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(b)	Consumption on the premises licensees, including but not limited to a special events facility or alcoholic beverage caterer, shall not sell, dispense, serve or deliver such alcoholic beverages between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Tuesday through Saturday, and shall not sell, dispense, serve or deliver such alcoholic beverages from 2:00 a.m. on Sunday to 7:00 a.m. on Monday. A licensee must close its doors to business and must cease to do business at or before 2:30 a.m. and must remain closed until 7:00 a.m. on each day of the week. 
(c)	Notwithstanding subsection (b) above, a consumption on the premises licensee, including but not limited to a special events facility or alcoholic beverage caterer, which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food, or 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging, may sell, dispense, serve or deliver beer or malt beverages between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sunday. 
(d)	The business hours of wholesale dealers shall be between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. There shall be no sales on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 12-12-03, § 1, 12-3-2012)
Sec. 6-134. - Prohibited acts; sexual display on licensed premises. 
(a)	No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication or allow persons who are noticeably intoxicated to congregate on the licensed premises. 
(b)	No licensee shall permit any gambling, betting, lottery, or other device for the hazarding of any money or other thing of value on the licensed premises, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to a properly licensed bingo game. 
(c)	No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct; breach of the peace; lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment, conduct, or practices; or noise which is disturbing to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(d)	No licensee shall suffer or permit any person to engage in live conduct exposing to public view the person's genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage or buttocks, or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola on the licensed premises. 
(e)	No licensee shall allow any person to engage in sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual act prohibited by law, on the licensed premises. 
(f)	Exception. Nothing contained in subsection (d) of this section shall apply to the premises of any theatre, concert hall, art center, museum, or similar establishment primarily devoted to the arts or theatrical performances, where the performances that are presented are expressing matters of serious literary, artistic, scientific, or political value. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-135. - Delivery and storage. 
(a)	Alcoholic beverages shall be delivered to and received at licensed premises in the original container and in a conveyance owned and operated by a licensed wholesale dealer or a licensed common carrier acting for a wholesaler. Alcoholic beverages shall be sold at retail only on the licensed premises. 
(b)	A retail licensee shall store alcoholic beverages only on the licensed premises and at no other place. All stock shall be available at all times for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. Any alcoholic beverages found in any retail licensee's stock which were not received from a wholesaler shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-136. - On-premises consumption unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages on premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. It shall be unlawful for any package licensee to open or break the package of any alcoholic beverages for a purchaser or to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-137. - Regulation of signs and lighting. 
The exterior of each building in which alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall contain sufficient lighting so that all sides of the building and all entrances thereto are clearly visible at all times when the premises are open for business. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-138. - Condition of premises requirements. 
All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with all regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. All licensed premises shall be open at all times for inspection by the chief of police and other authorized agents of the city and the county health department. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-139. - Change of ownership, profit distribution report required. 
(a)	A licensee shall file with the city manager a written, sworn report of any of the following changes: 
(1)	Any change in any legal relationship between any parties named in the application for the license; 
(2)	Any change in the payment of rent for leased premises or any change in the ownership of the licensed premises; 
(3)	Any loss or damage to goods or premises of the licensee which results in a claim against an insurance policy; and 
(4)	Any change in any material facts contained in the application for the license.
(b)	Such report shall be filed within five days after the date the change occurs.
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Secs. 6-140—6-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 6-161. - "Handling" not to include bagging and carrying out. 
For the purposes of this division, the bagging or carrying out of wine or malt beverages in the original package in the course of employment by a grocery store, convenience store, or similar establishment shall not constitute the handling of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-162. - Employee requirements. 
(a)	Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, no wholesale dealer or package licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(b)	No consumption on the premises licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(c)	A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall not employ any person under 21 years of age who, in the course of such employment, would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(d)	This section shall not prohibit the employment of persons under the above ages on licensed premises where such persons do not dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(e)	This section shall not prohibit persons 16 years of age or older from selling or handling alcoholic beverages in grocery stores or supermarkets. For purposes of this subsection, the term "grocery stores or supermarkets" shall not include convenience stores. 
(f)	No licensee shall employ in any premises for the sale of alcoholic beverages any person in any capacity whatsoever who has been convicted in this state or in any other state within ten years immediately prior to the application for employment, of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics, manufacturing of narcotics, sex offenses, or other charges relating to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors, or any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-163. - Employees alcohol beverage card (ABC); procedure. 
(a)	No person whose duties involve dispensing, serving, selling, handling or taking orders for alcoholic beverages may be employed by an establishment holding a license hereunder until such person has been issued an alcoholic beverage card (ABC card) by the police department indicating the person to be employed is eligible for such employment. 
(b)	All persons subject to the provisions of this section shall, within seven days after the date of their first work in an establishment holding a license to sell spirituous liquors, report to the police department for issuance of an alcohol beverage card. 
(c)	The police department shall make a complete and exhaustive search relative to the criminal record of any person so employed. The ABC card shall be denied or revoked, as the case may be, in the event the applicant employee shall have been convicted within a period of ten years immediately prior to the application for an ABC card of any forcible felony, any violation of this article or any other law relating to alcoholic beverages. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere, a plea of acceptance of first offender status or the forfeiture of a bond by a person charged with a crime. The police chief may, after investigation and within his discretion, waive any misdemeanor conviction or a conviction in which there is a plea of nolo contendere. 
(d)	Any letter of eligibility for employment issued hereunder shall expire 12 months from the date of the issuance unless earlier canceled by the police department. The police department may prescribe regulations for certifying the eligibility for continued employment without the necessity of a further search relative to the record of that person. The police department may prescribe reasonable fees and times for certifying eligibility for employment and the fees shall be paid by the employer or the employee at the time request for eligibility certification is made. Any such fees shall be approved by the mayor and council of the city. 
(e)	The licensee, or the manager of the licensed premises, shall be responsible for the conduct or actions of the employees and shall have the responsibility of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this Code section. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-164. - Happy hour discounts; other unlawful practices. 
(a)	No consumption on the premises licensee shall engage in any of the following practices:
(1)	The sale of alcoholic beverages during any special period of the day at prices lower than those customarily charged during the remainder of the day; 
(2)	The giving away of any alcoholic beverages in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverages; 
(3)	The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price or the sale of all the alcoholic beverages a customer can or desires to drink; provided, however, nothing herein shall prohibit a brewpub from offering a sampler of no more than four types of malt beverages in containers not exceeding four ounces each; 
(4)	The sale or serving of two or more alcoholic beverages at substantially the same price customarily charged for one alcoholic beverage; 
(5)	Requiring or encouraging the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been consumed; 
(6)	Selling distilled spirits in containers or glasses containing more than 1½ ounces of distilled spirits; 
(7)	Sponsoring, conducting, or allowing contests or promotions which have as their primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(b)	This section shall not apply with respect to private functions not open to the public with respect to which the licensee has agreed to the use of the licensee's establishment by a person, firm, or organization for a set period of time for a valuable consideration. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Secs. 6-165—6-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 6-181. - Wholesale taxes. 
(a)	There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of malt beverages in the city as follows: 
(1)	Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; 
(2)	Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)	There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine in the city at a rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(c)	There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of distilled spirits in the city at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(d)	The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and paid by the licensed wholesale dealer. Such taxes shall be paid on or before the 15th day of the month following the month in which the alcoholic beverages are sold or disposed of by the wholesaler within the city. Remittances shall be accompanied by completed forms as prescribed or authorized by the revenue division of the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-182. - Deficiency assessment. 
(a)	If the city has cause to believe that a return or the amount of tax paid to the city by a licensee is not proper, the city may compute and determine the amount due on the basis of any information available. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for any month. 
(b)	The amount of a deficiency determination shall bear interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of the taxes until paid, in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed. 
(c)	The city shall give notice of a deficiency determination to the licensee. The notice may be served personally or by mail. Service by mail shall be addressed to the named licensee at the licensed premises, shall be made by certified mail, and is complete when delivered with a receipt signed by the addressee or by the receipt of mailing from the United States Postal Service. 
(d)	Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this chapter, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the month following the month for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-183. - Failure to file return. 
(a)	If a licensee fails to make a return, the city shall make an estimate of the amount of the tax due for the period or periods for which a return was not filed. Such estimate may be based on any information available to the city. Written notice of the estimate shall be given to the licensee in the manner specified by subsection 6-182(c). 
(b)	If the failure to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this chapter, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the licensee shall be added to the estimate of the amount due in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-184. - Interest. 
Any licensee who fails to pay to the city within the time required any amount required to be paid under this article shall pay in addition to the principal unpaid amount, interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month or fraction thereof from the date the tax payment was last due until payment. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-185. - Actions for collection; overpayment. 
(a)	At any time within three years after the delinquency of any amount due under this article, the city may bring an action in the courts of this state, any other state, or the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorneys' fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)	Whenever any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset against any future liability for the tax. 
(c)	If the licensee determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once and such fact has not yet been determined by the city, the licensee shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim with respect to such overpayment or double payment. Such claim shall be in writing and shall state the specific grounds upon which it is based. The claim shall be audited. If the city approves the claim, the excess amount paid may be credited against any other amounts due from the licensee or refunded. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-186. - Administration and enforcement of article. 
(a)	The city manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
(b)	The city manager or his designee may promulgate rules and regulations for the enforcement of this article. 
(c)	Every licensee engaging in the sale of mixed drinks shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as may be required by the city. 
(d)	The city manager, or his designee, may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and facilities of any licensee engaging in the sale of any alcoholic beverage, retail or wholesale, in order to verify the accuracy of any return, or if no return is made to ascertain the amount of tax due. 
(e)	In the administration of the provisions of this article, the revenue division of the city may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody any information relating to purchases subject to taxation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-21, § 1, 2-21-2012)
Secs. 6-187—6-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FEE SCHEDULE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—Set out herein are the rates and fees imposed pursuant to the alcoholic beverages ordinance codified in this ch. 6, as established by resolution from time to time by the mayor and council, and included at the city's direction.

Sec. 6-211. - Alcoholic beverages related license fee schedule. 

 
(Res. of 2-20-12, exh. A)
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to enact animal control measures, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); animal protection, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; liability for injury caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means every nonhuman species of animal, both domestic and wild. 
Animal at large means any animal not under the restraint of a person capable of controlling the animal and/or off the premises of the owner. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by a humane society, or municipal agency or its authorized agents, for the purpose of impounding animals under the authority of this article or state law for care, confinement, return to owner, adoption, or euthanasia. 
Commercial animal establishment means any pet shop, grooming shop, guard dog auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibition, or boarding or breeding kennel. 
Grooming shop means a commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked, or otherwise groomed. 
Guard dog means any dog that will detect and warn its handler that an intruder is present in/or near an area that is being secured. 
Humane officer and animal control officer mean any person designated by the city, a municipal government or a humane society as a law enforcement officer who is qualified to perform such duties under the laws of this state. 
Kennel and cattery mean any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs or cats. 
Owner means any person, partnership, or corporation owning, keeping, or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more. 
Pet and companion animal mean any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility; an animal of a species that has been bred and raised to live in or about the habitation of humans and is dependent on people for food and shelter. 
Pet shop means any person, partnership, or corporation, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise, except for a licensed kennel, that buys, sells, or boards any species of animal. 
Public nuisance means any animal or animals that unreasonably annoy humans, endanger the life or health of other animals or persons, or substantially interfere with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to enjoyment of life or property. The term "public nuisance animal" shall mean and include, but is not limited to, any animal that: 
(1)	Is repeatedly found at large;
(2)	Damages the property of anyone other than its owner; molests or intimidates pedestrians or passersby; 
(3)	Chases vehicles;
(4)	Excessively makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(5)	Causes fouling of the air by odor and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(6)	Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(7)	Is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare by virtue of the number and/or types of animals maintained; 
(8)	Attacks other domestic animals; or
(9)	Has been found by the commission for animal control, after notice to its owner and a hearing, to be a public nuisance animal by virtue of being a menace to the public health, welfare, or safety. 
Restraint means any animal secured by a leash or lead under the control of a responsible person and obedient to that person's commands, or within the real property limits of its owner. 
Riding school and stable mean any place that has available for hire, boarding, and/or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule, or burro; or any place that regularly buys, sells or trains these animals, including a racetrack, trotting track, or rodeo. 
Veterinary hospital means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis, and treatment of diseases and injuries to animals. 
Wild animal means any living member of the animal kingdom, including those born or raised in captivity, except the following: human beings, domestic dogs (excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals), domestic cats (excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays), farm animals, rodents, any hybrid animal that is part wild, and captive-bred species of common cage birds. 
(Code 1988, § 11-3-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-32. - Animal enclosures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep horses, ponies, mules, asses, donkeys, cows, sheep, goats, dogs, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons or other fowl or animals except under the following conditions: 
(1)	Distances of animal enclosures from buildings. Any housing or enclosure used for the keeping of such animals or fowl shall be kept at the following minimum distances from any occupied building, except the dwelling unit of the owner, unless the permission of the owner/occupant of the adjacent building and where necessary the appropriate health officer is given for a lesser distance. So long as the minimum distance between other occupied buildings are not violated, such minimum distances shall not apply to an occupied unit of the owner of such animals or fowl. For the purposes of this subsection, a female animal and offspring shall be conclusively presumed as one animal for the period of ten consecutive weeks following birth or until the offspring are weaned, whichever is lesser: 
Feet 
a.	Horse, pony, mule, donkey, cow, sheep, goat, or other similar animal:
1.	One animal .....200 
2.	Two animals or more .....500 
b.	Dogs and cats:
1.	Two or less .....20 
2.	Three or more .....50 
c.	Rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters and similar animals:
1.	Four or less .....50 
2.	Five or more .....100 
d.	Fowl:
1.	Four or less .....20 
2.	Five or more .....100 
(2)	Area. Each such animal or fowl shall be provided with the following average minimum ground area in the enclosing in which it is kept. For the purposes of this subsection, a female animal and offspring shall be conclusively presumed as one animal for the period of ten consecutive weeks following birth or until the offspring are weaned, whichever is lesser. 

 
(3)	Drainage, cleanliness. Any housing or enclosure used for such animals shall be well drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors and otherwise clean and sanitary. 
(4)	Exceptions. Nothing contained in this section shall apply to a duly licensed veterinary hospital, pet shop, pet grooming facility or similar commercial establishment where in compliance with local zoning regulations. 
(5)	Swine. Swine and members of that species are prohibited. 
(Code 1988, § 11-3-2)
Sec. 10-33. - Licensing for horses. 
(a)	All horses now housed or quartered on two acres for the first animal and one acre for each animal following within the city limits of the city as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be allowed to remain at their present location provided that the horse is properly registered at city hall within 60 days of the enactment of such ordinance. For the purposes of this article, the term "properly registered" shall be construed to mean that the owner must file the following documentation with city hall: 
(1)	A color photograph sufficient to identify the horse;
(2)	The name of the owner and the specific location at which the horse is quartered; and
(3)	If the horse is registered, the owner shall provide the registration number and a copy of the registration certificate; or 
(4)	If the horse is not registered, certification from a veterinarian stating the age and sex of the horse. 
(b)	If any animal is pregnant, then the registration certificate shall also contain certification of such fact by a veterinarian. A female animal and offspring shall be conclusively presumed as one animal for the period of ten consecutive weeks following birth or until the offspring are weaned, whichever is lesser. 
(c)	For the purposes of this article, the term "horse" shall be construed to also mean mule, donkey, burro or any other similar animal. 
(d)	The registration fee shall be $10.00 per animal per year and the year shall be 12 months from the date of initial registration of such animal. 
(Code 1988, § 11-3-3)
Sec. 10-34. - Permits. 
(a)	No person shall operate a commercial animal establishment or animal shelter without first obtaining a permit in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)	The licensing authority shall promulgate regulations for the issuance of permits and shall include requirements for humane care of all animals and for compliance with the provisions of this article and other applicable laws. The licensing authority may amend such regulations from time to time as deemed desirable for public health and welfare and for the protection of animals. 
(c)	When a permit applicant has shown that he is willing and able to comply with the regulations promulgated by the licensing authority, a permit shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fee. 
(d)	The permit period shall begin with the calendar year and shall run for one year. Renewal applications for permits shall be made 30 days prior to and up to 60 days after, the start of the fiscal year. Application for a permit to establish a new commercial animal establishment under the provisions of this article may be made at any time. 
(e)	If there is a change in ownership of a commercial animal establishment, the new owner may have the current permit transferred to his name upon payment of a $10.00 transfer fee. 
(f)	No person shall train any dog to be used as a guard or sentry dog without possessing a valid license. This section shall not apply to the city government or any of its agencies. The application for a guard or sentry dog training license shall state the name and address of the owner and trainer, location of the facility, and the maximum number of dogs to be housed at the training facility. 
(g)	The annual permit shall be issued upon payment of the following applicable fee:
(1)	Kennel authorized to house fewer than ten dogs or cats .....$ 50.00 
(2)	Kennel authorized to house ten or more but fewer than 50 dogs or cats .....100.00 
(3)	Kennel authorized to house 50 or more dogs or cats .....150.00 
(4)	Pet shop .....175.00 
(5)	Riding stable .....100.00 
(6)	Grooming shop .....50.00 
(7)	Petting zoo .....150.00 
(8)	Guard dog training center .....200.00 
(h)	Every facility regulated by this article shall be considered a separate enterprise requiring an individual permit. 
(i)	Persons operating kennels for the breeding of dogs or cats may elect to license such animals individually. 
(j)	No fee may be required of any veterinary hospital, animal shelter, or government-operated zoological park. 
(k)	Failure to obtain a permit before opening any facility covered in this section shall result in a fine of $200.00. 
(l)	Any person who has a change in the category under which a permit was issued shall be subject to reclassification and readjustment of the permit fee. 
(Code 1988, § 11-3-4)
Sec. 10-35. - License and permit issuance and revocation. 
(a)	After an application is filed, the licensing authority shall inspect the facility prior to issuing the permit. The licensing authority may revoke any permit or license if the person holding the permit or license refuses or fails to comply with this article, the regulations promulgated by the licensing authority, or any law governing the protection and keeping of animals. 
(b)	Any person whose permit or license is revoked shall, within ten days thereafter, humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept, or harbored. No part of the permit or license fee shall be refunded. 
(c)	It shall be a condition of the issuance of any permit or license that the licensing authority shall be permitted to inspect all animals and the premises where animals are kept at any time and shall, if permission for such inspection is refused, revoke the permit or license of the refusing owner. 
(d)	If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on the application, the licensing authority shall refuse to issue a permit or license. 
(e)	No person who has been convicted of cruelty to animals shall be issued a permit or license to operate a commercial animal establishment. 
(Code 1988, § 11-3-5)
Sec. 10-36. - Restraint. 
(a)	All dogs shall be kept under restraint.
(b)	No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance. 
(c)	Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding. 
(d)	Every vicious animal, as determined by the licensing authority, shall be confined by the owner within a building or secure enclosure and shall be securely muzzled or caged whenever off the premises of its owner. 
(Code 1988, § 11-3-6)
Secs. 10-37—10-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 10-56. - Impoundment and violation notice. 
(a)	Unrestrained dogs and nuisance animals shall be taken by the police, animal control officers, or humane officers and impounded in an animal shelter and there be confined in a humane manner. 
(b)	Impounded dogs and cats shall be kept for not fewer than three days.
(c)	If, by a license tag or other means, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the animal control officer shall immediately upon impoundment notify the owner by telephone or certified mail. 
(d)	An owner reclaiming an impounded cat shall pay a fee of $10.00 and $3.00 for each day the animal has been impounded. Subsequent impounds occurring within 12 months are charged double. 
(e)	An owner reclaiming an impounded dog shall pay a fee of $10.00 and $4.00 for each day the animal has been impounded, and a license fee. Subsequent impounds occurring within 12 months are charged double. 
(f)	Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within three days shall become the property of the local government authority or humane society and shall be humanely euthanized by sodium pentobarbital, FP-3, or cooled and bottled carbon monoxide only. 
(g)	In addition to, or in lieu of impounding an animal found at large, the animal control officer, humane officer, or police officer may issue to the known owner of such animal a notice of ordinance violation. Such notice shall impose upon the owner a penalty of $10.00 that may, at the discretion of the animal owner, be paid to any agency designated by the licensing authority within 72 hours in full satisfaction of the assessed penalty. In the event that such penalty is not paid within the time period prescribed, a criminal warrant shall be initiated before a magistrate and upon conviction of a violation of this article, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 10-61. 
(h)	The owner of an impounded animal may also be proceeded against for violation of this article. 
(i)	The licensing authority shall review automatically all licenses issued to animal owners against whom three or more ordinance violations have been assessed in a 12-month period. 
(j)	The shelter director shall keep complete and accurate records of the care, feeding, veterinary treatment, and disposition of all animals impounded at the shelter. 
(Code 1988, § 11-3-7)
Sec. 10-57. - Animal care. 
(a)	No owner shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient wholesome and nutritious food, water in sufficient quantities, proper air, shelter space and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and humane care and treatment. 
(b)	No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans. 
(c)	No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
(d)	No person shall crop a dog's ears or dock a dog's tail, only a licensed veterinarian can perform such operations. 
(e)	Chickens, ducklings, or rabbits younger than eight weeks of age may not be sold in quantities of fewer than 25 to a single purchaser. 
(f)	No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile, or bird as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest, game or other competition, as an inducement to enter a place of amusement, or as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(g)	Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner. In the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency or to the local humane society. 
(h)	No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the poisonous substance shall be liable to be eaten by any animal, provided that it shall be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substance. 
(Code 1988, § 11-3-8)
Sec. 10-58. - Keeping of wild animals. 
(a)	No person shall own, possess, or have custody on his premises of any wild animal or vicious animal for display, training or exhibition purposes. 
(b)	No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal as a pet.
(c)	The licensing authority shall have the power to release or order the release of any infant wild animal under temporary permit that is capable of survival. 
(Code 1988, § 11-3-9)
Sec. 10-59. - Animal waste. 
The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by his animal on public walks, recreation areas, or private property. 
(Code 1988, § 11-3-10)
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 78. 
Sec. 10-60. - Enforcement. 
The civil and criminal provisions of this article shall be enforced by those persons or agencies designated by municipal authority. It shall be a violation of this article to interfere with a humane officer in the performance of his duties. 
(Code 1988, § 11-3-11)
Sec. 10-61. - Penalties. 
(a)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(b)	If any person is found guilty by a court of violating section 10-57, his permit to own, keep, harbor, or have custody of animals shall be deemed automatically revoked and no new permit shall be issued. 
(Code 1988, § 11-3-12)
Secs. 10-62—10-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DANGEROUS DOG CONTROL LAW 

Sec. 10-70. - Implementation of state law. 
This division shall be known and may be referred to as the dangerous dog control ordinance of the city. It is the intention of the governing authority of the city by the adoption of this division to implement the provisions of the Dangerous Dog Control Law adopted and approved by the General Assembly of Georgia (Georgia Laws 1988, Page 824), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 08-07-07, § 1, 7-7-2008)
Sec. 10-71. - Mayor and council as hearing board. 
In lieu of creating an animal control board to hold and conduct the hearings provided for in the dangerous dog control law, all hearings required thereby shall be held and conducted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hogansville, the governing authority of the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-07-07, § 1, 7-7-2008)
Sec. 10-72. - Dog control officer; position created. 
There is hereby created in the city a position of dog control officer as provided in and contemplated by the provisions of the Dangerous Dog Control Law of the State of Georgia. The police chief is hereby authorized and directed to appoint an individual as dog control officer of the city to carry out the duties and responsibilities of the dog control officer as provided in the Dangerous Dog Control Law of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 08-07-07, § 1, 7-7-2008)
Secs. 10-73—10-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PIT BULL DOGS 

Sec. 10-76. - Definitions; standards. 
(a)	As defined and used in this division, the term "pit bull dog" shall refer to any dog which exhibits those distinguishing characteristics which: 
(1)	Substantially conform to the standards established by the American Kennel Club for American Staffordshire Terriers or Staffordshire Bull Terriers; or 
(2)	Substantially conform to the standards established by the United Kennel Club for American Pit Bull Terriers. 
(b)	The current standards of the American Kennel Club and United Kennel Club referred to in this division and incorporated herein shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 10-10-04-C, § 1, 10-4-2010)
Sec. 10-77. - Registration; fee. 
(a)	In order to insure and monitor compliance with the requirements of this division, no pit bull dog shall be kept, harbored or maintained in the city unless such animal has been registered by the owner with the animal control division of the city police department. 
(b)	Each registration shall include the following:
(1)	Name, address and telephone number of the dog's owner;
(2)	Address where dog is harbored, if different from owner's address;
(3)	A full description of the dog, including the sex, color and any other distinguishing physical characteristics of same; 
(4)	Proof of inoculation and tag as required by Code Section 10-30-23;
(5)	Proof of liability insurance or adequate surety bond as required in this division; and 
(6)	Proof of proper enclosure as required in this division.
(c)	Upon proper registration, city shall provide to the pit bull owner a tag to verify registration which shall be and remain attached to the dog's collar. 
(d)	The fee for registration pursuant this division shall be $200.00.
(Ord. No. 10-10-04-C, § 1, 10-4-2010)
Sec. 10-78. - Liability insurance; surety bond. 
(a)	Every owner of a pit bull dog subject to this division shall at all times maintain either: 
(1)	A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $500,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the state insuring the owner of the pit bull dog against liability for personal injuries inflicted by the pit bull dog; or 
(2)	A surety bond in the amount of $500,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state and payable to any person injured by the pit bull dog. 
(b)	The policy of insurance or surety bond referenced above in subsection (a) must contain a provision which requires that the city be notified, in writing, by the surety or insurance company at least 30 days prior to said bond or insurance being cancelled for non-payment of premium or any other reason. 
(Ord. No. 10-10-04-C, § 1, 10-4-2010)
Sec. 10-79. - Proper enclosure. 
(a)	Every owner of a pit bull dog subject to this division shall at all times maintain for said dog a proper enclosure. "Proper enclosure" means an enclosure for keeping a pit bull dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed or locked pin, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of younger children and designed to prohibit the dog from escaping said enclosure. Any such enclosure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog from escaping either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
(b)	At any time that a pit bull dog is not confined in a proper enclosure as described herein, the dog shall be muzzled in such a manner as to prevent it from biting or injuring any person or animal, and kept on a leash with the owner or custodian in attendance. 
(c)	An exception to this section is hereby provided for any pit bull dog being attended to by a veterinary professional, or while participating in any lawful dog show, contest or exhibition sponsored by a dog club, association, society, or similar organization. 
(Ord. No. 10-10-04-C, § 1, 10-4-2010)
Sec. 10-80. - Impoundment. 
(a)	Upon complaint or upon reasonable grounds to believe that a person owns or is keeping or harboring an unlicensed pit bull dog on any premises within the city, the city police department or animal control officer may cause the matter to be investigated. 
(b)	Any unlicensed pit bull dog found within the city may be seized and impounded at the city animal shelter and retained for four days, during which time the owner may reclaim the animal upon proof of compliance with this division. If the owner of the impounded dog is known, such owner shall be notified of the impoundment. Should the owner fail to reclaim the pit bull within four days from impoundment, the animal shall be destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 10-10-04-C, § 1, 10-4-2010; Ord. No. 11-01-18-A, § 1, 1-18-2011)
Sec. 10-81. - Mandatory spay/neuter. 
(a)	Subject to the express exceptions provided in subsection (b) below, it shall be unlawful to keep, harbor or maintain in the city any unspayed or unneutered pit bull dog over four months of age. 
(b)	The prohibition set forth in subsection (a) above shall not apply if a veterinarian licensed in this state shall certify in writing that a specific pit bull dog is medically unfit to undergo the required spay or neuter procedure because of a physical condition which would be substantially aggravated by such procedure or would likely cause the animal's death. Such writing shall also include a description of the likely duration of the physical condition which prohibits the procedure. As soon as such condition ceases to exist, it shall be the duty of the person who harbors or keeps such animal to promptly comply with this code section. 
(c)	Failure to comply with this section may result in the unsprayed/unneutered pit bull to be seized and impounded at the city animal shelter and retained for ten days, during which time the owner may reclaim the animal upon proof of arrangements to comply with this section. Should the owner fail to make and give proper notice of the arrangements to comply with this code section within ten days from impoundment, the animal shall be destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 10-10-04-C, § 1, 10-4-2010)
Sec. 10-82. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this division shall upon conviction in the municipal court be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-10-04-C, § 1, 10-4-2010)
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Power to provide for the removal of dangerous buildings, § 3.01(nn).
Editor's note—Ord. No. 13-04-15E, § 1, adopted Apr. 15, 2013, repealed arts. I—VIII, §§ 14-1, 14-31, 14-51, 14-52, 14-81—14-85, 14-111, 14-141, 14-142, 14-171, 14-201 and 14-231, and set out new arts. I and II as set out herein. Former arts. I—VIII pertained to in general, building code, electrical code, plumbing code, gas code, property maintenance code, mechanical code, and swimming pool code, respectively. Section 2 of said ordinance redesignated art. IX, pertaining to unsafe or unfit buildings or structures, as art. III. See the Code Comparative Table for complete legislative history of this chapter.
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; flood damage prevention, ch. 42; historical preservation, ch. 46; classification of buildings and structures, § 46-34; planning and development, ch. 70; signs, ch. 74; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 102.
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); marshal of plans for certain buildings, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-14.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Duties and responsibilities of city manager or his designated representative. 
(a)	Primary administration and enforcement of construction codes is vested in the city manager, who may appoint one or more building inspectors and delegate such functions as the manager, in his discretion, deems appropriate. In the event more than one building inspector is employed, the manager may designate a chief building inspector to administratively head the department of building and code enforcement. The manager, and his designated representatives, shall have and exercise the following duties and responsibilities in the enforcement of state minimum standard codes and any other codes adopted by the city: 
(1)	To interpret, enforce, and administer the state minimum standard codes within the city in accordance with the provisions and procedural requirements of this article; 
(2)	To inspect all existing buildings and structures as required by such codes and to permit and inspect new construction and the renovation, alteration, modification and repairs to existing structures to assure compliance with applicable state minimum code standards; 
(3)	Under the budget and personnel regulations of said city, to employ inspectors and other personnel necessary for the proper enforcement of such codes and to provide for the authority, functions, and duties of such inspectors; 
(4)	To bring enforcement actions, prosecute complaints and citations in the appropriate court and to appeal those decisions adverse to the best interest of the city; 
(5)	To study and make recommendations to the Mayor and Council as to ordinances relating to the administration and enforcement of state minimum standard codes; and 
(6)	To perform all other duties and functions imposed upon the chief administrative officer, by whatever name or title referred, in the state minimum standard codes. 
(b)	The duties and responsibilities of the manager and his designated representatives, as set forth in this section, may, by contract approved by the mayor and council, be exercised and performed by an independent contractor or by a designated representative of any county or other municipal corporation of this state. Upon approval of such contract, the acts of such contractor shall be deemed the acts of the city as if fully performed by the city, its officers and employees. 
(Ord. No. 13-04-15E, § 1, 4-15-2013)
Sec. 14-2. - Limitation of liability for code enforcement; no special duty created. 
It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, life safety and general welfare of properties and occupiers of buildings and structures within the city in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. Approval of a permit and inspection of a property shall in no manner guarantee or warrant to the owner or occupants thereof that said property has been constructed, maintained, or operated in conformance with applicable codes, laws and regulations. The city reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any federal or state law, regulation, or ordinance requires compliance as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, plan or design approval, inspection or other activity by the city, its officers, employees and agents, issuance of such permit, approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver or estoppel of the condition precedent, and it shall remain the obligation and responsibility of the owner, his design professional(s), and contractor(s) to satisfy such legal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 13-04-15E, § 1, 4-15-2013)
Secs. 14-3—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STATE MINIMUM STANDARD CODES 

Sec. 14-31. - Building codes adopted. 
(a)	The following codes, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25, have mandatory statewide application and shall be enforced by the city manager or his designated representative, to wit: 
(1)	International Building Code (ICC);
(2)	National Electrical Code (NFPA);
(3)	International Fuel Gas Code (ICC);
(4)	International Mechanical Code (ICC);
(5)	International Plumbing Code (ICC);
(6)	International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC);
(7)	International Energy Code Conservation Code (ICC); and
(8)	International Fire Code (ICC).
Which codes have mandatory statewide application and do not require adoption by local ordinance, shall be enforced by the city manager, his designated representative, or designee(s) thereof, in accordance with the procedures hereinafter set forth. 
(b)	The following optional codes are hereby adopted within the City of Hogansville pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25, to wit: 
(1)	International Property Maintenance Code (ICC);
(2)	Standard Housing Code (SBCCI); and
(3)	Standard Swimming Pool Code (SBCCI).
(c)	The codes referenced within this article shall mean the current edition of such codes as approved by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, and shall include the Georgia State Amendments promulgated by the [state] department of community affairs and any local amendments approved by said body. 
(Ord. No. 13-04-15E, § 1, 4-15-2013)
Secs. 14-32—14-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNSAFE OR UNFIT BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 09-11-16-A, § 1, adopted Nov. 16, 2009, effectively repealed the former art. IX, §§ 14-261—14-264, and enacted a new art. IX as set out herein. The former art. IX pertained to unsafe buildings and derived from Code 1988, §§ 8-2-81, 8-2-82; and Code 2004, §§ 14-263, 14-264. Subsequently, Ord. No. 13-04-15E, § 2, adopted Apr. 15, 2013, renumbered art. IX as art. III.
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34.
State Law reference— Authority to repair, close or demolish a building, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; procedure for unsafe building complaint and resolution, O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-9, 41-2-12.

Sec. 14-261. - Findings of the existence of nuisance structures. 
(a)	The governing authority of the city finds and declares that within the corporate limits of the city there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and are not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance to be in force within the city; or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and the state; and that the public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)	It is further found and declared that within the corporate limits of the city where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. Moreover, the mayor and council find that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed. Finally, it is the intent of the governing authority to invoke the procedures hereafter codified for private property which constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(Ord. No. 09-11-16-A, § 1, 11-16-2009)
Sec. 14-262. - Nuisance abatement procedures. 
(a)	Continued use of other laws and ordinances. It is the intent of the mayor and council that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(b)	Definitions. 
Applicable codes means (a) any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; (b) any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. tit. 25, ch. 2; and (c) any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2 after October 1 provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-2, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the mayor and council of the city. 
Interested party means: 
(1)	Owner;
(2)	Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)	Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9;
(4)	Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the city or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court. "Interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)	Persons in possession of said property and premises.
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, § 41-2-8 and §§ 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this article adopted under § 41-2-7, § 41-2-8, and §§ 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(c)	Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(1)	It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances; 
(2)	The mayor and council of the city hereby appoint and designate the public works director and his designee(s) as the public officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(d)	Other remedies not precluded. 
(1)	The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in courts of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(2)	Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 09-11-16-A, § 1, 11-16-2009)
Sec. 14-263. - Procedures; notice; hearing; appeal. 
(a)	Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(b)	If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property; 
(3)	For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however; that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factored in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(c)	If the owner fails to comply with an order to prepare or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished. Such abatement shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by the court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the dwelling, building or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use and connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(d)	If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any monies received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; and 
(e)	The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees and administrative costs incurred by the municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(1)	The lien provided for in subsection (e) of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (d) of section 14-264. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(2)	Upon final determination of costs, fees and expenses incurred in accordance with this chapter, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this chapter shall transmit to the appropriate municipal tax collector or city revenue officer a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition or closure. It shall be the duty of the appropriate municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, whose duties include the collection of municipal taxes, to collect the amount of the lien using methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 4, provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The municipal tax collection or city revenue officer shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the city. 
(3)	Enforcement of liens pursuant to this article may be initiated at any time following receipt by the municipal tax collector or city revenue officer of the final determination of costs in accordance with this article. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this article. 
(4)	The redemption amount of any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this section shall be the full amount of costs as finally determined in accordance with this section together with interest, penalties and costs incurred by the governing authority, municipal tax collector or city revenue officer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(f)	Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. No. 09-11-16-A, § 1, 11-16-2009)
Sec. 14-264. - Standards; powers; service of complaints. 
(a)	The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwelling, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)	Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities;
(2)	Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities;
(3)	Dilapidation;
(4)	Disrepair;
(5)	Structural defects;
(6)	Uncleanliness; and
(7)	Other additional standards which may from time to time by adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(b)	The public officer(s) designated in this article shall have such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of this ordinance, including the following powers: 
(1)	To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, building, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)	To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence;
(3)	To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)	To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)	To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(c)	Service of complaints.
(1)	Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first class mail to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2)	For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in Troup County once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)	A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(e)	As provided by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13, any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may petition to the superior court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be had by the court on petitions within 20 days. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this section. 
(f)	Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint and hearing shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 09-11-16-A, § 1, 11-16-2009)
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to impose license fees, § 3.01(r).
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; fire extinguishers in businesses, § 38-72; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 62; taxation, ch. 90; occupation, profession and business taxes, § 90-101 et seq.; utilities, ch. 98; general commercial development standards, § 102-292 et seq.; commercial-residential district, § 102-351 et seq.; home occupations, § 102-461 et seq.
State Law reference— Business and occupational tax, O.C.G.A. § 3-2-21 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local business license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the city clerk, who shall be the administrator for the licensing of businesses under this article, and who may be assisted by employees of the clerk's office. 
Business means any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or calling of any kind for gain or profit, directly or indirectly; provided that this shall not include any business, trade, profession and the like licensed by the state unless city licensing is allowed by state law, nor shall it include any business operating solely under a franchise granted by the city. 
Engaged in business means any person engaged in business and thus subject to the requirements of this article who performs any act of selling any goods or services or solicits business or offers goods or services for sale for payment in an attempt to make a profit, including the sales or services of the character as made by a wholesaler or retailer or involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, either as an owner, operator or agent in any business within the city. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-32. - License required. 
Every business in this city or person doing business or engaged in business within the city is required to have a business license from the city for the privilege of engaging in a business, profession or occupation within the corporate limits, unless city licensing is prohibited under state law or the activity is exempted by this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-2)
Sec. 18-33. - Separate businesses. 
Where a person conducts a business at more than one store, location or place, each store, location or place shall be considered a separate business under the terms of this article and a separate license shall be required. Should more than one business on which a business tax is levied by this Code be conducted in or in conjunction with one place or kind of business, each business shall be separately licensed under this article. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-3)
Sec. 18-34. - Application; fee; temporary business. 
Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this Code shall submit an application for the license to the administrator, which application shall conform to the requirements of this section in addition to any other provisions of this Code. 
(1)	Unless otherwise provided in this Code, each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the city and submitted before February 1 of each year or within ten days of opening a new business or reopening of a business under a new ownership. 
(2)	Each application shall contain the following information:
a.	Name and home address of the applicant if an individual, or home office address if a corporation or partnership; 
b.	Place where the proposed business is to be located;
c.	Kind and class of business to be carried on;
d.	Names and home addresses of the partners, if a partnership;
e.	Names and home addresses of the officers and directors, if a corporation;
f.	Any information as may be required by the administrator for the purpose of determining the amount of any business taxes to be collected under this Code; and 
g.	Any additional information which the administrator may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this article which may include a complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer or director of the applicant for violations of any and all laws and ordinances of the city, state or federal government other than minor traffic violations. 
(3)	Each application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner if a partnership, or by an officer if a corporation. 
(4)	All information furnished or secured under the authority of this article shall be kept in strict confidence by the city; shall not be subject to public inspection; and shall be utilized solely by the officers of the city responsible for administering the provisions of this article and the city's business taxes. 
(5)	False statements on any application for a license shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the license or denial of the application. 
(6)	Any application, license and registration fees as fixed from time to time by the city council or business taxes required under this Code shall accompany the application. 
(7)	Transient and temporary businesses shall pay any fees or taxes provided for in this Code. No license granted these businesses shall be valid after 180 days. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-4)
State Law reference— Confidentiality of business information exempt from enclosure, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-15. 
Sec. 18-35. - Administration of article. 
The administrator shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the application for and issuance of business licenses under this article. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-5)
Sec. 18-36. - Duties of administrator. 
The administrator, or an authorized representative, shall have, among others, the following duties: 
(1)	To prepare and provide the necessary forms for the registration and application for a business license and for the submission of any required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(2)	To issue to each person a business license within a reasonable time after the payment of the license fee assessed and any business taxes, property or other city taxes levied in this Code; provided, however, where under other portions of this Code, permits, certifications and compliance with enumerated conditions are required for the operation of the business, the administrator shall not issue a business license until the applicant exhibits to the administrator the obtained permits, certification and compliance. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-6)
Sec. 18-37. - Duration of license. 
Any license referred to in this article shall automatically expire on December 31 of the year of its issuance. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-7)
Sec. 18-38. - Casual and isolated activity. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, nothing contained in this article shall be interpreted so as to require any person who may engage in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions, where they involve personal assets only and are not the principal occupation of the individual, to obtain a business license and pay a fee therefor. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-8)
Sec. 18-39. - Special daily business license. 
In lieu of obtaining a business license as provided in this article, a person not maintaining a fixed place of business in the city may obtain from the administrator a special daily business license which shall expire at 12:00 midnight of the day for which it is issued. A new license shall be obtained for each day on which any type of business is to be conducted. Any person desiring to engage in a business licensed under this section shall obtain a license prior to engaging in business on the day for which the license is issued and pay all license fees and business taxes required under this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-9)
Sec. 18-40. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)	If any provision of this Code provides for the review of an application for a license by a city officer designated therein, the administrator shall forward a copy of the application to that officer. The officer charged with the duty of reviewing the application shall make a recommendation thereon, favorable or otherwise, and shall return the recommendation to the administrator after receiving a copy of the application. 
(b)	Upon the receipt of the recommendation of the reviewing officer as provided in this section, or upon the receipt of the application if no reviewing officer is designated, the administrator shall forward the recommendation and application to the city council for consideration and action at its next regularly scheduled public meeting, if approval by the city council is required. 
(c)	No license shall be issued to any applicant whose place of business is not in full compliance with all minimum standard building codes adopted by the city. 
(d)	No license shall be issued to any applicant who has any outstanding indebtedness to the city, including but not limited to property taxes, business license fees, business taxes, utility bills and any other taxes or assessments. 
(e)	Upon the express approval of the city council, when so required, or otherwise upon a determination by the administrator that the application is in order and all requirements have been met, the administrator shall issue a business license to the applicant therefor, which license shall state the nature of the business authorized and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the administrator. 
(f)	If the administrator determines that the application is not in order or any requirements for the license have not been met, then the administrator shall deny the application and immediately provide written notice of the denial and the grounds therefor to the applicant. The applicant may appeal the denial to the city council within ten days of the denial notice being issued. The city council shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within ten days of the appeal being filed with the city clerk. The city council within ten days of the hearing may order the license granted with or without conditions or may affirm the denial of the application. The decision shall be based only upon a finding by the city council that the administrator was incorrect or erred in the interpretation of the regulations involved or the facts of the case. 
(g)	Unless otherwise provided in this article, all license applications shall be approved or disapproved within ten days of filing with the administrator. 
(h)	Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as granting any person whose business is subject to municipal regulation any legal right to engage in that business. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-10)
Sec. 18-41. - Display of licenses and registrations. 
All persons shall exhibit and display all licenses and registrations issued to them under this Code in some conspicuous place in their business establishment at which address the license or registration was issued. Any transient or nonresident person doing business within the city shall carry the license or registration either upon his person or in any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in the business and the person shall exhibit the license to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-11)
Sec. 18-42. - Renewal of licenses. 
Each licensee shall make a written application for renewal on forms supplied by the administrator no later than February 1 of each calendar year, which application may require substantially the same information as the initial application. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-12)
Sec. 18-43. - Revocation; suspension. 
The city council, after affording the licensee a five-day notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceedings, may, if it finds this Code to have been violated by the licensee, his agent, or employee in the operation of the business, revoke any and all city licenses in their entirety, suspend the license for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation or place other conditions thereon as the city council may deem necessary after a hearing thereon. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-13)
Sec. 18-44. - Change of address. 
Any person licensed under this article moving from one location to another shall notify the administrator of the move and the new address in writing on a form provided by the administrator no later than the day of moving. The same business license will be valid at the new location if the new location conforms to the zoning, subdivision and building regulations of the city and any other location transfer requirements of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-14)
Sec. 18-45. - Transfer of licenses. 
Business licenses shall not be transferable except as provided in this section. In the event that the owner of a business holding a currently valid paid up business license should sell or transfer the business to another person, the purchaser of the business shall obtain free of charge a new license in his name for the balance of the current term of the seller's business license, upon making application to the administrator, and the purchaser shall be punishable for violation of this article if the transfer of the business license provided for in this section is not made before the transferee begins to engage in the business. At the date of renewal of the seller's business license, the buyer must obtain a new annual business license and pay all license fees and business taxes required by this Code and comply with all applicable provisions of this Code and all ordinances in the same manner as if he had been the original owner of the business. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-15)
Sec. 18-46. - Issuance of replacement licenses. 
In the event that the administrator is notified that the licensee has lost his copy of the license, he shall make a new copy, upon showing by the licensee that the required fees have been paid. In addition, the licensee shall be charged a replacement fee as fixed from time to time by the city council. Replacement licenses shall be signed by the administrator and shall indicate the time and date upon which issued. The possession of a replacement license shall not be a defense to any charge of violation of this article except a charge made after the time of the issuance of the replacement license. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-16)
Sec. 18-47. - Special provisions for disabled veterans. 
All disabled veterans desiring to enter business without paying city license fees or business taxes must present a state disability license to the administrator whereupon a city license will be issued and marked "FREE" on the face of the license. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-17)
Sec. 18-48. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)	It shall be a violation of this article for any person, whether based in the city or elsewhere, to transact any business of a type for which this article requires a license, or to carry on any business for which a license is required however briefly or transitory, without first obtaining a license to do so, under the provisions of this article. 
(b)	It shall be a violation of this article for any person, whether based in the city or elsewhere, made liable for obtaining a business license under this article, to fail to show the license or a copy thereof to any police officer within a reasonable time after the making of a demand therefor by the police officer. 
(c)	It shall be a violation of this article to fail to pay the license fees required by this article by the date on which such payments are due. 
(d)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-18)
Sec. 18-49. - Defense to prosecution. 
It shall be a defense to any prosecution under this article for failing to obtain a business license before engaging in business, that a license has in fact been issued in the manner provided by law. It shall be presumed that no license has been issued unless, at his trial, the accused produces in court his currently valid business license or a certified copy thereof. In no event shall the claim by the accused that he has been issued a currently valid business license which has been lost be sustained unless that person shall have first reported the alleged loss to the administrator and made demand for the issuance of a new license. The report of loss or demand for issuance of a replacement license must have been made prior to the arrest for the violation for which the accused is charged. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-19)
Sec. 18-50. - Owner and manager both punishable for violations. 
In the event that a business is being conducted without a license, both the person owning the business and the person in charge of the management of the business in the city may be held liable for the violation of the provisions of this article, and, upon conviction, either or both may be punished as provided for in section 1-7. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-20)
Sec. 18-51. - Subsequent amendments; other fees. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city to assess, levy and collect any of the license fees prescribed. The payment of any license fee provided for in this article shall not be construed as prohibiting the assessment, levy or collection of additional license or permit fees upon the same person. 
(Code 1988, § 9-1-21)
Secs. 18-52—18-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BONDSMAN[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Professional bondsmen, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-50 et seq.

Sec. 18-71. - Professional bondsmen defined. 
All persons who hold themselves out as signers or sureties of bail bonds for compensation, and who are licensed as provided in this division, are professional bondsmen. 
(Code 1988, § 9-4-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-72. - License required; qualifications. 
(a)	To qualify for a license as a professional bondsman in the city, it must affirmatively appear that: 
(1)	The applicant is a natural person who has reached the age of 21 years;
(2)	The applicant is a citizen of the United States or possesses the appropriate documentation from the federal government permitting the applicant to work in the United States and has been a bona fide resident of the state for one year prior to the date of application; 
(3)	The place of business of the applicant will be located in this state and the applicant will be actively engaged in the bail bond business and maintain a place of business accessible to the public; 
(4)	The applicant is a person of high character and approved integrity who has been vouched for by two other reputable citizens who are residents of the county. 
(b)	A fee of $25.00 shall be submitted with each application as the cost of conducting a character investigation of the applicant. 
(c)	The applicant shall furnish with his application a complete set of his fingerprints and a recent credential-size full face photograph of himself. The applicant's fingerprints shall be certified by the chief of police, who shall certify the applicant to be free of any record of any crime of moral turpitude or any violation of law applicable to the bail bonding business. 
(d)	The applicant shall justify the sufficiency of his bonding ability by affidavit and attachment of certified copies of arrangements with surety bonding companies that he possesses the qualifications and sufficiency to become a surety, and in such affidavit shall describe his property which he proposes to justify as to his sufficiency, stating the encumbrances thereon, according to the standards as promulgated by the sheriff of the county. 
(e)	The applicant shall file for a business license with the city and pay such rate as specified in the business and occupation tax schedule. 
(Code 1988, § 9-4-2)
Sec. 18-73. - Denial; suspension; refusal to renew; revocation. 
(a)	The city manager may deny, suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any license issued in accordance with this division for any of the following causes: 
(1)	Any cause for which issuance of a license could have been refused had it then existed and been known to the city manager. 
(2)	Material misstatement, misrepresentation or fraud in obtaining the license.
(3)	Misappropriation, conversion or unlawful withholding of money belonging to others and received in the conduct of business under the license. 
(4)	Conviction of a felony.
(5)	Fraudulent or dishonest practices in the conduct of business under the license.
(6)	Willful failure to comply with the provisions of this division.
(7)	Willful failure to return collateral security to the principal when the principal is entitled thereto. 
(8)	When in the judgment of the city manager the licensee has, in the conduct of affairs under the license, demonstrated incompetency, untrustworthiness, conduct or practices rendering him unfit to carry on the bail bond business, making his continuance in such business detrimental to the public interest; when the licensee is no longer in good faith carrying on the bail bond business, or is guilty of rebating or offering to rebate, offering to divide his compensations, and for any such reasons, found by the city manager to be a source of detriment, injury or loss to the public. 
(b)	Appeals of the city manager's decision may be appealed to the city council by filing notice of the appeal within ten days of the written decision of the manager. All appeals shall be heard within ten days of filing at a regular or special council meeting. 
(Code 1988, § 9-4-3)
Sec. 18-74. - Display of signs in booking section of jail. 
(a)	Each professional bondsman duly licensed by the city shall be allowed to display a sign of his own making in a place designated by the chief of police, at or near the booking section of the city jail. 
(b)	One sign per licensee shall be permitted and shall be limited to lettering and numbering of no more than three inches high and 1½ inches in width for each letter or numeral. 
(Code 1988, § 9-4-4)
Sec. 18-75. - Equal access to jail. 
All professional bondsmen who hold a currently effective license issued by the city clerk shall be entitled to equal access to the jail for the purpose of making bond. 
(Code 1988, § 9-4-5)
Sec. 18-76. - Termination or ceasing operation. 
Any professional bondsman who discontinues writing bail bonds during the period for which he is licensed shall notify the chief of police and the city clerk and immediately return his license. 
(Code 1988, § 9-4-6)
Sec. 18-77. - Employee termination. 
Any professional bondsman who terminates the appointment of any employee authorized to sign bonds shall immediately file written notice thereof with the chief of police and the city clerk, together with a statement that he has given or mailed notice to the employee. Such notice filed shall state the reasons, if any, for the termination. Information so furnished shall be privileged and shall not be used as evidence in any action against the professional bondsman. 
(Code 1988, § 9-4-7)
Sec. 18-78. - Prohibitions. 
No professional bondsman shall: 
(1)	Pay a fee or rebate or give or promise anything of value to a jailor, police officer, peace officer, the municipal judge, or any other person who has power to arrest or to hold in custody, or to any city official or city employee in order to secure a settlement, compromise, remission or reduction of the amount of any bail bond thereof; 
(2)	Pay a fee or rebate or give anything of value to an attorney in bail bond matters, except in defense of any action on a bond; 
(3)	Pay a fee or rebate or give or promise anything of value to the principal or anyone in his behalf; or 
(4)	Sign or countersign in blank any bond; nor give a power of attorney to, or otherwise authorize, anyone to countersign his name to bonds unless the person so authorized is directly employed by the bondsman giving such power of attorney. 
(Code 1988, § 9-4-8)
Secs. 18-79—18-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— False advertising, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-421; misrepresenting ownership in going-out-of-business sales, O.C.G.A., § 10-1-425.

Sec. 18-96. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fire and other altered goods sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water, or other means. 
Going-out-of-business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued, including, but not limited to, the following sales: adjuster's adjustment, alteration, assignee's bankrupt, benefit or administrator's, final days, forced out, forced out of business, insolvent's, last days, lease expires, liquidation, loss of lease, mortgage sale, receiver's, trustee's, or quitting business. 
Goods means any goods, wares, merchandise, or other property capable of being the object of sale regulated under this division. 
Removal of business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to resume business at a new location in the city, or will then continue business from other existing locations in the city. 
(Code 1988, § 9-6-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-97. - License required. 
Any person selling or offering to sell any goods within the city at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means to be a going-out-of-business sale, a removal of business sale, or a fire and other altered stock sale shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this division. 
(Code 1988, § 9-6-2)
Sec. 18-98. - License application. 
Application for a license under this division shall be made as provided in section 18-34, except that such application shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)	The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale, if other than the applicant; 
(2)	The true name and address of the person from whom such owner purchased the goods to be sold and the price therefor, and if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition; 
(3)	A description of the place where such sale is to be held;
(4)	The nature of the occupancy, whether lease or sublease, and the effective date of termination of such occupancy; 
(5)	The dates on which and the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted;
(6)	A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reasons for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted; 
(7)	The means to be employed in advertising such sale together with the proposed content of any advertisement; and 
(8)	A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at such sale as disclosed by the applicant's records; such inventory shall be attached to and become a part of the required application. 
(Code 1988, § 9-6-3)
Sec. 18-99. - Restriction on issuance of license. 
No license under this division shall be issued to any person who has held a sale at the location stated in the application within one year from the date of such application. 
(Code 1988, § 9-6-4)
Sec. 18-100. - Conditions of issuance of license. 
A license shall be issued under this division on the following terms: 
(1)	Nature of sale. The license shall authorize only one type of sale described in the application at the location named therein. 
(2)	Saleable goods. The license shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. 
(3)	Surrender of general license. Upon being issued a license under this division for a going-out-of-business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the city clerk all other licenses he may hold covered by the application for a license under this division. 
(4)	Restricted location. Where a person applying for a license under this division operates more than one business, the license issued shall apply to only one store or branch specified in this application. 
(5)	Nontransferability. Any license provided for in this division shall not be assigned or transferable. 
(Code 1988, § 9-6-5)
Sec. 18-101. - Duties of licensee. 
A licensee under this division shall: 
(1)	Adhere to inventory. Make no additions whatsoever during the period of the licensed sale to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application for license. 
(2)	Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising. 
(3)	Adhere to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or publicity incident thereto. 
(4)	Keep duplicate inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and present such duplicate copy to the inspecting officials upon request. 
(5)	Segregate noninventoried goods. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale and make such distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the place of sale, apprising the public of the status of all such goods. 
(Code 1988, § 9-6-6)
Sec. 18-102. - Inventory restrictions. 
All goods included in such inventory shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges, and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment. 
(Code 1988, § 9-6-7)
Sec. 18-103. - Persons exempted. 
The provisions of this division shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
(1)	Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(2)	Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials.
(3)	Duly licensed auctioneers selling at auctions.
(4)	Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication who publishes in good faith any advertisement, without knowledge of its false, deceptive, or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions of this division have not been complied with. 
(Code 1988, § 9-6-8)
Secs. 18-104—18-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TAXICABS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; issue of local license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6.

Sec. 18-121. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cruising means the driving of a taxicab on the streets, alleys, or public places of this city in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire. 
License means the authorization granted by the city council to allow a person to engage in the business of operating taxicabs in this city. 
Manifest means a daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips made by that driver, showing time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers, and the amount of fare of each trip. 
Open stand means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere which has been designated by the city council as reserved exclusively for the use of taxicabs. 
Rate card means a card which contains the rates of fare for taxicab service and which is on clear display in each taxicab. 
Taxicab means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of less than ten passengers, including driver, and not operated on a fixed route. 
Taxicab driver's permit means the permission granted by the city council to a person to drive a taxicab upon the streets of this city. 
Taximeter means a meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which measures mechanically the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the fare is based. 
Waiting time means the time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time of arrival at the point of origin of a trip to the time of commencement of such trip. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-122. - License required. 
Each person who engages in the business of operating one or more taxicabs in the city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this division. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-2)
Sec. 18-123. - Application. 
Application for a license under this division shall be made as provided in section 18-34, except that such application shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)	The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the transaction or acts giving rise to those judgments; 
(2)	The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers;
(3)	Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public convenience and necessity require the granting of a license; 
(4)	The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant and the location of proposed depots and terminals; and 
(5)	The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or vehicles of the applicant. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-3)
Sec. 18-124. - Bond. 
(a)	Before any license shall be issued for engaging in the taxicab business, including renewal licenses, the applicant shall file with the city clerk an indemnity bond for each vehicle authorized in the amount of $100,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person; in the amount of $300,000.00 for injuries to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident; and in the amount of $50,000.00 for property damages resulting from any one accident. The bond or bonds shall be executed by the applicant, as principal, and two sureties upon which service of process may be made in the state, and shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the negligence of the applicant, his servants, or agents. 
(b)	The city council may, in its discretion, allow the applicant to file, in lieu of a bond or bonds, a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, provided that such policy conforms to the provisions of this section relating to bonds. 
(c)	No such policy of insurance or bond shall be canceled until the expiration of five days' notice of such intention to cancel has been given in writing to the city clerk by registered mail or personal delivery, and a provision therefor shall be made a part of the policy of insurance or surety bond. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-4)
Sec. 18-125. - License fee. 
The annual business license fee for each person engaged in the business of operating taxicabs in the city shall be as fixed from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-5)
Sec. 18-126. - Public hearing. 
Upon the filing of an application for a taxicab license, the city clerk shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. Individual notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant and to all persons to whom taxicab licenses have been issued, and notice to the general public shall be given by publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-6)
Sec. 18-127. - Review of application. 
In consideration whether to grant or deny a taxicab license to an applicant for such license, the city council shall take into account the number of taxicabs already in operation; whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need; the probable effect of increased service on local traffic conditions; and character, experience, and responsibility of the applicant. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-7)
Sec. 18-128. - Taxicab driver's license and permit. 
(a)	Requirement. No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so driven, and no taxicab licensed under the provisions of this division shall be driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of that taxicab shall have first obtained and have then in force a valid motor vehicle driver's license, issued by the state, and a valid taxicab driver's permit issued by the city as provided in this section. 
(b)	Application for taxicab driver's permit. An application for a taxicab driver's permit shall be in writing, addressed to the city manager, and filed with the city clerk. Such application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The names and addresses of four residents of the city who have known the applicant and who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty, and general good character of the applicant; 
(2)	The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers;
(3)	The educational background of the applicant; and
(4)	A concise history of the applicant's employment.
Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate from a reputable physician of the city certifying that, in his opinion, the applicant is not afflicted with any disease or infirmity which might make him an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. 
(c)	Permit fee. Each application for a taxicab driver's permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee as established from time to time by the city council. 
(d)	Police investigation of applicant. The chief of police shall investigate each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit. Such investigation shall be made to determine the moral character and fitness of the applicant, as well as the applicant's knowledge of the city and all traffic regulations. A report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application and forwarded to the city manager. 
(e)	Consideration of application. The city manager shall, upon consideration of the application and the reports attached thereto, approve or reject the application. If the application is rejected, the applicant may request a personal appearance before the city manager to offer evidence why his application should be reconsidered. 
(f)	Issuance of permit. Upon approval of an application for a taxicab driver's permit, the city clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant which shall be signed by the clerk, bear the corporate seal of the city, and set forth the name, address, age, and signature of the applicant. The chief of police shall procure or cause to the procured two photographs of the applicant, one of such photographs to be retained by the chief of police in the files of the police department and the other to be attached to the taxicab driver's permit. 
(g)	Display of permit. Every taxicab driver licensed under this section shall post his taxicab driver's permit in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while the driver is operating a taxicab. 
(h)	Duty to comply with city, state, and federal laws. Every driver licensed under this section shall comply with all city, state and federal laws. Failure to do so will justify the suspension or revocation of the taxicab driver's permit. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-8)
Sec. 18-129. - Inspection of taxicabs police. 
(a)	No taxicab shall be permitted to be used or operated in the city until the vehicle has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and examined under the supervision of the chief of police and has been found to comply with such reasonable rules and regulations respecting safety and sanitation as may be prescribed by the city council. 
(b)	When it has been determined that a vehicle has met the standards established in subsection (a) of this section, a certificate to that effect shall be issued, which certificate shall also state the authorized seating capacity of the vehicle. Such certificate may be withdrawn and the vehicle relating thereto suspended from operation at any time by the chief of police if the vehicle is found to be unsafe or not in compliance with any applicable regulations. 
(c)	Periodic inspections of taxicabs shall be made at such intervals as shall be established by the chief of police to ensure that such vehicles are kept in condition of continued fitness for public use. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-9)
Sec. 18-130. - Designation of taxicabs. 
(a)	Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each rear door and on the rear of the vehicle, in painted letters not less than three inches high, the name of the company or individual owning or operating the vehicle and the word "taxi;" and, in addition, may bear an identifying design approved by the chief of police. 
(b)	There shall also be permanently affixed on each side and on the rear of each taxicab a number, such number to be a separate and distinct number from that on any other taxicab in the city. The number shall be assigned to the taxicab by the chief of police and shall not be altered or changed without the consent of the chief of police. 
(c)	A register of the name of each person owning or operating a taxicab in the city shall be kept by the city clerk, and the register shall contain for each owner, or operator the description, make of car, and number assigned to the vehicle by the chief of police. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-10)
Sec. 18-131. - Rates of fare. 
(a)	No owner or driver of a taxicab shall charge a greater sum for the use of a taxicab than in accordance with such schedule as approved from time to time by the city council. 
(b)	Every taxicab shall have a rate card setting forth the rates of fare as prescribed in the schedule. The rate card shall be displayed in the taxicab so as to be in full view of all passengers. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-11)
Sec. 18-132. - Receipts. 
The driver of any taxicab shall, upon request by the passenger, render to that passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt, on which shall be the name of the owner, license number or motor number, amount of the meter reading or charges, and the date of the transaction. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-12)
Sec. 18-133. - Solicitation, acceptance and discharge of passengers. 
(a)	Solicitation of passengers by driver. No driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab except when sitting in the driver's compartment of the taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curbside thereof. The driver of any taxicab shall remain in the driver's compartment or immediately adjacent to his vehicle at all times when the vehicle is upon the public streets; except that, when necessary, a driver may be absent from his taxicab for not more than ten consecutive minutes; and provided further that nothing contained in this subsection shall be held to prohibit any driver from alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers into or out of the vehicle. 
(b)	Prohibited solicitation. No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone of voice, or by sign, or in any manner annoy any person or obstruct the movement of any person, or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting patronage. 
(c)	Receipt and discharge of passengers on sidewalk only. Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall pull up to the righthand sidewalk, as near as possible, or in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme righthand side of the road, and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets where passengers may be discharged at either the righthand or lefthand sidewalk or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk. 
(d)	Cruising. No driver shall cruise in search of passengers except in such areas and at such times as shall be designated by the chief of police. Such areas and times shall only be designated when the chief of police finds that taxicab cruising would not congest traffic or be dangerous to pedestrians and other vehicles. 
(e)	Solicitation of other common carrier passengers prohibited. No driver, owner, or operator shall solicit passengers at the terminal of any other common carrier, nor at any intermediate points along any established route of any other common carrier. 
(f)	Additional passengers. No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in the taxicab, unless the person first employing the taxicab shall consent to the acceptance of additional passengers. 
(g)	Restrictions on number of passengers. No driver shall permit more persons to be carried as passengers in a taxicab than the stated seating capacity of his vehicle found in the inspection certificate issued by the police department. A child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger. 
(h)	Refusal to carry orderly passengers. No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person upon request unless previously engaged. 
(i)	Prohibitions of drivers. It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab to solicit business for any hotel or to attempt to divert patronage from one hotel to another. Neither shall such driver engage in selling intoxicating liquors or, solicit business for any house of ill repute nor use his vehicle for any purpose other than the transporting of passengers. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-13)
Sec. 18-134. - Accidents. 
All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of any taxicab which results in death or injury to any person, or in damage to any vehicle or to any property in an amount exceeding the sum of $100.00 shall be reported within 24 hours from the time of occurrence to the police department on a form to be furnished by the police department. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-14)
Sec. 18-135. - Manifests. 
(a)	Every taxicab driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which is recorded all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip and amount of fare, and all such completed manifests shall be returned to the owner by the driver at the conclusion of his tour of duty. The forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the owner and shall be of a character approved by the chief of police. 
(b)	Completed manifests shall be retained and preserved in a safe place by the owner of the taxicab business for at least the calendar year next preceding the current calendar year, and shall be made available to the chief of police upon request. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-15)
Sec. 18-136. - Open stands. 
(a)	The city council is authorized and empowered to establish open stands in such place or places upon the streets of the city as it deems necessary for the use of taxicabs operated in the city, taking into account the need for such stands and the convenience to the general public. 
(b)	Open stands shall be used by the different drivers on a first come, first served basis. The driver shall pull on to the open stand from the rear and shall advance forward as the cabs ahead pull off. Drivers shall stay within five feet of their cabs. Drivers shall not solicit passengers or engage in loud or boisterous talk while at an open stand. Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing a passenger from boarding the taxicab of his choice that is parked at an open stand. 
(c)	Private vehicles shall not be permitted to occupy any space upon the streets that has been established as an open stand. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-16)
Sec. 18-137. - Refusal of passengers to pay legal fare. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any taxicab after having hired the taxicab, and it shall likewise be unlawful for any person to hire any taxicab with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. 
(Code 1988, § 9-3-17)
Secs. 18-138—18-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, ch. 102.
State Law reference— Restricting adult businesses, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3.

Sec. 18-156. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore and adult video store mean a commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)	Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)	Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. A principal business purpose need not be a primary use of an establishment so long as it is a significant use based upon the visible inventory or commercial activity of the establishment. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment that regularly features: 
(1)	Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity;
(2)	Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; 
(3)	Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(4)	Persons who engage in erotic dancing or performances that are intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an audience or customers. 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that: 
(1)	Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way that advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)	Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 24 hours; or
(3)	Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than 24 hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear, in person, in a state of nudity and/or seminudity, and/or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
Director means the chief of police and such employee of the police department as he may designate to perform the duties of the director under this division. 
Employee means a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, contract, or independent basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise, and whether or not such person is paid a salary, wage, or other compensation by the operator of such business. The term "employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises, nor does the term "employee" include a person exclusively on the premises as a patron or customer. 
Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)	The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2)	The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)	The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; 
(4)	The relocation of any sexually oriented business; or
(5)	A sexually oriented business or premises on which the sexually oriented business is located. 
Licensed day care center means a facility licensed by the state, whether situated within the city or not, that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than 12 children under 14 years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than 24 hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers. 
Licensee means a person in whose name a license under this division has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license under this division. 
Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons for consideration. 
Nudity and a state of nudity mean the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, female genitals, or vulva, with less than a fully opaque covering; or a female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Premises means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a business license pursuant to section 18-159. 
Seminude and seminudity mean the appearance of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point. These definitions shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency or nude model studio. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)	The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if fully and opaquely covered; 
(2)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
Specified criminal activity means any of the following offenses: 
(1)	Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness, indecent exposure; indecency with a child; sexual assault; molestation of a child; or any similar sex-related offenses to those described in this subsection under the criminal or penal code of this state, other states, or other countries. 
(2)	For which:
a.	Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.	Less than ten years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; 
c.	Less than ten years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period; 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)	The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts, whether covered or uncovered; 
(2)	Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)	Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(4)	Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1)—(3) of this definition. 
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor areas exist on the date of the original issuance of a license. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)	The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(2)	The transfer of securities that form a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or 
(3)	The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § II; Ord. No. 08-12-01-01, §§ 3, 5, 1-5-2009)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-157. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)	Purpose. It is the purpose of this division to regulate sexually oriented businesses and related activities to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this division have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this division to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this division to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials. 
(b)	Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the city council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (I 986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); Arcara v. Cloud Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697, (1986); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); Iacobucci v. City of Newport, Ky, 479 U.S. 92 (1986); United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Key, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053 (9th Cir. 1986); Hang On, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); and South Florida Free Beaches, Inc. v. City of Miami, 734 F.2d 608 (11th Cir. 1984), as well as studies conducted in other cities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas; and findings reported in the Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986), the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On the Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), and statistics obtained from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the city council finds that: 
(1)	Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
(2)	Crime statistics show that all types of crimes, especially sex-related crimes, occur with more frequency in neighborhoods where sexually oriented businesses are located. see, e.g., Studies of the cities of Phoenix, Arizona; Indianapolis, Indiana; and Austin, Texas. 
(3)	Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. see, e.g., California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109, 111 (1972); see also Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 377. 
(4)	Offering and providing such booths and/or cubicles encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. See, e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 376-77. 
(5)	Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses, for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. See, e.g., Arcara v. Cloud Book, Inc., 478 U.S. 697, 698 (1986); see also Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 376-77. 
(6)	At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections, and shigella infections. See, e.g., Study of Fort Meyers, Florida. 
(7)	For the period 1985—1995, the total number of reported cases of AIDS in the United States caused by the immunodeficiency virus was 523,056. See, e.g., Statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
(8)	Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of persons testing positive for HIV antibody test in the state. 
(9)	The total number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United States reported during the ten-year period 1985-1995 was 367,796. See, e.g., Statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
(10)	The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high level, with a total of 1,250,581 cases reported during the period 1993-1995. See, e.g., Statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
(11)	The surgeon general of the United States in his report of October 22, 1986, advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug use, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn. 
(12)	According to the best scientific evidence available, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. See, Findings of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
(13)	Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. See, e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 377. 
(14)	Numerous studies and reports have determined that bodily fluids, including semen and urine, are found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented films. See e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 377. 
(15)	Nude dancing in adult establishments encourages prostitution, increases sexual assaults, and attracts other criminal activity. See, e.g., Barnes v. Glen Theatre, 501. U.S. 560, 583 (1991). 
(16)	Nude dancing in adult establishments increases the likelihood of drug-dealing and drug use. See, e.g., Key, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053, 1056 (9th Cir. 1986) 
(17)	The findings noted in subsections (b)(1) through (16) of this section raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(18)	Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(19)	A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(20)	Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on the premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult establishments. 
(21)	The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and criminal activity. 
(22)	It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct this division is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
(23)	The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business license has been convicted of a sex-related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention to this division. 
(24)	The barring of such individuals from operation or employment in sexually oriented businesses for a period of ten years for a previous felony conviction serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(25)	The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of this city will be promoted by the enactment of this division. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § I)
Sec. 18-158. - Classification. 
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)	Adult arcades;
(2)	Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
(3)	Adult cabarets;
(4)	Adult motels;
(5)	Adult motion picture theaters;
(6)	Adult theaters;
(7)	Escort agencies; and
(8)	Nude model studios.
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § III; Ord. No. 08-12-01-01, § 4, 1-5-2009)
Sec. 18-159. - License required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful:
(1)	For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the director pursuant to this division; 
(2)	For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work and/or perform services on the premises of the sexually oriented business, if such employee is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented business employee license issued to such employee by the director pursuant to this division; 
(3)	For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business if such person is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented business employee license issued to such person by the director pursuant to this division. 
It shall be a defense to subsections (a)(2) and (3) of this section if the employment is of limited duration and for the sole purpose of repair and/or maintenance of machinery, equipment or the premises. Violation of any provision within this subsection shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(b)	An application for a sexually oriented business license must be made on a form provided by the city. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or a diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Prior to issuance of a license, the premises must be inspected by the health department, fire department, building department and zoning department. 
(c)	An application for a sexually oriented business employee license must be made on a form provided by the city. 
(d)	All applicants for a license must be qualified according to the provisions of this division. The application may request, and the applicant shall provide, such information, including fingerprints, as to enable the city to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established under this division. The applicant has an affirmative duty to supplement an application with new information received subsequent to the date the application was deemed completed. 
(e)	If a person who wishes to own and operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a business license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a business license as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity that wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a ten percent or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a business license as applicant. 
(f)	Applications for a business license, whether original or renewal, must be made to the director by the intended operator of the enterprise. Applications must be submitted to the office of the director or the director's designee during regular working hours. Application forms shall be supplied by the director. The following information shall be provided on the application form: 
(1)	The name, street address and mailing address, if different, of the applicant;
(2)	A recent photograph of the applicant;
(3)	The applicant's driver's license number, Social Security Number, and/or his state or federally issued tax identification number; 
(4)	The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a general description of the services to be provided. If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, he must: 
a.	State the sexually oriented business's fictitious name; and
b.	Submit the required registration documents;
(5)	Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending charges, of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 18-156, and if so, the "specified criminal activity" involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each; 
(6)	Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license under this division or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the business license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, is or has been a partner in a partnership or an office, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is or was licensed under a sexually oriented business ordinance the business license of which has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the business license was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation; 
(7)	Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, holds any other licenses under this division or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses; 
(8)	The single classification of license, as found in section 18-158, for which the applicant is filing; 
(9)	The telephone number of the establishment;
(10)	The address, and legal description of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be located; 
(11)	If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the owner acquired the establishment for which the business license is sought, and the date on which the establishment began operations as a sexually oriented business at the location for which the business license is sought; 
(12)	If the establishment is not in operation, the expected startup date, which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of the business license. If the expected startup date is to be more than ten days following the date of issuance of the business license, then a detailed explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time schedule and plan for accomplishing the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected delay; 
If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet of floor space, films, videocassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the application requirements set forth in this section. 
(g)	Each application for a business license shall be accompanied by the following:
(1)	Payment of the application fee;
(2)	If the establishment is a state corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto; 
(3)	If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in this state, together with all amendments thereto; 
(4)	If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws of the state, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto; 
(5)	If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto; 
(6)	Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed; 
(7)	If the persons identified as the fee owner of the tract of land in subsection (g)(6) of this section are not also the owners of the establishment, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or other document evidencing the legally enforceable right of the owners or proposed owners of the establishment to have or obtain the use and possession of the tract or portion thereof that is to be used for the establishment for the purpose of the operation of the establishment; 
(8)	A current certificate and straightline drawing prepared within 45 days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school, public park or recreation area, or family-oriented entertainment business within 1,500 feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted; 
(9)	Any of subsections (g)(2)—(8) of this section shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished the director with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current. 
(h)	Applications for an employee license to work and/or perform services in a sexually oriented business, whether original or renewal, must be made to the director by the person to whom the employee license shall issue. Each application for an employee license shall be accompanied by payment of the application fee in full. Application forms shall be supplied by the director. Applications must be submitted to the office of the director or the director's designee during regular working hours. Each applicant shall be required to give the following information on the application form: 
(1)	The applicant's given name, and any other names by which the applicant is or has been known, including "stage" names and/or aliases; 
(2)	Age, and date and place of birth;
(3)	Height, weight, hair color and eye color;
(4)	Present residence address and telephone number;
(5)	Present business address and telephone number;
(6)	Date, issuing state, and number of photo driver's license, or other state-issued identification card information; 
(7)	Social Security Number; and
(8)	Proof that the individual is at least 21 years old.
(i)	Attached to the application form for a license shall be the following:
(1)	A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. 
(2)	A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant, in this or any other city, county, state, or country, has ever had any license, permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the name under which the license was sought and/or issued, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the application. 
(3)	A statement whether the applicant has been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending charges, of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 18-156 and, if so, the "specified criminal activity" involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each. 
(j)	Every applicant for a license shall contain a statement under oath that:
(1)	The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application, and that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct; and 
(2)	The applicant has read the provisions of this division.
(k)	A separate application and business license shall be required for each sexually oriented business classification as set forth in section 18-158. 
(l)	The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business or employee license. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § IV)
Sec. 18-160. - Issuance of license. 
(a)	Upon the filing of an application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the director shall issue a temporary license to such applicant. The application shall then be referred to the appropriate city departments for investigation to be made on the information contained in the application. The application process shall be completed within 45 days from the date of the completed application. After the investigation, the director shall issue an employee license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true: 
(1)	The applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(2)	The applicant is under the age of 21 years;
(3)	The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 18-156; 
(4)	The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule, or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this division; or 
(5)	The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the city within two years of the date of the current application. 
If the sexually oriented business employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null and void. Denial, suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in subsection (i) of this section. 
(b)	A license issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the sexually oriented business. The employee shall keep the license on his person at all times while engaged in employment or performing services on the sexually oriented business premises so that such license may be available for inspection upon lawful request. 
(c)	A license issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the director that the applicant has not been convicted of any "specified criminal activity" as defined in this division, or committed any act during the existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The decision whether to renew a license shall be made within 45 days of the completed application. The renewal of a license shall be subject to the fee as set forth in section 18-161. Nonrenewal of a license shall be subject to appeal as set forth in subsection (i) of this section. 
(d)	If application is made for a sexually oriented business license, the director shall approve or deny issuance of the license within 45 days of receipt of the completed application. The director shall issue a license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true: 
(1)	An applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(2)	An applicant is under the age of 21 years;
(3)	An applicant, or a person with whom the applicant is residing, has been denied a license by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months, or whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months; 
(4)	An applicant, or a person with whom the applicant is residing, is overdue in payment to the city in taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him in relation to any business; 
(5)	An applicant, or a person with whom the applicant is residing, has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 18-156; 
(6)	The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the health department, fire department and the building department as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances; 
(7)	The license fee required under this division has not been paid;
(8)	An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with one or more of the provisions of this division. 
(e)	A license issued pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business, and the classification as set forth in section 18-158 for which the license is issued. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(f)	The health department, fire department, building department and zoning department shall complete their certification that the premises are in compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of receipt of the completed application by the director. The certification shall be promptly presented to the director. 
(g)	A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one classification, as set forth in section 18-158. 
(h)	In the event that the director determines that an applicant is not eligible for a sexually oriented business license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within 45 days of the receipt of the completed application by the director, provided that the applicant may request, in writing at any time before the notice is issued, that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten days in order to make modifications necessary to comply with this division. 
(i)	An applicant may appeal the decision of the director regarding a denial to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city secretary within 15 days after service of notice upon the applicant of the director's decision. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The director may, within 15 days of service upon him of the applicant's memorandum, submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the applicant on appeal to the city council. After reviewing such memoranda, as well as the director's written decision, if any, and exhibits submitted to the director, the city council shall vote either to uphold or overrule the director's decision. Such vote shall be taken within 21 calendar days after the date on which the city secretary receives the notice of appeal. However, all parties shall be required to comply with the director's decision during the pendency of the appeal. Judicial review of a denial by the director and city council may be made pursuant to section 18-166. 
(j)	A license issued pursuant to subsection (d) of this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the director that the applicant has not been convicted of any "specified criminal activity" as defined in this division, or committed any act during the existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The decision whether to renew a license shall be made within 45 days of the completed application. The renewal of a license shall be subject to the fee as set forth in section 18-161. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § V)
Sec. 18-161. - Fees. 
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license, whether new or renewal, is $500.00. The annual fee for a sexually oriented business employee license, whether new or renewal, is $50.00. These fees are to be used to pay for the cost of the administration and enforcement of this division. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § VI)
Sec. 18-162. - Inspection. 
(a)	An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, building department or other city or state departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is open for business. 
(b)	A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he refuses to promptly permit such lawful inspection of the premises, and upon conviction in the municipal court of the city shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § VII)
Sec. 18-163. - Expiration of license. 
(a)	Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 18-159. Application for renewal should be made at least 45 days before the expiration date. When made less than 45 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(b)	When the director denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § VIII)
Sec. 18-164. - Suspension. 
The director shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 45 days if he determines that the licensee or an employee of the licensee has: 
(1)	Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this division;
(2)	Operated or performed services in a sexually oriented business while intoxicated by the use of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances; 
(3)	Refused to allow prompt inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this division; 
(4)	With knowledge, permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § IX)
Sec. 18-165. - Revocation. 
(a)	The director shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 18-164 occurs and the license has been suspended within the proceeding 12 months. 
(b)	The director shall revoke a license if he determines that:
(1)	A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; 
(2)	A licensee, or a person with whom the licensee is residing, was convicted of a "specified criminal activity" on a charge that was pending prior to the issuance of the license; 
(3)	A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted the possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(4)	A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted the sale, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises; 
(5)	A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted prostitution on the premises;
(6)	A licensee has, with knowledge, operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(7)	A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sexual conduct to occur in or on the licensed premises; 
(8)	A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city or state for any taxes or fees;
(9)	A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted a person under 21 years of age to enter the establishment; 
(10)	A licensee has attempted to sell his business license, or has sold, assigned, or transferred ownership or control of the sexually oriented business to a nonlicensee; or 
(11)	A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted a person or persons to engage in specified sexual activities on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
(c)	When the director revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented license for one year from the date revocation became effective. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § X)
Sec. 18-166. - Judicial review. 
After denial of an initial or renewal application by the director and city council, or suspension or revocation of a license by the director, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction. The administrative action shall be promptly reviewed by the court. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XI)
Sec. 18-167. - No transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XII)
Sec. 18-168. - Location restrictions. 
Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted in any commercial district provided that: 
(1)	The sexually oriented business may not be operated within:
a.	One thousand five hundred feet of a church, synagogue or regular place of religious worship; 
b.	One thousand five hundred feet of a public or private elementary or secondary school;
c.	One thousand five hundred feet of a boundary of any residential district;
d.	One thousand five hundred feet of a public park;
e.	One thousand five hundred feet of a licensed day care center;
f.	One thousand five hundred feet of an entertainment business that is oriented primarily towards children or family entertainment; or 
g.	One thousand feet of another sexually oriented business.
(2)	A sexually oriented business may not be operated in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, containing another sexually oriented business classified pursuant to section 18-158. 
(3)	For the purpose of this division, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, synagogue, regular place of worship, or public or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or residential lot, or licensed day care center, or child or family entertainment business. 
(4)	For purposes of subsection (3) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented business uses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XIII)
Sec. 18-169. - Nonconforming uses; amortization. 
(a)	Any business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived that is in violation of the locational or structural configuration requirements of this division shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed two years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business that was first established and continually operated at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business is nonconforming. 
(b)	A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, synagogue, or regular place of religious worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, licensed day care center, public park, residential district, or child or family entertainment business within 1,500 feet of the sexually oriented business. This subsection applies only to the renewal of a valid business license, and does not apply when an application for a business license is submitted after a business license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XIV)
Sec. 18-170. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)	Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or a similar commercial enterprise has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the enterprise is an adult motel as that term is defined in this division. 
(b)	It is unlawful if a person, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial enterprise that does not have a sexually oriented business license, rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)	For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms "rent" and "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(d)	Violation of subsection (b) of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XV)
Sec. 18-171. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)	An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 21 years.
(b)	A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 21 years. 
(c)	Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XVI)
Sec. 18-172. - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)	A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
(b)	A person under the age of 21 years commits a misdemeanor if the person appears seminude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 21 years was in a restroom not open to the public view or visible by any other person. 
(c)	A person commits a misdemeanor if the person appears in a state of nudity, or with knowledge, allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)	A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XVII)
Sec. 18-173. - Additional regulations concerning public nudity. 
(a)	It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who, with knowledge and intent, appears in person in a nude or seminude condition in a sexually oriented business, unless the person is an employee who, while nude or seminude, is at least ten feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet from the floor. 
(b)	It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while nude or seminude in a sexually oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any employee, while such employee is nude or seminude in the sexually oriented business and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(c)	It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while nude or seminude, to touch a patron or the clothing of a patron, or for a patron to touch a nude or seminude employee or the clothing of a nude or seminude employee, and upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XVIII)
Sec. 18-174. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films and videos. 
(a)	A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction that depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)	Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the business license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The director may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)	The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(3)	No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the director or his designee. 
(4)	It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)	The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of the entire area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of the entire area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)	It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted, as designated in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(7)	No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
(8)	The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(9)	It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (a)(8) of this section is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(10)	No licensee shall allow an opening of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths.
(11)	No person shall make any attempt to make an opening of any kind between the viewing booths or rooms. 
(12)	The operator of the sexually oriented business shall, during each business day, inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist. 
(13)	The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
(14)	The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor. 
(b)	A person having a duty under subsections (1)—(13) of this section commits a misdemeanor if he, with knowledge, fails to fulfill that duty, and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XIX)
Sec. 18-175. - Exterior portions of sexual oriented businesses. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from a point outside the establishment. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the provisions of this division. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color. This subsection shall not apply to a sexually oriented business if the following conditions are met: 
(1)	The establishment is a part of a commercial multiunit center; and
(2)	The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multiunit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multiunit center. 
(d)	Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business. 
(e)	A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, and upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XX)
Sec. 18-176. - Signs. 
(a)	Notwithstanding any other city ordinance, code, or regulation to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than the one primary sign and one secondary sign, as provided in this section. 
(b)	Primary signs shall have no more than two display surfaces. Each such display surface shall: 
(1)	Not contain any flashing lights;
(2)	Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
(3)	Not exceed 75 square feet in area; and
(4)	Not exceed ten feet in height or ten feet in length.
(c)	Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain only the name of the enterprise. 
(d)	Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print type, size and color. The background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color. 
(e)	Secondary signs shall have only one display surface. Such display surface shall:
(1)	Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
(2)	Not exceed 20 square feet in area;
(3)	Not exceed five feet in height and four feet in width; and
(4)	Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the enterprise.
(f)	The provisions of subsection (b)(1) of this section and subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall also apply to secondary signs. 
(g)	Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XXI)
Cross reference— Signs, ch. 74. 
Sec. 18-177. - Sale, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(a)	The sale, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business is prohibited. 
(b)	Any violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XXII)
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Sec. 18-178. - Persons younger than 21 years of age prohibited from entry; attendant required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than 21 years of age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time the sexually oriented business is open for business. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented businesses' regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to prohibit any person under the age of 21 years from entering the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of 21 years unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: 
(1)	A valid operator's, commercial operator's or chauffeur's driver's license; or
(2)	A valid personal identification certificate issued by the state reflecting that such person is 21 years of age or older. 
(c)	Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XXIII)
Sec. 18-179. - Massages or baths administered by person of opposite sex. 
It shall be unlawful for any sexually oriented business, regardless of whether in a public or private facility, to operate as a massage salon, massage parlor or any similar type business where any physical contact with the recipient of such services is provided by a person of the opposite sex. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XXIV)
Sec. 18-180. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XXV)
Sec. 18-181. - Exemptions. 
It is a defense to prosecution under this division that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)	By a proprietary school, licensed by the state, a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)	By a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XXVI)
Sec. 18-182. - Notices. 
(a)	Any notice required or permitted to be given by the director or any other city office, division, department or other agency under this division to any applicant, operator or owner of a sexually oriented business may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for the license, or any notice of address change that has been received by the director. Notices mailed as provided in this subsection shall be deemed given upon their deposit in the Untied States mail. In the event that any notice given by mail is returned by the postal service, the director or his designee shall cause it to be posted at the principal entrance to the establishment. 
(b)	Any notice required or permitted to be given to the director by any person under this division shall not be deemed given until and unless it is received in the office of the director. 
(c)	It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the license application and each operator to furnish notice to the director in writing of any change of residence or mailing address. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XXVII)
Sec. 18-183. - Injunction. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid business license or in violation of section 18-168 is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violation. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation. 
(Ord. of 10-15-2001, § XXVIII)
Secs. 18-184—18-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INSURER LICENSE FEES 

Sec. 18-201. - Levied. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $40.00. For each separate business location in excess of one which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $14.00. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 10-4-1993, § 1)
State Law reference— Authority to require a license fee, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
Secs. 18-202—18-209. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - GROUP HOMES AND PERSONAL CARE HOMES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 15-09-08, § 2, adopted Sept. 8, 2015, repealed the former div. 7, § 18-210, and enacted a new div. 7 as set out herein. The former div. 7 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 11-11-21-A, § 2, adopted Nov. 21, 2011.

Sec. 18-210. - Special use permit required for group home. 
(a)	Applications; content and requirements. All operators of group homes, including those facilities operating as a nonconforming use, are required to apply for and obtain a special use permit from the city and to register the facility with the city. The applicant shall apply for the permit required under this chapter with the city manager or his designee on forms provided by the city and shall provide such information as may be reasonably required, including, without limitation, the following: 
(1)	The name and address of the applicant;
(2)	If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of all officers and members of the board of directors if the applicant is a corporation (hereafter sometimes "principals"). If the applicant is an entity other than a corporation, the applicant shall state the type of entity, principals, and where organized; 
(3)	The name and address of the manager of the facility;
(4)	Whether the applicant, manager (or, if the applicant is not an individual, the principals of the entity) have ever had a state or local government license for operation of a group home and, if so, the issuing jurisdiction and duration of each; 
(5)	Whether any license referenced in subsection (a)(4) above was suspended, revoked, or otherwise terminated by the licensing authority and, if so, identify the licensing authority, the action taken and the reason for the action taken against the license; 
(6)	Criminal background information, and a release for the city to obtain same, to allow for review of the standards contained in subsection (b)(1) below; 
(7)	The nature of services and treatments to be provided to residents of the facility and the maximum number of residents, excluding staff, to be housed at any one time; 
(8)	Whether the applicant contends that the facility at issue is operating as a nonconforming use, and, if so, the date the facility began operation; and 
(9)	The applicant shall submit a "good neighbor plan" which contains, at minimum, the following components: 
a.	Hours of operation;
b.	Designated staff member, telephone number and administrative procedure for neighborhood complaints or concerns; and 
c.	Grounds maintenance plan.
(b)	Planning commission review; mayor and council action. Within 60 days of the submission of a completed application, the planning commission shall review the contents of said application and transmit to the mayor and council a recommendation of approval or denial of same. The mayor and council shall thereafter act on a completed special use permit application within 45 days of the recommendation of the planning commission. The mayor and council may grant the special use permit only if the requirements of this Code section are met, and the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)	No applicant, manager (or principal if the applicant is an entity) shall have been convicted within the ten years preceding the application of any felony, any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or any sexually related crime. This requirement shall apply with respect to the laws of this state, other states, the United States, and other countries. A plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this section. Sentencing as first offender status shall not be considered as a conviction if the sentence was successfully completed without any violation of probation and with no adjudication of guilt ever being entered; 
(2)	The applicant, manager (or principal if the applicant is an entity) shall not have had revoked, suspended or otherwise terminated, within the ten years preceding his application, any license or permit to operate a group home issued by any governmental entity; and 
(3)	The applicant must be of good moral character and a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. 
(c)	Automatic revocation. Any special permit issued pursuant to this section shall become invalid if the appropriate permits or licenses required by the State of Georgia are revoked or otherwise terminated. Such special permits shall also become invalid if the facility is not operated for a continuous period of six months. 
(d)	Accreditation requirements. Each group home governed by this division shall be required to apply for and received accreditation by the Council on Accreditation (Group Living Services) or Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities (Group Home Care) within two years of the receipt of the special use permit required hereunder, and shall maintain such accreditation while operating the group treatment facility. 
(e)	Annual permitting; fee. Each facility shall be required to pay an annual permit fee of $20.00, said fee to be paid no later than January 1 of each year of operation. For a facility which begins operation subsequent to January 1, the permit fee shall not be prorated but shall be due in full for the remainder of the calendar year. 
(f)	Additional requirements for each group home. 
(1)	Floor area requirements. To avoid unsafe or unhealthy conditions that may be produced by the overcrowding of persons living in these facilities, a minimum floor area per person shall be required below. 
(2)	Total interior living space. A minimum of 175 square feet of interior living space shall be provided per residing facility resident. Interior living space shall include sleeping space and all other interior space accessible on a regular basis to all facility residents. 
(3)	Minimum sleeping areas. A minimum of 70 square feet shall be provided in each sleeping space for single occupancy. A minimum of 60 square feet of sleeping space shall be provided for each bed in a sleeping space for multiple occupancy. 
(4)	Bathroom facilities. One full bathroom with toilet, sink, and tub or shower per five residents plus an additional toilet and sink shall be provided for each additional group of three persons or any fraction thereof. 
(5)	Lot and building requirements. Each facility shall meet the lot and building requirements of the district in which it is located. All applicable fire safety codes, building codes, and housing codes shall likewise apply. 
(6)	Off-street parking. Minimum of two off-street parking spaces or one parking space per shift employee, plus one per number of permanent vehicles stored at the facility shall be provided, whichever is greater. 
(7)	Authorization from state and county agencies. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to obtain all appropriate state or county licenses prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(g)	Suspension or revocation. 
(1)	Any special permit which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city to any permittee under this Code section may be suspended or revoked for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing has been held by the mayor and council for the purpose of considering any such suspension or revocation. At least five days prior to such hearing, written notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing, and a statement of the charge or charges upon such hearing is to be held, shall be given to the holder of such permit for which suspension or revocation is to be considered. 
(2)	Due cause for the suspension or revocation of a permit shall consist of a violation of any laws or ordinances applicable to regulating such group home, violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purposes of regulating such facility, or failure of the permittee or his employees to promptly report to the police department any violation of the law or ordinances, any breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence which may occur in or upon the permitted premises. 
(3)	A decision shall be rendered in writing by the mayor and council within ten days of the hearing referenced hereinabove. Appeal of such decision shall be by writ of certiorari or any other lawful process to the Superior Court of Troup County. 
(Ord. No. 15-09-08, § 2, 9-8-2015)
Sec. 18-211. - Special use permit required for personal care home. 
(a)	Applications; content and requirements. All operators of personal care homes, including those facilities operating as a nonconforming use, are required to apply for and obtain a special use permit from the city and to register the facility with the city. The applicant shall apply for the permit required under this chapter with the city manager or his designee on forms provided by the city and shall provide such information as may be reasonably required, including, without limitation, the following: 
(1)	The name and address of the applicant;
(2)	If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of all officers and members of the board of directors if the applicant is a corporation (hereafter sometimes "principals"). If the applicant is an entity other than a corporation, the applicant shall state the type of entity, principals, and where organized; 
(3)	The name and address of the manager of the facility;
(4)	Whether the applicant, manager (or, if the applicant is not an individual, the principals of the entity) have ever had a state or local government license for operation of a personal care home and, if so, the issuing jurisdiction and duration of each; 
(5)	Whether any license referenced in subsection (a)(4) above was suspended, revoked, or otherwise terminated by the licensing authority and, if so, identify the licensing authority, the action taken and the reason for the action taken against the license; 
(6)	Criminal background information, and a release for the city to obtain same, to allow for review of the standards contained in subsection (b)(1) below; 
(7)	The nature of services and treatments to be provided to residents of the facility and the maximum number of residents, excluding staff, to be housed at any one time; and 
(8)	Whether the applicant contends that the facility at issue is operating as a nonconforming use, and, if so, the date the facility began operation. 
(b)	Planning commission review; mayor and council action. Within 60 days of the submission of a completed application, the planning commission shall review the contents of said application and transmit to the mayor and council a recommendation of approval or denial of same. The mayor and council shall thereafter act on a completed special use permit application within 45 days of the recommendation of the planning commission. The mayor and council may grant the special use permit only if the requirements of this Code section are met, and the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)	No applicant, manager (or principal if the applicant is an entity) shall have been convicted within the ten years preceding the application of any felony, any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or any sexually related crime. This requirement shall apply with respect to the laws of this state, other states, the United States, and other countries. A plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this section. Sentencing as first offender status shall not be considered as a conviction if the sentence was successfully completed without any violation of probation and with no adjudication of guilt ever being entered; 
(2)	The applicant, manager (or principal if the applicant is an entity) shall not have had revoked, suspended or otherwise terminated, within the ten years preceding his application, any license or permit to operate a personal care home issued by any governmental entity; and 
(3)	The applicant must be of good moral character and a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. 
(c)	Automatic revocation. Any special permit issued pursuant to this section shall become invalid if the appropriate permits or licenses required by the State of Georgia are revoked or otherwise terminated. Such special permits shall also become invalid if the facility is not operated for a continuous period of six months. 
(d)	Annual permitting; fee. Each facility shall be required to pay an annual permit fee of $20.00, said fee to be paid no later than January 1 of each year of operation. For a facility which begins operation subsequent to January 1, the permit fee shall not be prorated but shall be due in full for the remainder of the calendar year. 
(e)	Suspension or revocation. 
(1)	Any special permit which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city to any permittee under this Code section may be suspended or revoked for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing has been held by the mayor and council for the purpose of considering any such suspension or revocation. At least five days prior to such hearing, written notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing, and a statement of the charge or charges upon such hearing is to be held, shall be given to the holder of such permit for which suspension or revocation is to be considered. 
(2)	Due cause for the suspension or revocation of a permit shall consist of a violation of any laws or ordinances applicable to regulating such personal care home, violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purposes of regulating such facility, or failure of the permittee or his employees to promptly report to the police department any violation of the law or ordinances, any breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence which may occur in or upon the permitted premises. 
(3)	A decision shall be rendered in writing by the mayor and council within ten days of the hearing referenced hereinabove. Appeal of such decision shall be by writ of certiorari or any other lawful process to the Superior Court of Troup County. 
(Ord. No. 15-09-08, § 2, 9-8-2015)
Secs. 18-212—18-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTERS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note—Inasmuch as Ord. No. 11-11-21-A, § 2, adopted Nov. 21, 2011, amended art. II by the addition of a new div. 7, the provisions formerly designated div. 7, "Sexual Encounter Centers," have been renumbered div. 8.

Sec. 18-301. - Findings; definitions; sexual encounter centers prohibited. 
(a)	The mayor and council make the following findings:
(1)	The operation of a sexual encounter center for purposes of providing the opportunity to engage in, or the opportunity to view, live sex acts is declared to be a disorderly house and a public nuisance per se which should be prohibited; and 
(2)	The operation of a sexual encounter center contributes to the spread of sexually transmitted diseases; and 
(3)	The operation of a sexual encounter center is inimical to the health, safety, general welfare and morals of the inhabitants of the city. 
(b)	In this section, unless the context otherwise requires:
Consideration means the payment of money or the exchange of any item of value for: 
(1)	The right to enter the premises, or any portion thereof;
(2)	The right to remain on the premises, or any portion thereof;
(3)	The right to purchase any item permitting the right to enter, or to remain on, the premises, or any portion thereof; or 
(4)	The right to a membership permitting the right to enter, or remain on, the premises, or any portion thereof. 
Live sex act means any act whereby one or more persons engage in a live performance or live conduct which contains oral sexual contact or sexual intercourse. 
Operate and maintain means to organize, design, perpetuate or control. "Operate and maintain" includes providing financial support by paying utilities, rent, maintenance costs or advertising costs, supervising activities or work schedules, and directing or furthering the aims of the enterprise. 
Oral sexual contact means oral contact with the penis, vulva or anus. 
Sexual encounter center means any business or premises in which one or more persons may view, or participate in, a live sex act for consideration. 
Sexual intercourse means penetration into the penis, vulva or anus by any part of the body or by any object or manual masturbatory contact with the penis or vulva. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate and maintain a sexual encounter center.
(d)	Operation of a sexual encounter center is a public nuisance per se which may be abated by order of the municipal court. 
(e)	The city attorney, in the name of the city, may apply to the municipal court for an order permitting the city to abate violations of this section. 
(f)	After notice to the operator of a sexual encounter center, the municipal judge shall conduct a hearing and take evidence as to whether a sexual encounter center is being operated in violation of this section. 
(g)	If, at the conclusion of the hearing, the municipal judge determines that a sexual encounter center is being operated in the city in violation of this section, an order shall be entered authorizing the city to abate the violation by closing the business. A copy of the order shall be delivered to the operator of the sexual encounter center and mailed to the owner of the property upon which the sexual encounter center is located. 
(h)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to the non-obscene presentation, showing or performance of any play, drama, or ballet in any theater, concert hall, fine arts academy, school, institution of higher education, or similar establishment as a form of expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of sex for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 08-12-01-01, § 2, 1-5-2009)
Secs. 18-302—18-349. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - MASSAGE AND SPA ESTABLISHMENTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 13-12-02, § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 2013, effectively repealed the former div. 9, §§ 18-350—18-357, and enacted a new div. 9 as set out herein. The former div. 9 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 09-12-21-A, § 1, adopted Dec. 21, 2009; and Ord. No. 11-11-21-B, § 1, adopted Nov. 21, 2011. Said division has been renumbered from div. 8 as set forth in the ordinance.

Sec. 18-350. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the term: 
Massage and massage therapy mean the application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft issue of the body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore health and well-being. The term includes complementary methods, including without limitation the external application of water, superficial heat, superficial cold, lubricants, salt scrubs, or other topical preparations and the use of commercially available electromechanical devices, which do not require the use of transcutaneous electrodes and which mimic or enhance the actions possible by the hands; the term also includes determining whether massage therapy is appropriate or contraindicated, or whether referral to another health care provider is appropriate. "Massage therapy" shall not include the use of ultrasound, fluidotherapy, laser, and other methods of deep thermal modalities. 
Massage apparatus means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric, or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power, which is utilized by a "massage therapist" for the purpose of administering a "massage." 
Massage establishment means any place of business established for profit which employs or contracts with one or more "massage therapists" or operates or maintains for profit one or more "massage apparatus," and which for good or valuable consideration, offers to the public facilities and personnel for the administration of "massages" or "massage therapy." This term shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the State of Georgia. 
Massage therapist/practitioner/masseur/masseuse means any person who administers "massage" or "massage therapy" for consideration. 
Spa establishment means any business established for profit that provides personal services such as body wraps, hydro mineral wraps, body polish, body wash, baths and hydro tub soak. 
(Ord. No. 13-12-02, § 1, 12-2-2013)
Sec. 18-351. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)	All licenses issued under this division shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the certificate or permit only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city and state law. 
(b)	Nothing in this division shall be construed to regulate, prevent, or restrict in any manner: 
(1)	Any physician, chiropractor, physical therapist, or similar professional licensed and regulated by or through the state while engaged in the practice of said profession. 
(2)	Any hospital or other professional health care establishment separately licensed as such by the state. 
(3)	Any other individual or entity expressly exempted from local legislation by the laws of the state. 
(c)	Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to regulate the practice of massage therapy or require licensure of a massage therapist. The intention of this division, to the contrary, is to regulate any place of business where massage therapy is performed for compensation. 
(Ord. No. 13-12-02, § 1, 12-2-2013)
Sec. 18-352. - License required; application. 
(a)	All persons, firms or corporations desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of a massage establishment shall, before engaging in such trade, business, profession, make application for a license in the form and manner prescribed in this division. The application shall include the information required on all license returns, along with the following additional information: 
(1)	If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall, in the foregoing information, submit a complete list of the stockholders of said corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations, and provide the name and address for an agent who resides in the city authorized to receive legal process and notices under this division on behalf of the applicant. 
(2)	If the applicant is a partnership or other legal entity not a corporation, such must submit information as is reasonably required to disclose the names, current addresses and occupations of the principals of the organization, as well as the name and address for an agent who resides in the city authorized to receive legal process and notice under this division on behalf of the applicant. 
(3)	If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation must be chartered under the laws of the State of Georgia or authorized by the Secretary of State to do business in Georgia. 
(4)	If the applicant is an individual, the applicant must submit a copy of a valid driver license or a valid I.D. card as reliable proof thereof. No license for a massage establishment shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. Additionally, if the applicant does not reside in the city, the applicant must provide the name and address for an agent who resides in the city authorized to receive legal process and notices under this division on behalf of the applicant. 
(5)	A certified copy of the State of Georgia license of any individual who is to perform "massage therapy" on the licensed premises. 
(b)	All persons, firms or corporations desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of a spa establishment shall, before engaging in such trade, business, profession, make application for a license in the form and manner prescribed in this division. The application shall include the information required on all license returns, along with the following additional information: 
(1)	If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall submit a complete list of the stockholders of said corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations, and provide the name and address for an agent who resides in the city authorized to receive legal process and notices under this division on behalf of the applicant. 
(2)	If the applicant is a partnership or other legal entity not a corporation, such must submit information as is reasonably required to disclose the names, current addresses and occupations of the principals of the organization, as well as the name and address for an agent who resides in the city authorized to receive legal process and notice under this division on behalf of the applicant. 
(3)	If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation must be chartered under the laws of the State of Georgia or authorized by the Secretary of State to do business in Georgia. 
(4)	If the applicant is an individual, the applicant must submit a copy of a valid driver license or a valid I.D. card as reliable proof thereof. No license for a spa establishment shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence Additionally, if the applicant does not reside in the city, the applicant must provide the name and address for an agent who resides in the city authorized to receive legal process and notices under this division on behalf of the applicant. 
(c)	No person, firm or corporation or its officers shall be granted a license for a massage or spa establishment unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the city manager or his designee that such person, partners in the firm, officers and directors of the corporation are of good moral character and have not been convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, disorderly conduct, misdemeanor involving any type of sexually related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs for a period of the ten years prior to the date of application for such license. No person, partner or officer under the age of 18 shall be granted a license for massage establishment or spa. 
(Ord. No. 13-12-02, § 1, 12-2-2013)
Sec. 18-353. - Expiration and renewal. 
All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file application, with the requisite fee heretofore provided, with the city manager on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any renewal applications received after November 30 shall pay in addition to said annual fee a late charge of 20 percent. If license application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. 
(Ord. No. 13-12-02, § 1, 12-2-2013)
Sec. 18-354. - General operating provisions. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license under this division to annually file, along with the renewal application for the license, the name of all employees, their home address, home telephone number and place of employment. The holder of a license issued under the provisions of this division must additionally report changes in the list of employees with the names and require supplemental information for new employees to be filed with the city manager or his designee within ten days from the date of such change. To the extent any employee performs massage therapy on the licensed premises, such information shall include a certified copy of the state-issued massage therapy license for such individual. 
(b)	The establishment shall have an owner, manager, or supervisor on premises at all hours the establishment offers massage therapy. If during an inspection there is no owner, manager, or supervisor on premises, the establishment must cease operations and close to the public until an owner, manager or supervisor is on premises. 
(c)	The establishment shall be subject to inspection at any time during business hours by the city manager or his designee and by the chief of police or his designee to ensure compliance with this division. 
(d)	All employees, massage therapist and other persons on the premises, with the exception of the customers, shall be completely clothed at all times when administering a massage. For the purposes of this division, "completely clothed" shall mean having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms and neck and shall mean having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or skirt, and said paints or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two inches above the knee. All clothes worn in compliance with this division shall be entirely nontransparent. 
(e)	No business of a massage therapist shall be engaged in and no place of business shall be open for business except within and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(f)	A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment. Signs shall comply with the sign requirements of this Code. 
(g)	Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with any applicable building code, and additionally at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth. 
(h)	Ordinary beds or mattresses shall not be permitted in any establishment.
(i)	The establishment, prior to the issuance of the license, must be in compliance with all applicable building and life safety codes, and the building to be occupied must have a valid, current certificate of occupancy. 
(j)	It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to patronize any massage establishment unless such person carries with him/her at the time of such patronage, a written order directing the treatment to be given by a regularly licensed physician or written permission of the underage person's parent or guardian. It shall be the duty of the holder of a license to determine the age of the person attempting to patronize a massage establishment and to prohibit such patronage by an underage person. 
(k)	No massage practitioner, or any of his employees, shall manipulate, fondle or handle the sexual organs or anus of any person. 
(Ord. No. 13-12-02, § 1, 12-2-2013)
Sec. 18-355. - Employees massage/sauna card (MSC); procedure. 
(a)	No person may be employed by an establishment holding a license under this division unless such person has been issued a massage/sauna card (MSC card) by the police department indicating the person to be employed is eligible for such employment. 
(b)	All persons subject to the provisions of this section shall, prior to their first work in an establishment holding a license under this division, report to the police department for issuance of a massage/sauna card. 
(c)	The police department shall make a complete and exhaustive search relative to the criminal record of any person so employed. The MSC card shall be denied or approved, as the case may be, within seven days from a complete application in the event the applicant employee shall have been convicted within a period of five years immediately prior to the application for a MSC card of the following laws: any federal, state or local law of any crime involving illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, disorderly conduct, misdemeanor involving any type of sexually related crime, any theft or violence against any person or property, any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs, any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, or disorderly conduct in connection with the operation of the massage or sauna establishment or on or about the premises of the massage or sauna establishment. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere, a plea of acceptance of first offender status or the forfeiture of a bond by a person charged with a crime. The police chief may, after investigation and within his discretion, waive any misdemeanor conviction or a conviction in which there is a plea of nolo contendere. 
(d)	Any determination of eligibility for employment issued hereunder shall expire 12 months from the date of the issuance thereof unless earlier canceled by the police department. The police department may prescribe regulations for certifying the eligibility for continued employment without the necessity of further search relative to the record of that person. The police department may prescribe reasonable fees and times for certifying eligibility for employment and the fees shall be paid by the employer or the employee at the time request for eligibility certification is made. Any such fees shall be approved by the mayor and council of the city. 
(e)	The licensee, or the manager of the licensed premises, shall be responsible for the conduct or actions of the employees and shall have the responsibility of insuring compliance with the provisions of this Code section. 
(Ord. No. 13-12-02, § 1, 12-2-2013)
Sec. 18-356. - Issuance of license. 
(a)	When a license application is submitted in proper form, including all information and exhibits required herein, the application shall be accepted and a review of the application and an inspection and investigation shall be conducted by the city manager or his designee. The city manager or his designee shall transmit a copy of the completed application to the police department. Upon the payment by the applicant of the required fees, the police department, or its designee, shall cause to be conducted a background investigation of the criminal history as required within section 18-352, and shall transmit a summary of the investigation results to the city manager or his designee. 
(b)	Upon receipt of the background investigation, and completion of review of the application in accordance with the terms of this division, the city manager or his designee shall, within 60 days of the initial application, act on the application. The city manager or his designee shall deny any application that: 
(1)	Fails to meet each of the application requirements specified herein; or
(2)	Contains false information in the application or attached documents.
(Ord. No. 13-12-02, § 1, 12-2-2013)
Sec. 18-357. - Grounds for revocation and suspension of license. 
The license of a massage establishment or spa may be revoked or suspended upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)	Failure of the holder to maintain initial requirements for obtaining the license.
(2)	Any of the holder's employees, independent contractors or agents has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, or disorderly conduct in connection with the operation of the massage establishment or on or about the premises of the massage establishment. 
(3)	Failure of the holder to maintain correct and accurate records as required by this division. 
(4)	The holder, his/her employees, agents, or independent contractors associated with the establishment have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any part of this division. 
(Ord. No. 13-12-02, § 1, 12-2-2013)
Sec. 18-358. - Hearings. 
No license for a massage or spa establishment shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. 
(1)	The city manager shall provide written notice to the applicant or license holder of any order to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or license holder of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any applicant or license holder who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the city manager may have a review thereof by appeal to the mayor and council. Such appeal shall be by written petition filed in the office of the city manager within 15 days after the final order or action of the city manager. 
(2)	A hearing shall be conducted on any appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the city manager unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city manager. 
(3)	The decision of the Mayor and Council shall be rendered within three days from the close of the hearing, shall be in writing and shall be forwarded to the appellant. 
(4)	The decision of the Mayor and Council shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of such finding by certiorari to the Superior Court of Troup County. An aggrieved party shall have all other remedies provided by law or at equity. 
(Ord. No. 13-12-02, § 1, 12-2-2013)
Secs. 18-359—18-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - PAWN SHOPS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 13-01-07B, § 1, adopted Jan. 7, 2013, set forth provisions intended for use as div. 7, §§ 18-230—18-238. Inasmuch as div. 7 already existed and in order to maintain sequential numbering of Code provisions, said ordinance provisions have been included as herein set out in div. 10.

Sec. 18-381. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the term: 
Pawnshop means any business wherein a substantial part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, consignment, trade or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatsoever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or other legal entity however organized. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07B, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 18-382. - Purpose; legislative intent. 
It is hereby declared to be within the public welfare for this city to impede the sale of stolen property by requiring pawnshop operators within the city to timely post electronically information obtained from pledges and sellers in a format available to and usable by law enforcement agencies. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07B, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 18-383. - Permit application. 
(a)	Any person, before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop or similar place of business, shall file an application with the city clerk for a permit to conduct such business. The application for permit shall state the name and address of the applicant, the street and number at which the applicant proposes to operate such business and the names and addresses of all persons having a financial interest in such business. 
(b)	The application for license shall list all convictions, guilty pleas, or pleas of nolo contendere by or against the applicant for a period of ten years preceding the date of such application for violation of any felony or misdemeanor of any state, or of the United States, or any municipal ordinance other than for traffic violations, together with a waiver sufficient to authorize investigation of the criminal record of the applicant, if any. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07B, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 18-384. - License—Issuance. 
(a)	No license shall be granted pursuant to this division to any applicant who has been convicted, plead guilty or plead nolo contendere to any felony as described in section 18-383(b) above. Moreover, no license shall be issued to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted to be a permanent resident of the United States. 
(b)	(1)	The disqualifying convictions and pleas as described above in subsection (a) shall apply to the principals of the applicant as well, which shall be defined as: 
a.	All partners in the event the applicant is a partnership; and
b.	In the event the applicant is a corporation, all officers and any shareholder holding more than 20 percent ownership of said corporation. 
(2)	In order to determine the identity of such individuals, all applications shall contain a full and complete sworn and notarized statement by each applicant of all material facts as determined by the city manager to be relevant to the requirements of this chapter and further shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.	If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners and a copy of the partnership agreement; 
b.	If a corporation, the names of the officers, the name of the manager, and the names of all shareholders holding more than 20 percent of any class of corporate stock and a copy of the articles of incorporation; and 
c.	The name of any other entity having a financial interest in the establishment for which a license is sought. 
(c)	No license shall be issued under this division to any person until the permit required by this division shall have been granted by the council. After the permit has been issued by the council, the city manager shall issue such license as may be required for the conduct of such business on payment of the amount required therefor. 
(d)	All applications for license shall be approved or disapproved within 60 days of a completed application. Any application not acted upon within said period shall be deemed denied. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07B, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 18-385. - Same—Revocation; suspension. 
Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this division, or such other ordinances and regulations as may be adopted by the council for the conduct of the business of a pawnshop, shall be subject to having his permit and license to conduct such business revoked or suspended for a definite period of time in the discretion of the council, after proper notice and hearing. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07B, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 18-386. - Records and information to be recorded. 
Every person engaged as a pawnshop operator within the city shall secure from every person from whom he receives any used or previously owned tangible personal property, whether by purchase or through pledge, trade, pawn or exchange, the following: 
(1)	Government-issued photo identification card, such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport; 
(2)	The name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, date of birth, social security or driver's license number, along with a capture of the thumb and index finger print via inkless finger pad or inkless tab set; 
(3)	A digital photograph clearly showing a frontal view of the subject's face (digital images shall be labeled with the date and time of the transaction and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption); 
(4)	Written description of property or item received, including serial number or other identifying marks, if available, and digital photograph of property or item, labeled with date and time of transaction. 
The operator or dealer shall maintain the above information, digital photographs, and fingerprint for a period of three years and make the same available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07B, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 18-387. - Report to police; required format. 
Every operator or dealer located within the city shall make a computer-generated daily report, in such format as prescribed by the chief of police, of all transactions that occurred during the 24-hour period, ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. A report shall be made for each day the operator or dealer transacts business. Daily reports shall be filed electronically by posting to a law enforcement web site designated by the chief of police. Where technological problems prevent posting the daily report electronically, a printed, typed or legibly handwritten report shall be delivered to the police department in lieu thereof. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07B, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 18-388. - Holding period for goods. 
Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnshop license who takes goods on pawn or buys goods, taking full title thereto, the word "goods" being used in this section in the broadest sense and including all kinds of personal property, shall hold such goods so taken in pawn or purchased for at least 30 days before disposing of the same by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07B, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 18-389. - Purchases from minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawn shop license to take goods on pawn or buy goods from any person who is less than 18 years of age. The pawnbroker or his agent or employee shall have the burden of requiring identification sufficient to show that any person entering such a transaction is not less than 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07B, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Secs. 18-390—18-419. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS DEALERS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 13-01-07C, § 1, adopted Jan. 7, 2013, set forth provisions intended for use as div. 8, §§ 18-250—18-258. Inasmuch as div. 8 already existed and in order to maintain sequential numbering of Code provisions, said ordinance provisions have been included as herein set out in div. 11.

Sec. 18-420. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Precious gems means any precious or semi-precious stone, including but not limited to diamond, ruby, sapphire or emerald which is cut and polished. 
Precious metals means gold, silver, or platinum or any alleged alloy containing gold, silver or platinum. 
Precious metals and gems dealer means any person, partnership, sole proprietorship, corporation, association, or other entity engaged in the business of purchasing, selling, bartering, or acquiring in trade any precious metals or gems from persons or sources, other than manufacturers or licensed dealers for resale, in its original form or as changed by melting, reforming, remolding, or for resale as scrap, or in bulk. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07C, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 18-421. - Permit application; exemption. 
(a)	Any person, before beginning the business of operating a precious metals and gems dealer or similar place of business, shall file an application with the city clerk for a permit to conduct such business. The application for permit shall state the name and address of the applicant, the street and number at which the applicant proposes to operate such business and the names and addresses of all persons having a financial interest in such business. 
(b)	The application for license shall list all convictions, guilty pleas, or pleas of nolo contendere by or against the applicant for a period of ten years preceding the date of such application for violation of any felony of any state or of the United States, together with a waiver sufficient to authorize investigation of the criminal record of the applicant, if any. 
(c)	Any person who holds a valid pawn shop license pursuant to division 10 of this article shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this division, but shall comply with the requirements of Code sections 18-424 through 18-427 of this division if said license holder meets the definition of a "precious metals and gems dealer" as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07C, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 18-422. - License; issuance. 
(a)	No license shall be granted pursuant to this division to any applicant who has been convicted, plead guilty or plead nolo contendere to any felony as described in section 18-421(b) above. Moreover, no license shall be issued to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted to be a permanent resident of the United States. 
(b)	(1)	The disqualifying convictions and pleas as described above in subsection (a) shall apply to the principals of the applicant as well, which shall be defined as: 
a.	All partners in the event the applicant is a partnership; and
b.	In the event the applicant is a corporation, all officers and any shareholder holding more than 20 percent ownership of said corporation. 
(2)	In order to determine the identity of such individuals, all applications shall contain a full and complete sworn and notarized statement by each applicant of all material facts as determined by the city manager to be relevant to the requirements of this chapter and further shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.	If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners and a copy of the partnership agreement; 
b.	If a corporation, the names of the officers, the name of the manager, and the names of all shareholders holding more than 20 percent of any class of corporate stock and a copy of the articles of incorporation; and 
c.	The name of any other entity having a financial interest in the establishment for which a license is sought. 
(c)	No license shall be issued under this division to any person until the permit required by this division shall have been granted by the council. After the permit has been issued by the council, the city manager shall issue such license as may be required for the conduct of such business on payment of any amount required therefor. 
(d)	All applications for license shall be approved or disapproved within 60 days of a completed application. Any application not acted upon within said period shall be deemed denied. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07C, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 18-423. - Revocation; suspension. 
Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this division or such other ordinances and regulations as may be adopted by the council for the conduct of the business of a precious metals and gems dealer shall be subject to having his or her permit and license to conduct such business revoked or suspended for a definite period of time in the discretion of the council, after proper notice and hearing. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07C, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 18-424. - Record of transactions; inspection by police. 
All precious metals and gems dealers shall keep books wherein shall be entered an accurate, detailed description of all precious metals and gems sold to them. Such description shall include the name of the maker of the article, any identifying mark or number and a description of the kind of material of which it is made so that such article can be reasonably and definitely identified. There shall also be entered in such book the name, address and age of the person by whom such article was deposited or sold, and the date and hour the transaction was made. If the precious metals and gems dealer accepting such article is not personally acquainted with the person making such deposit or sale, the precious metals and gems dealer shall require identification sufficient to show the name, age, and address of such person and sufficient to show that the identification information given is not fictitious or false. Such book and the articles pledged or sold shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by the police. Upon refusal of the proprietors at any time to submit their shops to a thorough inspection by the police, the shops shall be immediately closed and the permit and license revoked. A digital picture of the seller of all precious metals and gems should be kept on file for inspection by police to prevent the use of fraudulent documents such as driver's license and social security cards, along with a capture of the thumb and index finger print of every such seller via inkless finger pad or inkless tab set. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07C, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 18-425. - Holding period for goods. 
Any precious metals and gems dealer or person operating under a precious metals and gems dealer license who takes or buys precious metals or gems, taking full title thereto, shall hold such goods so taken or purchased for at least seven days before disposing of the same by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07C, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 18-426. - Report to police; required format. 
Every operator or dealer located within the city shall make a computer-generated daily report, in such format as prescribed by the chief of police, of all transactions that occurred during the 24-hour period, ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. A report shall be made for each day the operator or dealer transacts business. Daily reports shall be filed electronically by posting to a law enforcement web site designated by the chief of police. Where technological problems prevent posting the daily report electronically, a printed, typed or legibly handwritten report shall be delivered to the police department in lieu thereof. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07C, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 18-427. - Purchases from minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any precious metals and gems dealer, or his or her agents or employees to receive or purchase any precious metals or gems of any character or description from any person who is less than 18 years of age. Any precious metals and gems dealer or his or her agents or employees shall have the burden of requiring identification sufficient to show that any person making a sale is not less than 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07C, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Sec. 18-428. - Hours of operation. 
The hours within which precious metals or gems dealer may remain open shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07C, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Chapter 22 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82.
State Law reference— Municipality authorized to act as trustee of cemetery funds, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-5.

Sec. 22-1. - Prices of lots and grave openings. 
The prices of cemetery lots and grave openings shall be as fixed from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 5-3-1)
Sec. 22-2. - Driving off roadways. 
No person shall drive a motor vehicle on cemetery property other than on the driveways designated for that purpose. 
(Code 1988, § 5-3-2)
Sec. 22-3. - Removal of flowers. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to remove flowers placed in the Myrtle Hill Cemetery for a period of seven days after the flowers are so placed except by a member of the family of the deceased or by someone designated in writing by a member of the family and turned in to the city at city hall. The writing shall show the date the flowers are to be removed, the date signed, the name of the designated person, and the name of the grave, area or plot from which the flowers are to be removed. 
(b)	After the first seven days that flowers are placed in Myrtle Hill Cemetery, the flowers and their frames shall become the property of the city and shall be removed by the cemetery custodian or his assistant. Frames will be sold by the city to the highest bidder. 
(Code 1988, § 5-3-3)
Chapter 26 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Establishment, jurisdiction, powers, § 5.05.
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 50; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94.
State Law reference— The recorder's court was renamed the municipal court, pursuant to 1986 Ga. Laws, page 784 and O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1. The municipal court has concurrent jurisdiction with the state court over the following offenses: marijuana possession of one ounce or less, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6; vehicle operation without effective insurance, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-7; shoplifting of $100.00 or less, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-9; furnishing alcoholic beverages to and purchases and possession of alcoholic beverages by minors, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; driver's license offenses, § 40-5-124; traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-376.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 26-31—26-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL COURT RULES AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 26-46. - Time, place for holding court. 
The municipal court shall be held on the second and fourth Mondays of each month or at such other times and places as the judge may designate, with approval of the city council. No change in the dates and times of sessions shall be made without 30 days' public notice being given. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-1)
Sec. 26-47. - Police attendance. 
The chief of police, or his designee, and one other police officer shall attend each session of the municipal court with the chief or his designee serving as bailiff and the additional officer acting as court clerk. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-2)
Sec. 26-48. - Assistant judges. 
At the first meeting of the city council in January of each year, one or more assistant judges shall be appointed by the city council to serve in the absence or disability of the judge. Such assistant judges shall take such oath of office as designated and administered by the city attorney. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-3)
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-81 et seq. 
Sec. 26-49. - Appearance; bond forfeitures. 
All persons cited for or charged with offenses shall appear before the court on their designated court date; provided that bond forfeitures may be allowed for such speeding charges and nonresident traffic charges as approved from time to time by the judge. 
(Code 1988, § 2-3-4)
Sec. 26-50. - Administrative fee. 
In addition to any fine, forfeiture, cost or other monetary penalty imposed upon a defendant, there shall be assessed the following court costs: an administrative fee of $40.00, a processing fee of $25.00, and a technology fee of $25.00. The technology fee component of the court costs established herein shall be accounted for separately and dedicated to the procurement of technology serving the court system. 
(Ord. No. 09-03-16-A, § 1, 3-16-2009)
Sec. 26-51. - Prosecuting attorney. 
The city manager may appoint a prosecuting attorney of the municipal court who shall have the duties and authorities as outlined in Georgia law to represent the city in municipal court. Such individual shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and admitted to practice before the appellate courts of this state. The prosecuting attorney shall serve on a part-time basis, and will be otherwise allowed to engage in the private practice of law. The part-time prosecuting attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager, and the city manager shall also be authorized to appoint such substitute prosecuting attorneys as may be in the best interests of the city. Nothing herein shall prohibit the city attorney from prosecuting ordinance violations in municipal court or otherwise representing the interests of the city in municipal court or appeals therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 12-12-17, § 1, 12-17-2012)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-12-17, § 1, adopted Dec. 17, 2012, set forth provisions intended for use as § 26-50. Inasmuch as § 26-50 already existed, said provisions have been redesignated 26-51. 
Secs. 26-52—26-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BAIL BONDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Acceptance of cash bonds for offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-10; bond forfeiture, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70; authority to require bond and forfeiture, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-4.

Sec. 26-66. - Persons prohibited from signing bonds. 
No attorney at law and no official authorized to admit to bail, nor any city, or county official, shall become surety on any bond. 
(Code 1988, § 9-4-21)
State Law reference— Elected officials prohibited from engaging in bail bond business, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-8. 
Sec. 26-67. - Officer taking insufficient bail. 
Any person, authorized to take bail, who takes bail which he knows to be insufficient, or accepts as surety any professional bondsman who is not qualified to act as surety, shall be guilty of an act of misconduct and shall be subject to disciplinary action by his department head in accordance with existing rules and regulations for such misconduct. 
(Code 1988, § 9-4-22)
Sec. 26-68. - Condition of the bond. 
If a person is admitted to bail for his appearance in the municipal court, the condition of the bail bond shall be that he will appear for hearing to answer the charge at the time and date specified on the copy of charges, and will submit himself to the orders and processes of the municipal judge trying the case and will not depart without leave of the municipal judge. 
(Code 1988, § 9-4-23)
Sec. 26-69. - Prenumbered receipt as evidence of payment. 
(a)	Any professional bondsman who accepts money or any other consideration for any bail bond which he executes, must for each payment received, give to the person paying the money or giving the consideration a prenumbered receipt as evidence of payment, which receipt shall state the date, name of the principal, amount of money or consideration received and purpose for which received, number of the power of attorney form attached to the bond, penal sum of the bond, and the name of the person making payment or giving consideration. 
(b)	A duplicate copy of each receipt issued must be retained by the professional bondsman as a part of his record and shall be produced for examination upon request by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 9-4-24)
Sec. 26-70. - Forfeiture of bond; surrender of custody of defendant. 
(a)	In the event of a forfeiture of the bond, the surety shall have the right to surrender the defendant into custody, without the return of any money paid for the signing of the bond. 
(b)	An appearance bond shall not be forfeited unless the clerk of the court gave the surety at least 72 hours' written notice, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, before the time of the required appearance of the principal. Notice shall not be necessary if the time for appearance is within 72 hours from the time of arrest, provided the time for appearance is stated on the bond, or where the principal is given actual notice in open court. 
(c)	The nonappearance of a defendant by the end of the court day where the call of the docket for the specific offense occurs shall be deemed a bond forfeiture, where such is allowed by the municipal judge. 
(Code 1988, § 9-4-25)
Sec. 26-71. - Judgment on bond. 
(a)	The judge shall, at the end of the court day, upon the failure of the principal to appear, forfeit the bond and order an execution hearing not sooner than 120 days but not later than 150 days after such failure to appear. Notice of the execution hearing shall be served within ten days of such failurre to appear by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the surety at the address listed on the bond or by personal service to the surety within ten days of such failure to appear at its home officer or to its designted registered agent. Service shall be considered complete upon the mailing of such certified notice. 
(b)	If at the execution hearing it is determined that judgement should be entered, the judge shall so order and a writ of fieri facias shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the court where such judgement is entered. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all bail bonds, whether returnable to superior court, state court, probate court, magistrate court, or municipal court. 
(Code 1988, § 9-4-26)
State Law reference— Execution hearing on failure of principal to appear, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-71. 
Sec. 26-72. - Conditions not warranting forfeiture of bond for failure to appear; remission of forfeiture. 
(a)	No judgement shall be rendered on a forfeiture of any appearance bond if it is shown to the satisfaction of the court by the written statement of a licensed physician that the principal on the bond was prevented from attending by some mental or physical disability. 
(b)	No judgement shall be rendered on a forfeiture of any appearance bond if it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that the prinicipal on the bond was prevented from attending because he or she was detained by reason of arrest, sentence, or confinement in a penal institution or jail in the State of Georgia, or so detained in anothr jurisdiction, or because he or she was involuntarily confined or detained pursuant to court order in a mental institution in the State of Georgia or in another jurisdiction. An official written notice of the holding institution in which the principal is being detained or confined shall be considered proof of the prinicipal's detention or confinement and such notice may be sent from the holding institution by mail or delivered by hand or by facsimile machine. Upon the presentation of such written notice to the clerk of the proper court, the prosecuting attorney, and the sheriff or other law enforcement officer having jurisdiction over the case, along with a letter of intent to pay all costs of returning the principal to the jurisdiction of the court, such notice and letter shall serve as the surety's request for a detainer or hold to be placed on the principal. Should there be a failure to place a detainer or hold within 15 days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, and after such presentation of such notice and letter of intent to pay costs, the surety shall then be relieved of the liability for the appearance bond without further order of the court. 
(c)	No judgement shall be rendered on a forfeiture of any appearance bond if it is shown to the satification of the court that prior to the entry of the judgement on the forfeiture the principal on the bond is in the custody of a responsible law enforcement agency. An official written notice of the holding institution in which the principal is being detained or confined shall be considered proof of the principal's detention or confinement and such notice may be sent from the holding institution by mail or delivered by hand or by facsimile machine. Upon presentation of such written notice to the clerk of the proper court, the prosecuting attorney, and law enforcement officer having jurisdiction over the case along with a letter of intent to pay all costs of returning the principal to the jurisdiction of the court, such notice and letter shall serve as the surety's request for a detainer or hold to be placed against the principal. Should there be a failure to place a detainer or hold within 15 days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, and after presentation of such notice and letter of intent to pay costs, the surety shall then be relieved of the liability for the appearance bond without further order of the court. 
(d)	In cases in which subsection (d)(3) of this section is not applicable, on application filed within 120 days from the payment of judgement, the court shall order remission under the following conditions: 
(1)	Provided the bond amount has been paid within 120 days after judgement and the delay has not prevented prosecution of the pincipal and upon application to the court with prior notice to the prosecuting attorney of such application, said court shall direct remission of 95 percent of the bond amount remitted to the surety if the surety locates the principal in the custody of the sheriff in the jurisdiction where the bond was made or in another jurisdicition causing the return of the principal to the jurisdiction where the bond was made, apprehends, surrenders, or produces the principal, if the apprehension or surrender of the prinicpal was substantially procured or caused by the surety, or if the location of the principal by the surety caused the adjudication of the principal in the jurisdicition in which the bond was made. Should the surety, within two years of the principal's failure to appear, locate the principal in the custody of the sheriff in the juridiction where the bond was made or in another jurisdiction causing the return of the principal to the jurisdiction where the bond was made, apprehend, surrender, or produce the principal, if the apprehension or surrender of the principal is substantially procured or caused by the surety, or if the location of the principal by the surety causes the adjudication of the principal in the jurisdicition in which the bond was made, the surety shall be entitled to a refund of 50 percent of the bond amount. The application for 50 percent remission shall be filed no later than 30 days following the expiration of the two-year period following the date of judgement; 
(2)	Remission shall be granted upon condition of the payment of court costs and of the expenses of returning the principal to the jurisdiction by the surety; or 
(3)	If, within 120 days after judgement, the surety surrenders the principal to the responsible law enforcement officer, or said surrender has been denied by the responsible law enforcement officer, or surety locates the principal in custody in another jurisdiction, the surety shall only be required to pay costs and five percent of the face amount of the bond, which mount includes all surcharges. If it is shown to the satisfaction of the court, by the presentation of competent evidence from the law enforcement officer or the holding institution, that said surrender has been made or denied or that the principal is in custody in another jurisdiction or that said surrender has been made and that five percent of the face amount of the bond and all costs have been tendered to the sheriff, the court shall direct that the judgement be marked satisfied and that the writ of execution, fi fa., be canceled. 
State Law reference— Conditions not warranting forfeiture, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-72. 
Sec. 26-73. - Cancelling the bond. 
When the condition of the bond is satisfied or the forfeiture of the bond has been discharged or remitted, the judge shall make an order cancelling the bond. Conviction or acquittal of the defendant shall satisfy the terms of the bond written by any bail bondsman. 
(Code 1988, § 9-4-27)
Chapter 30 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Corporate powers, § 3.01 et seq.
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.

Sec. 30-1. - Conduct of municipal elections. 
(a)	The mayor and council of the city authorizes the judge of the probate court of the county to conduct any or all elections within the city pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Election Code (O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.) and to perform all duties as superintendent of elections as specified therein. 
(b)	With reference to any such election, the city shall pay to the county probate judge the actual cost incurred in performing those election functions requested to be performed. 
(c)	The city clerk is designated the clerk for handling qualification of candidates.
(Ord. of 9-18-1995, § 2-2-1)
State Law reference— Superintendent, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-70 et seq.; poll officers, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-90 et seq.; duties of superintendent, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-400 et seq. 
Sec. 30-2. - Voter registration deadline. 
The deadline for registration of voters in city elections shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-224. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-2)
State Law reference— Registration of voters, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-224. 
Sec. 30-3. - Notice of candidacy; filing dates. 
Notice of the opening and closing dates for candidates to qualify shall be published in the call for election pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-3)
Editor's note— This section of the 1988 Code has been changed to conform to state statute. 
State Law reference— Filing notice of candidacy, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132. 
Sec. 30-4. - Qualification fees. 
The qualification fee shall be three percent of the total gross salary of the office paid in the preceding calendar year including all supplements authorized by law if a salaried office; provided, however, that for the offices of clerk of the superior court, judge of the probate court, sheriff, tax commissioner, and magistrate, the qualifying fee shall be three percent of the minimum salary provided by general law for the office, exclusive of cost-of-living increases and longevity increases. If not a salaried office, a reasonable fee shall be set by the city, such fee not to exceed three percent of the income derived from such city office by the person holding the office for the preceding year or more than $35.00 for a municipal office. 
(Code 1988, § 2-2-4)
State Law reference— Fixing and publishing qualification fees, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131; filing notice of candidacy, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132. 
Sec. 30-5. - Polling place. 
As required by the provisions of the Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-260), the Hogansville High School Gymnasium on Main Street, Hogansville, Georgia is hereby designated as the polling place for all general and special primaries and all general and special elections to be held in the city. 
State Law reference— Polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-260 et seq. 
Sec. 30-6. - Votes required for election. 
The number of votes required for election to the office of mayor and council shall be a plurality of the votes cast. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2002)
State Law reference— Number of votes required for election, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-501. 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; unsafe buildings, § 14-261 et seq.; flood damage prevention, ch. 42; historical preservation, ch. 46; parks and recreation facilities, ch. 58; planning and development, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 102.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 09-11-16-B, § 1, adopted Nov. 16, 2009, repealed the former art. II, §§ 34-31—34-38, and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control and derived from Code 1988, § 8-7-2; and §§ II—IX of an ordinance adopted July 16, 2001.
State Law reference— Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq.; Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; Metropolitan River Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-40 et seq.; Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; minimum standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6; permits for land disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-7, 12-7-9; stop work orders, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-14; exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17.

Sec. 34-31. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Hogansville Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 09-11-16-B, § 1, 11-16-2009)
Sec. 34-32. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs) includes sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Roosevelt Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 34-34(c) of this article. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 34-33(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority (LIA) means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: 
(1)	Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)	Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Roosevelt Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or
(2)	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or
(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 09-11-16-B, § 1, 11-16-2009)
Sec. 34-33. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968; 
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying;
(3)	Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)	Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 34-34(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)	Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)	Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)	Any public water system reservoir.
(Ord. No. 09-11-16-B, § 1, 11-16-2009)
Sec. 34-34. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)	General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities if requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsection (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)	Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)	Best management practices as set forth in this subsection and subsection (c) of this section shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (2) of this subsection (b) or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)	A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)	Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)	The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)	[Minimum protections.] The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum;
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented;
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable;
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property;
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)	Land disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 34-34(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)	Except as provided in subsection (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 5, pt. 6, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.	No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.	Stream crossings for water lines; or
2.	Stream crossings for sewer lines; and
(16)	There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 2, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.	No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.	Stream crossings for water lines; or
2.	Stream crossings for sewer lines.
(d)	Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections 34-34(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)	The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 09-11-16-B, § 1, 11-16-2009)
Sec. 34-35. - Application/permit process. 
(a)	General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)	Application requirements. 
(1)	No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 34-34(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)	A fee in the amount of $100.00 per project plus $20.00 per lot contained within such project shall be charged for each application. 
(4)	In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(5)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 34-39(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(7) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(6)	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(7)	The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)	Plan requirements. 
(1)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 34-34(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)	Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)	Permits. 
(1)	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)	No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsection 34-39(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)	Any land disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)	The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)	The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 09-11-16-B, § 1, 11-16-2009)
Sec. 34-36. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)	Representatives of the city will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this ordinance, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)	The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(c)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 09-11-16-B, § 1, 11-16-2009)
Sec. 34-37. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)	Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)	Stop work orders. 
(1)	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; and 
(3)	All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; 
(4)	When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all active construction on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)	Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 34-35(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)	Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 09-11-16-B, § 1, 11-16-2009)
Sec. 34-38. - Education and certification. 
(a)	Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)	For each site on which land disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)	Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)	If a state general permittee who has operational control of land disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said subsection. 
(Ord. No. 09-11-16-B, § 1, 11-16-2009)
Sec. 34-39. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)	Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city manager or his designee within 15 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)	Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Troup County. 
(Ord. No. 09-11-16-B, § 1, 11-16-2009)
Sec. 34-40. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)	The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)	No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any Waters of the State as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 09-11-16-B, § 1, 11-16-2009)
Secs. 34-41—34-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATERSHED PROTECTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 34-61—34-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATERSHED PROTECTION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-76. - Definitions. 
When used in this division, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings given to them in this section. Terms not defined in this section shall have their customary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area located adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed. 
Corridor means all the land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed. 
Development and single development mean any project or group of related projects constructed or planned for construction on a single parcel or on contiguous parcels under single ownership. 
Hazardous material means any substance defined as "hazardous material" by the state department of natural resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. 
Hazardous waste means those solid and liquid wastes or combinations thereof that may cause or contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious, irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness, or which pose a substantial threat to human health when improperly handled. 
Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples include buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools or patios. 
Land disturbing activity means any operation that involves excavation or filling of land; clearing of vegetation; and construction, rebuilding, or alteration of an existing structure. The term "land disturbing activity" does not include ordinary maintenance and landscaping activities; yard and grounds maintenance; individual home gardens; repairs or minor modifications to a single-family residence; or the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
Natural vegetated area means an undeveloped area largely free from human disturbance where naturally occurring vegetation is allowed to remain undisturbed or is enhanced and maintained by human intervention. Activities specifically allowed in such an area include: 
(1)	Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, shellfish and other wildlife. 
(2)	Outdoor recreational activities including hunting, fishing, trapping, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, swimming, canoeing, skeet and trap shooting, education, scientific research and nature trails. 
(3)	Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads, structures and utilities used in the service of the public, provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that negative effects on the previous nature of the land shall be minimized. 
(4)	Limited excavating, filling and land disturbance necessary for the repair and maintenance of structures necessary to the uses permissible in the area as set out in this definition. 
Nonconforming use means a land use activity, building or structure legally established prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this division was derived, or subsequent amendment to it, that would not otherwise be permissible under the provisions of this division. 
Perennial stream means a stream which flows throughout the year, as indicated by a solid blue line on United States Geological Survey (USGS) seven-minute topographic series maps (scale of 1/24,000). 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a reservoir, defined by its normal pool level. 
Setback measurement means a measurement from the banks of any river, creek, stream, spring or body of water. 
Surface water means any river, creek, stream, spring or body of water located within the watershed. 
Toxic means any chemical substance that has been defined as toxic by the state environmental protection department (EPD), the state department of agriculture (GDA), or the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States (EPA). 
Underground water means any water located underground in the watershed. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel, pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads. 
Water supply reservoir means an impoundment of water for the purpose of providing drinking water to one or more governmentally-owned public drinking water systems. 
Water supply watershed means the drainage area (watershed) of lands upstream of a governmentally-owned public drinking water intake or water supply reservoir. 
(Ord. of 3-21-1994, § 1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-77. - Purpose and intent. 
This division is enacted pursuant to the laws of the state for the following purposes: 
(1)	To establish measures to protect the quality of the present and future water supply for the city; 
(2)	To minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply;
(3)	To maintain the yield of the water supply watershed; and
(4)	To establish regulations for the management of Blue Creek Reservoir.
(Ord. of 3-21-1994, § 2)
Sec. 34-78. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the provisions of this division and those of some other ordinance or statute apply to the same subject matter, that ordinance requiring the highest or most strict standard shall govern. 
(Ord. of 3-21-1994, § 3)
Sec. 34-79. - Establishment of the watershed protection district. 
The Hogansville Watershed Protection District is hereby designated and shall comprise the land that drains to the water supply intakes from the stream banks and the reservoir boundary to the ridge line of the city watershed. The boundary of the watershed protection district is defined by the ridgeline of the watershed within a radius of seven miles upstream of the water supply intakes or by the political boundaries of the city where those boundaries occur within the watershed. All lands in the district are within an area defined as a water quality critical area, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. The boundary shall be set at places readily identifiable on the watershed protection district map. 
(Ord. of 3-21-1994, § 5)
Sec. 34-80. - Conditions and performance standards. 
All uses in the watershed protection district are subject to the following conditions and performance standards: 
(1)	Buffers. A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the perennial stream as measured from the stream banks and for a distance of 150 feet from the reservoir boundary of Blue Creek Reservoir. 
(2)	Impervious surface. No impervious surface shall be constructed with a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks or within a 150-foot setback area from the reservoir boundary. 
(3)	Septic tanks. Septic tanks and the drainfields of septic tanks are prohibited within 150 feet of a stream bank or of the reservoir boundary. 
(4)	Exemptions. Exemptions from buffer and setback requirements shall be as follows: 
a.	Mining activities permitted by the state department of natural resources under the Surface Mining Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq.) are exempted from the provisions of this division. 
b.	Utilities from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions of this division in accordance with the following conditions if the utilities to be located in the buffer or setback areas cannot feasibly be located outside these areas: 
1.	The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible.
2.	The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible. 
3.	The utilities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream.
c.	Forestry and agricultural activities from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions of this division in accordance with the following conditions: 
1.	The activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the forestry commission of the state department of agriculture. 
2.	The activity shall not impair the quality of the drinking water system.
(5)	Site plans required. Except for the exemptions listed in subsection (7) of this section, all forms of development within the watershed protection district shall be required to have a site plan prepared and approved according to this division before any building permits or other development related permits may be issued or any land disturbing activity may take place. Each site plan submitted under this division shall include the following: 
a.	A site plan drawn to a scale and showing all planned improvements including the width, depth, and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, watercourses, and drainageways; water, wastewater, and stormwater facilities; and utility installations. 
b.	Location, dimensions, and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
c.	The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
d.	Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
e.	Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
f.	Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross sectional drawings. 
(6)	Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of such site plan. Significant changes to the site plan, that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount or provisions of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill, or removal of vegetation during construction, or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the building official. Minor changes such as realignment of streets, or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure, to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(7)	Exemptions from site plan requirement. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
a.	Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels.
b.	Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development.
c.	Construction of minor structures such as sheds, or additions to single-family residences.
d.	Agriculture and forestry. Normal agricultural activities including planting and harvesting of crops are exempted if they conform to best management practices established by the state department of agriculture. Agricultural activities must conform to best management practices established by the state forestry commission. 
e.	Mining activities. All mining activities that are permitted by the state department of natural resources under the Georgia Surface Mining Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq.). 
(Ord. of 3-21-1994, § 6)
Sec. 34-81. - Use limitations. 
Within the watershed protection district the following limitations on permissible uses shall apply: 
(1)	New sanitary landfills are allowed only if they have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(2)	New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited.
(3)	New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types and amounts determined by the state department of natural resources, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by the state department of natural resources. 
(4)	The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be based upon all assessment of the percentage of impervious surface present in the watershed district at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this division was derived. New impervious surface will be allowed up to the point where 25 percent of the watershed district as a whole is comprised of impervious surface. 
(5)	Recreational use of Blue Creek Reservoir is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a.	Public access shall be limited to the road and concrete boat ramp maintained by the city. 
b.	Motorized boats shall utilize electric motors only.
c.	Private docks shall be constructed with a minimum of impervious surface. The installation and maintenance of private docks shall be such to protect the integrity of the natural vegetated area and not to impair the quality of the drinking water. 
(Ord. of 3-21-1994, § 7)
Sec. 34-82. - Blue Creek Reservoir use and protection. 
(a)	Uses of the reservoir. The sole public purpose of the Blue Creek Reservoir is as a water storage impoundment for the city water system. Consequently, water will periodically be drawn from the reservoir during periods of drought and/or high demand in accordance with the city's reservoir management plan and the level of the water pool will fluctuate accordingly. Recreational activity such as boating and fishing shall be available to the general public but only with the restrictions included in this section. No commercial use of any type, for any purpose is permitted. 
(b)	Permit requirement. A permit is required for any use of Blue Creek Reservoir. 
(c)	Encroachment resolution. Items placed on project lands longer than 24 hours that are not relative to a permit become an encroachment and are subject to summary removal at the owner's expense; and if impounded, ultimately disposed of if not claimed Encroachments are classified as either major or minor. 
(1)	Minor encroachments. Minor encroachments are portable personal properties. The city generally prefers to return minor encroachments to private land. The abandonment of personal property is often in the form of solid waste such as rubber tires, Styrofoam, lumber, steel, furniture, building debris, etc. 
(2)	Major encroachments. Major encroachments are considered to be items of more substantial value and can result in civil action to force removal. Major encroachments generally include storage sheds, swimming pools, decks, screen porches or even houses and garages. 
(d)	Swimming/wading. Swimming and/or wading will not be permitted in the reservoir. 
(e)	Fishing. Fishing is permitted by the general public from public lands, or on the lake, if from private property abutting the lake prior permission must be received from the property owner. All individuals fishing in the reservoir must comply with all fishing rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources concerning safety, licenses, creel limits and all other applicable requirement. Trot lines and set or bank poles are not permitted. 
(f)	Boating. 
(1)	Except as otherwise provided in this section, no vessel shall be operated on project waters with a gasoline, diesel, or other internal combustion engine or power plant. Electric motors, canoes and kayaks are permissible. 
(2)	This section pertains to all vessels or watercraft, including, but not limited to, power boats, cruisers, houseboats, sailboats, rowboats, canoes, kayaks, jet skis, wind surfboards or any other such equipment capable of navigation on water, whether in motion or at rest. 
(3)	All vehicles or watercraft so required by applicable federal, state and local laws shall display an appropriate registration on board whenever the vessel is operated on project waters. 
(4)	The maximum speed of boats on the reservoir shall be five miles per hour.
(5)	No boat shall be operated before sunrise and after sunset.
(6)	Water skis, parasail, ski-kites and other similar devices are prohibited.
(7)	All vessels when not in actual operation shall be removed from project land and waters unless moored or stored at designated areas approved by the designated representative of the city. 
(8)	The city reserves the right to prohibit any boat and/or vehicle from the reservoir.
(g)	Docks, piers, boathouses. Private docks, boathouses, piers or related structures are prohibited. 
(h)	Public access. The city reserves the rights to, at any time, restrict or prevent the use of the reservoir during periods of emergency or circumstances demanding such restrictions or preventions of use. 
(i)	Additional restrictions on use of the reservoir. The following is expressly prohibited at the reservoir and reservoir property: 
(1)	The possession or consumption of alcohol, drugs or any controlled substance;
(2)	The possession or use of firearms, ammunition, bows and arrow, loaded firing devices or explosives; 
(3)	The operation or use of any audio or noise producing devices in such a manner as to unreasonably annoy or endanger other individuals; 
(4)	Pets;
(5)	Glass containers of any kind;
(6)	Littering or dumping;
(7)	Jet-skis, wind surfer boards or similar motorized or nonmotorized vessels;
(8)	Cleaning of boats with soaps or solvents;
(9)	Boats that are not properly registered or that do not carry appropriate flotation devices; 
(10)	The discharge of any pollutants.
(j)	Damage, trespassing. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, tamper with, trespass, or alter any property, barricades, structures or appurtenances owned by the city. 
(k)	Dam and intake restrictions. The dam, intake structure and immediate surrounding area are a restricted area. No person shall enter the restricted area, attempt to operate or tamper with such structures, physically climb or attempt to reach by shoreline such structures, or in any way attempt to manipulate water levels around such structures. 
(l)	Liability. All users of the city's reservoir shall hold the city safe and harmless from any claim, cost, loss, damage or obligation whatsoever that arises from the use of the reservoir facility. 
(m)	Violators. The city reserves the right to expel persons, either temporarily or permanently, and/or revoke boating, docking, swimming, fishing or other privileges for reasons detrimental to the city or reservoir or permanently and/or revoke boating, docking, swimming, fishing or other privileges for reasons detrimental to the city and failure to follow the direction of city representatives and agents. Nothing in this section shall prohibit or limit the authority from seeking other remedies as may be provided by law. 
(n)	Watershed protection ordinance. All property abutting the reservoir and all property delineated by ordinance is subject to the provisions of this chapter in division 3, the watershed protection plan. Protection Overlay Zone adopted as an amendment to the city zoning ordinance on May 15, 2000. 
(Ord. of 10-16-2000)
State Law reference— Protection of water quality, O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, DNR Rule 391-3-16-01. 
Secs. 34-83—34-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATERSHED PROTECTION PLAN 

Sec. 34-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances. Specific buffer uses may be defined and made use of upon good showing and allowance by variance. A buffer shall be measured from the bank of the steam or the normal pool mark of the reservoir. 
Ground cover means natural plant material such as vines, shrubs, or grasses which would not normally attain a height of more than two feet. 
Impervious surface means manmade structure or surface which prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools or patios. 
Natural vegetation means natural vegetation shall connote a generally undisturbed, maintenance-free, self-perpetuating stand of vegetation comprised of indigenous shrubs, flowers, wild grasses and trees. 
Perennial stream means a stream which flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a USGS Quad map. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Shrub means a woody plant or bush of relatively low height (two to six feet), distinguished from a tree by having several items rather than a single trunk. 
Tree means a self-supporting woody plant having one or more well-defined stems or trunks, a more or less definitely formed crown, usually attaining a mature height of at least ten feet, and a trunk diameter of at least two inches measured at a point four feet above the ground. 
Tree canopy means any tree having reached a relatively tall height compared to surrounding trees and vegetation and providing shade and protection to the earth and vegetation beneath it from its foliage mass; also individual or tree groups forming an overhead cover. Examples include oak, red maple, hickory, beech, pecan, sycamore, sweetgum, poplar, ash, river birch, long leaf pine, loblolly pine and Virginia pine. 
Tree, understory means any tree, which is of relatively lesser height and spread than surrounding canopy trees, but still provides shade and a degree of protection to the earth and vegetation beneath it. Examples include dogwood, cherry, red bud, sassafras, crabapple, pear, American holly, red cedar, and magnolia. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems, and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Water supply reservoir means an impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to the public for drinking water. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream of a water supply reservoir and its tributaries. 
(Ord. of 5-15-2000, § 8-11-2)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-102. - Purpose. 
(a)	The purpose of this plan and division is to establish the protection of drinking water watersheds in the city. This protection is necessary for the enhancement of public health, safety and welfare as well as to assure that surface sources of drinking water are of high quality in order to be treated to meet all state and federal drinking water standards. 
(b)	This division is intended to operate and be enforced in conjunction with the "high water easement" owned by the city and recorded in the deed records of the county. This easement affects the property in and around the city reservoir between the ocean sea elevations of 739.0 and 714.0 feet elevation. 
(Ord. of 5-15-2000, § 8-11-1)
Sec. 34-103. - Restrictions, setbacks and buffers. 
(a)	Generally. Any property within the watershed of the city's water supply shall comply with the following: 
(1)	Permitted residential uses. Permitted residential uses shall comply with the following: 
a.	Minimum lot size per zoning district.
b.	Minimum natural buffer shall be 100 feet.
c.	Minimum setback from natural buffer for all structures, nitrification fields and impervious surfaces shall be 75 feet. 
d.	No multifamily residential or mobile home park uses allowed unless otherwise provided for by chapter 102 (zoning) of this Code. 
(2)	Permitted agricultural uses. Permitted agricultural uses shall comply with the following: 
a.	Minimum natural buffer shall be 100 feet.
b.	Minimum setback from natural buffer for all structures, nitrification fields and impervious surfaces shall be 75 feet. 
c.	No chemical treatment (herbicides, pesticides, fertilizers, or paint) allowed in the natural buffer without prior approval of the substance to be used. 
(3)	Commercial. No commercial structures or uses of any nature allowed unless otherwise provided by chapter 102 (zoning) of this Code. 
(4)	Industrial. No industrial structures or uses of any nature. 
(5)	Permitted recreational uses. Permitted recreational uses shall comply with the following: 
a.	Minimum natural buffer shall be 100 feet.
b.	Minimum setback from natural buffer for all structures, nitrification fields and impervious surfaces shall be 75 feet. 
c.	No chemical treatment (herbicides, pesticides, fertilizers, or paint) allowed in the natural buffer without prior approval of the substance to be used. 
d.	All buffers and setbacks shall apply to the reservoir and all tributaries.
(b)	Other quality considerations. 
(1)	It shall be the responsibility of every developer or builder on all construction sites to present required plans and to comply with sediment control requirements promulgated by the city, state and federal governments. 
(2)	Whenever the zoning district regulations are more restrictive than those contained in this section, the more restrictive provisions shall prevail. 
(3)	Nonresidential developments may be required to install any or all of, but not limited to, the following devices: 
a.	Oil-water separators.
b.	Grease traps.
c.	Presetting basins.
(4)	No agricultural or recreational activity that does not strictly comply with Georgia Pesticide Act of 1976, Georgia Pesticide Use and Application Act of 1976, and 1982 Ga. Laws, House Bill 1780 (O.C.G.A. § 2-1-4) as amended, or with any and all other laws of the state, will be allowed. 
(5)	No gas powered boat engines may be operated or used in the water supply or the watershed of the water supply. 
(6)	No gas operated engine may be operated to power a golf cart or personal off-road transport vehicle within the watershed of the water supply. 
(7)	Hunting within the water supply watershed is prohibited.
(8)	No septic tank or drain field shall be allowed or permitted within the water supply watershed. 
(c)	Variance. No variance of the restrictions, requirements or prohibitions of this division shall be gained without an application being made to the mayor and city council. The setback requirements shall not be varied and the only variance that may be granted, after due notice and application, shall be as to the buffer size, makeup and uses. 
(1)	Objective. 
a.	The existing watershed protection ordinances for the city were developed pursuant to the Rules of Environmental Planning Criteria, Chapter 391-3-16, O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 and provides protection for the quality of the water supply to the Blue Creek Reservoir. 
b.	The existing ordinance, as written, is without a mechanism for allowing alternate criteria or mitigative measures. This analysis provides mitigative criteria for the development of sites within a water supply watershed (Chapter 391-3-16.01). 
c.	The rationale behind requiring a buffer on each side of a perennial stream within a water supply watershed is to protect the source water by providing a vehicle for the filtering or cleansing of stormwater discharging to a stream. In the event that the regulated buffer is violated, a mechanism for providing an equal capacity of cleansing for the stormwater discharge must be supplied. 
d.	Chapter 391-3-16.01, Section 10 of the environmental planning criteria provides the legal authority for the city to review alternate or mitigative criteria with technical justification for the implementation of alternate of mitigative proposals rests with the property owner. All exceptions to this division must be submitted to the state department of natural resources, through the city for review and comment. This review must be obtained before construction plans can be reviewed for a building permit. The criteria for the development of mitigation plans is outlined in subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(2)	Request for variance. If due to physical topographical or other reasons, a site can not be developed in compliance with this division, for the purpose it was zoned, the owner/developer may request a variance. Application for a variance must develop alternate methods for providing the same level of water quality protection as afforded by natural buffer and impervious surface setback required in this division. An environmental assessment report shall be prepared in accordance with the guidance documents provided by the state department of natural resources. The report shall explain how the concepts of avoidance, minimization or mitigation have been addressed in the design of the proposed project. The report shall be prepared by one or more individuals having expertise in the following areas: erosion and sediment control, soils science and mechanics, aquatic biology, hydrology and environmental/civil engineering. A statement as to the qualifications of each of the report's authors shall be included as an appendix to the environmental assessment report. 
a.	Stream buffer variance. The general principal in the preservation of natural stream buffers are as follows: 
1.	Design the site facilities without conflict with natural stream buffers.
2.	Relocate the stream so that the site facilities will not conflict with the natural stream buffer requirement. Relocation of a stream requires a mitigation plan approved by the state department of natural resources. 
3.	A combination of site configuration and stream relocation with approved mitigation plan. 
4.	In the event reduction of the 100-foot buffer is proposed as a part of a site development plan, equivalent buffer must be provided downstream of the impacted area. An approved mitigation plan must be provided. 
5.	The least preferred method of developing a site with a perennial stream is to pipe the stream. The initial reaction of the regulatory agencies is to disallow the piping of a stream. Stream piping is normally not allowed because of the adverse effect on cold water microorganisms and the normal small fish population. However, if the steam is enclosed with properly jointed concrete pipe, it will protect the water quality of the stream segment from contaminated runoffs and therefore, piping may be justified. Piping will require mitigation of the lost stream buffer. Lost or reduced buffer shall be compensated for by providing replacement buffer or the construction of wetlands. Replacement buffer shall be provided at the rate of five times the disturbed buffer area. In the event wetlands are constructed in lieu of replacement buffer, the area of the constructed wetland is 2.5 times the disturbed buffer. Replacement buffer and constructed wetlands shall be set aside as conservation easement as outlined under O.C.G.A. tit. 44, ch. 10 (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.). 
b.	Impervious surface variance. Mitigation plans for encroachment into the required 175-foot setback of impervious surfaces from a perennial stream shall be developed in accordance with the following: 
1.	All impervious surfaces shall be contoured so that the stormwater runoff is direct to a "first flush" dry retention filter with a subsurface filtration system. 
2.	The "first flush" of a storm event is of primary importance to water quality. This term describes the washing action that stormwater has on accumulated pollutants from impervious surfaces. This flushing creates a shock loading of pollutants. Studies have determined that the "first flush" equates to the first one-half inch of rainfall over the impervious area. This runoff carries 90 percent of the pollution load from a storm. 
3.	Treatment of the first one-half inch of runoff will help minimize the effect of the stormwater on water quality. 
4.	Surface oil skimming from the "first flush" unit shall be processed through an oil/water separator. Surface discharge from oil/water separators to state waters shall comply with the Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control, state department of natural resources Chapter 391-3603(5). 
(3)	Landscape plan requirements. All applications for a variance shall be prepared an contain the information as set out in this subsection. A landscape plan is required for the replacement/replanting of buffer vegetation. 
a.	A landscape plan shall be prepared by a landscape architect registered in the state.
b.	The landscape plan check sheet and landscape plan shall contain the following information:
1.	Name, address and telephone number of property owner.
2.	Name, address, telephone number and seal of landscape architect who prepared the plan.
3.	Site location map, north point, scale of drawings.
4.	Show all pertinent site features: buildings, walks, drives, underground utilities, water bodies, etc. 
5.	Show all property lines, distances to bodies of water and/or streams, and the limits of the natural buffer areas. 
6.	Show calculations on the plan for: total area, buffer area disturbed (in acres and square feet). Indicate numbers of canopy and understory trees required by ordinance. 
7.	Planting key: botanical and common name of all plant materials proposed; quantity of each species, size of plant material (caliper, height, width); condition (i.e., balled and burlapped, container grown, bare root, collected, etc.). 
8.	Submit three copies of plans for review. One will be returned upon approval.
c.	A landscape plan shall include two canopy trees with a minimum trunk caliper of 2½ inches (at four inches from the ground) for every 1,000 square feet of disturbed buffer area on the site. 
d.	A landscape plan shall include one understory tree with a minimum trunk caliper of one inch (at four inches from the ground) for every 1,000 square feet of disturbed buffer area on the site. 
e.	Required trees shall be randomly placed so that the mature canopy covers the buffer area. 
f.	All disturbed buffer areas shall be 100 percent covered with, deciduous trees, shrubs, and/or ground cover (not requiring mowing). 
(Ord. of 5-15-2000, § 8-11-3)
Secs. 34-104—34-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER QUALITY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 34-131—34-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER CONSERVATION 

Sec. 34-146. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Code 1988, § 8-8-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-147. - Residential construction requirements. 
On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)	Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)	Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)	Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush;
(4)	Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)	Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(Code 1988, § 8-8-2)
Sec. 34-148. - Commercial construction requirements. 
On or after July 1, 1992 there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of section 34-147. 
(Code 1988, § 8-8-3)
Sec. 34-149. - Applicability. 
The requirements of section 34-147 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Code 1988, § 8-8-4)
Sec. 34-150. - Exemptions. 
(a)	New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 34-147—34-149 when: 
(1)	The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
(2)	Such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this ordinance were installed; 
(3)	Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)	Units to be installed are:
a.	Specifically designed for use by the handicapped;
b.	Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.	Toilets for juveniles.
(b)	The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the city. A fee of $50.00 shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Code 1988, § 8-8-5)
Sec. 34-151. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)	This division shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector of the city. 
(b)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 8-8-6)
Secs. 34-152—34-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER QUALITY CONTROL 

Sec. 34-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Household laundry detergent means a laundering cleaning compound in liquid, bar, spray, tablet, flake, powder, or other form used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. The term "household laundry detergent" shall not mean: 
(1)	A dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner, decreasing compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner or other substance that is intended to be used for nonlaundry cleaning purposes; 
(2)	A detergent used in dairy, beverage or food processing cleaning equipment;
(3)	A phosphorous acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener, acid cleaner or metal conditioner; 
(4)	A detergent used in hospitals, veterinary hospitals or clinics, or health care facilities or in agricultural production; 
(5)	A detergent used by industry for metal cleaning or conditioning;
(6)	A detergent manufactured, stored or distributed for use or sale outside of the state;
(7)	A detergent used in any laboratory, including a biological laboratory, research facility, chemical laboratory and engineering laboratory; or 
(8)	A detergent used in a commercial laundry that provides laundry services for hospital, health care facility, or veterinary hospital. 
Phosphorous means elemental phosphorous. 
(Code 1988, § 8-9-2)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-172. - Declaration of policy. 
It is declared to be the public policy of the city to encourage the use of clean, phosphate-free household laundry detergents and to prohibit the sale of household laundry detergents which contain more than 0.5 percent phosphorous by weight. The city finds that such use and sale will be a cost-effective way to reduce the amount of phosphorous in wastewater discharge so as to protect the state's rivers and lakes downstream and promote health, safety and welfare, prevent injury to human health, plant and animal life and property. It is vital to the health, well-being and welfare of present and future inhabitants of the city that these sources be protected against contamination and pollution. 
(Code 1988, § 8-9-1)
Sec. 34-173. - Phosphorous detergents prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at the retail level a household laundry detergent which contains greater than 0.5 percent phosphorous by weight and is intended to be used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. 
(Code 1988, § 8-9-3)
Sec. 34-174. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. Each sales transaction shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	In addition to the penalty provided in subsection (a) of this section, the city may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this division. 
(Code 1988, § 8-9-4)
Secs. 34-175—34-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WETLANDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Flood damage prevention, ch. 42.
State Law reference— Natural resource protection, O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8.

Sec. 34-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Generalized wetlands map means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for the city. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 333 USC 1344, as amended. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Ord. of 10-16-2000, § II)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-202. - Purpose. 
(a)	The wetlands in the city indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well-being of many communities within the state. 
(b)	Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
(c)	The purpose of this article is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. 
(Ord. of 10-16-2000, § I)
Sec. 34-203. - Establishment of the wetlands protection district. 
(a)	The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps. This map shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
(b)	The generalized wetlands map does not represent boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Ord. of 10-16-2000, § III)
Sec. 34-204. - Protection criteria; requirements for local permit or permission. 
No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from the city. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by the city building official or authorized representative using the generalized wetlands map, a U.S. Army Corp of Engineers determination shall be required. If the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a Section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(Ord. of 10-16-2000, § IV)
Sec. 34-205. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the wetlands protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, dredging except as provided in this article. The activities listed in this section are exempted from the regulations of Section 404 of the Clean Water Act provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual Section 404 permit. However, under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances. 
(1)	Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual Section 404 permit. 
(2)	Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(3)	Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practice approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)	The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(5)	The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)	Education, scientific research, and natural trails.
(Ord. of 10-16-2000, § V)
Sec. 34-206. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are not permitted within the wetlands protection district: 
(1)	Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants.
(2)	Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills.
(Ord. of 10-16-2000, § VI)
Sec. 34-207. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be punished as provided in section 1-7 and will also be subject to other administrative and enforcement procedures as permitted by law. 
(Ord. of 10-16-2000, § VII)
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14.
State Law reference— Powers concerning fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT AND AMBULANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; Firefighters Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq.

Sec. 38-31. - Rules and regulations authorized for fire and ambulance department. 
Under the direction of the city manager, the fire chief shall maintain written rules and regulations for the operation of the fire and ambulance department as are necessary. Changes in the departmental rules and regulations shall be proposed in writing by the fire chief. Such changes shall be submitted to the city manager for his approval and submission to council. These rules and regulations shall become effective following approval by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 4-2-1)
Sec. 38-32. - Authority at fires. 
(a)	The fire chief or firefighters under his direction shall have full control over all fire apparatus of the fire and ambulance department in service at any fire. It shall be the duty of the fire chief or his designee to superintend the fire and ambulance department while performing any public duty in fighting a fire. It shall be the duty of the fire chief or his designee to give general and specific directions as to the manner of fighting fires, the use of hose and apparatus, and the specific duties and assignments of the various members of the department in attendance at a fire. The fire chief may immediately suspend any member of the fire and ambulance department for insubordination at any fire. 
(b)	The fire chief or his designee shall, in all cases of fire and fire alarms, have full control and occupy sufficient ground or space necessary for the operation of all fire companies at any fires, and for the protection of life and property, and shall be protected in the discharge of his duties by the police officers of the city. 
(c)	Officers of the fire and ambulance department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the city police department in directing traffic in the immediate vicinity and while in this capacity shall have all rights and authority as a police officer of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 4-2-2)
State Law reference— Firefighters' authority, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-2. 
Sec. 38-33. - Certain acts interfering with firefighting activities. 
No person, except an active member of the fire and ambulance department, shall at any time enter within the territory or vicinity of any fire, when the area is roped off or access is denied by the city police, or interfere with or attempt to operate any of the apparatus or equipment of the department or any fire hydrant, or interfere by giving orders to any individual, unless requested to do so by the fire chief or firefighters under his direction; provided, however, that the mayor or any member of the council, any police officer or other law enforcement officer, the owner or occupant of the property, the city manager or any other persons as may be specifically authorized by the fire chief or his designee, may enter the restricted areas. 
(Code 1988, § 4-2-3)
Sec. 38-34. - Records of fires. 
The fire chief or his designee shall keep a permanent record of the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire and the damages resulting therefrom immediately after the occurrence of any fire. 
(Code 1988, § 4-2-5)
Sec. 38-35. - Obstruction or tampering with fire hydrants and apparatus prohibited. 
(a)	No person shall place ashes, cinders, dirt, rubbish, building material or any other material around or in close proximity to any fire hydrant so as to cause hindrance or delay in access thereto or to prevent the free use thereof by the fire and ambulance department. No person shall, in any way, interfere with or tamper with any fire hydrant or attempt to take water therefrom without special authority from the fire chief or his designee. 
(b)	Without the consent of the fire chief, no person not an active member of the fire and ambulance department shall at any time ride upon any of the fire apparatus of the department, nor shall any person make use of any fire apparatus, hose, or other equipment of the department, other than for the purpose for which the equipment was intended, without the consent of the fire chief. 
(Code 1988, § 4-2-6)
State Law reference— Damage to government property, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-22—16-7-24. 
Sec. 38-36. - Fire drills. 
The fire chief or his authorized representative shall have the authority to conduct fire drills in all public buildings located within the city. Public buildings shall include, but not be limited to, all buildings owned by the city, county, all libraries, recreational facilities, and any privately owned structure if the owners or occupants thereof request this service of the fire chief. The principal of any school shall be notified before any drill is held. 
(Code 1988, § 4-2-7)
Sec. 38-37. - Open burning. 
There shall be no open burning after sunset until sunrise. All other open burning shall be performed only after notifying the fire and ambulance department. Open burning shall not include fireplaces, charcoal grills or small recreational campfires provided they create no fire hazard or smoke nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 4-2-8)
Cross reference— Open burning of solid waste, § 78-35. 
State Law reference— Open burning, Admin. Reg. of the State of Georgia, DNR, § 391-3-1-.02(5). 
Sec. 38-38. - Workers' compensation coverage. 
All volunteer firefighters performing volunteer firefighter services rendered to and on behalf of the city shall be included under the definition of "employee" for workers' compensation purposes and will be classed as municipal employees to the extent of any accidents which occur to any such firefighters while engaged in firefighting activities on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 4-2-9)
State Law reference— Authority to cover volunteer firefighters under workers' compensation, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1. 
Sec. 38-39. - Fees for ambulance service. 
The city shall charge such fees for use of the city ambulance service as fixed from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 4-2-10)
Sec. 38-40. - Permit to drive city emergency vehicles. 
(a)	No person shall operate or drive an ambulance, police vehicle and/or fire vehicle on the streets of the city unless that person has a current, unrevoked permit obtained from the chief of police. 
(b)	Any person having resided continually in the county for not less than six months immediately preceding the making of an application for a permit and being 18 years of age or over may make application to the chief of police for a permit. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make an investigation to determine the moral character and fitness of the applicant, and the applicant's knowledge of the traffic regulations of the city and the motor vehicle laws of the state. The chief of police shall issue a permit if he finds that the applicant is morally fit and possesses sufficient knowledge of the traffic regulations and laws. The permit shall be written, signed by the chief of police and bear the corporate seal of the city, and shall include the name, address, sex, color, age and signature of the applicant. 
(c)	Permits shall be renewed on or by January 1 of each year, and permits issued within the year shall be good for only the duration of such calendar year. 
(d)	The city manager, upon recommendation of the chief of police, may suspend or revoke any permit issued by the chief of police, if, upon investigation or knowledge, the provisions of this article have been violated or the permittee has been convicted of driving one of such emergency vehicles named in subsection (a) of this section while under the influence of alcoholic beverages or drugs, or if the person is suffering from a contagious or communicable disease or defect or impairment of vision or other physical handicap, or if the person is not a person of good moral character, or for any violation of state traffic laws, or for any other reason which the city manager may deem justifiable. Before such permit shall be suspended or revoked, notice of intention to revoke or suspend shall be served upon the holder either by registered mail or personal service three days prior to the hearing, and the holder, if he so desires, shall be given an opportunity to be heard at a hearing conducted by the city manager. 
(Code 1988, § 4-2-11)
Secs. 38-41—38-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt fire and life safety codes, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; adoption of state fire safety standards, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12; code requirements, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13; minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20.

Sec. 38-71. - Fire prevention code. 
(a)	The following rules and regulations affecting fire prevention are hereby adopted in their entirety as the fire prevention code of the city and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section. Copies of all fire prevention regulations shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk where they shall be available for public inspection. In case of conflict between the codes, enforcement priority will be given to the regulation which contains the most stringent conditions, stipulations or requirements. 
(1)	The state minimum fire safety standards as the fire prevention code of the city pursuant to O.C.G.A §§ 25-2-12 and 25-2-13. 
(2)	Standard Fire Prevention Code (SBCCI).
(3)	The rules and regulations promulgated for the prevention of destruction of life and/or property by fire, explosion and related hazards by the state safety fire commissioner. 
(b)	Any provision of the city Code which is in conflict with these codes shall be controlling.
(Code 1988, § 4-2-21)
State Law reference— Fire safety standards, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12. 
Sec. 38-72. - Fire extinguishers in businesses. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a business establishment in the city without having readily accessible at least one fire extinguisher in workable condition of the soda and acid, or foam type of at least 2½-gallon size. 
(b)	The chief of the fire and ambulance department or the fire marshal of the city or any inspector designated for the purpose shall have the right to inspect any such fire extinguisher maintained in compliance with the provisions of this section to determine its efficiency or operating condition. 
(Code 1988, § 4-2-22)
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
Chapter 42 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, adopted June 18, 2012, repealed the former ch. 42, arts. I—III, §§ 42-1—42-12, 42-31—42-35 and 42-61—42-65, and enacted a new ch. 42 as set out herein. The former Art. X pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1988, §§ 8-10-1—8-10-22.
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; wetlands, § 34-201 et seq.; planning and development, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 102.

ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 42-1. - Statutory authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council ordains as follows. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Sec. 42-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	The flood hazard areas of Hogansville, Georgia, are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Sec. 42-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Secs. 42-4—42-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 42-21. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city manager's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 42-32. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)	Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)	Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)	Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)	Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines.
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before August 4, 1987. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 4, 1987. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after August 4, 1987, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced after August 4, 1987, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after August 4, 1987. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis;
(2)	Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are NOT exempt from any chapter requirements.)) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include: 
(1)	Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
(2)	Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Secs. 42-22—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 42-31. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Hogansville, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Sec. 42-32. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)	The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated July 3, 2012, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
(b)	For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated July 3, 2012, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Troup County are hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)	Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(d)	The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at: 400 East Main Street, Hogansville, Georgia 30230. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Sec. 42-33. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Sec. 42-34. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Sec. 42-35. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing chapter, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Sec. 42-36. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements;
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Sec. 42-37. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of city, or by any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Sec. 42-38. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Secs. 42-39, 42-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 42-41. - Designation of chapter administrator. 
The city manager, or his designee, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Sec. 42-42. - Permit procedures. 
(a)	Application for a development permit shall be made to the city manager, or his designee, on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
(b)	Specifically, the following information is required:
(1)	Application stage. 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 42-52(2); 
d.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)	Construction stage. 
a.	For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.	Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
c.	The city manager, or his designee, shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Sec. 42-43. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the city manager, or his designee, shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)	Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)	Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)	Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 42-32, then the city manager, or his designee, shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article V of this chapter. 
(5)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 42-42(b)(2). 
(6)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 42-42(b)(2). 
(7)	When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the city manager, or his designee, shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 42-42(b)(1)c and section 42-52(2) or 42-54(2). 
(8)	Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)	Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city manager, or his designee, shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(12)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the city manager, or his designee, and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Secs. 42-44—42-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 42-51. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)	Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction; 
b.	So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(5)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Sec. 42-52. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 42-51(4) pertaining to elevated buildings. 
a.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 42-43(6). 
(3)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.	All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.	Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Refer to section 42-51(6) above.) 
d.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
1.	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
2.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)a, c of this section. 
(4)	Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-32 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.	Only if subsection (4)a above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article V of this chapter. 
(Ord.	No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 42-53. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-32, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 42-32, then the city manager, or his designee, shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article V of this chapter. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (subsections (2) and (3)) shall apply: 
(2)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed.) Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 42-51(4) pertaining to elevated buildings. 
a.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. The city manager, or his designee, shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Sec. 42-54. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-32, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)	No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)	New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 42-52. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Sec. 42-55. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-32 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 42-51(4) pertaining to elevated buildings. 
The city manager, or his designee, shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 42-42(b)(1)c and (b)(2). 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Sec. 42-56. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(d)	For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Sec. 42-57. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)	Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)	All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Secs. 42-58—42-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 42-61. - Procedure. 
(a)	The mayor and council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)	The mayor and council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the city manager, or his designee, in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Troup County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)	In reviewing such requests, the mayor and council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Sec. 42-62. - Conditions for variances. 
(a)	A variance shall be issued only when there is:
(1)	A finding of good and sufficient cause;
(2)	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(3)	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(b)	The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d)	The city manager, or his designee, shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(1)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the mayor and council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-06-18, § 1, 6-18-2012)
Chapter 46 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; planning and development, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 102.
State Law reference— Historic preservation, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-31. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the historic district is to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the city pursuant to the provisions of the amendment to Article XI of the Constitution of Georgia, ratified November 5, 1968 (1968 Ga. Laws, page 1591). 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-1)
Sec. 46-32. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the historic district shall be as follows: Begin at a point on the centerline of East Main Street, the east boundary of the Atlanta and West Point Railroad, run thence north and northeasterly to the centerline of Askew Avenue, thence northeasterly and east along the centerline of Askew Street to the centerline of Johnson Street, thence south 120.8 feet, thence east 20 feet to the northwest corner of Parcel 12, Block 4, Tax Map 202, thence east 237.95 feet to the northeast corner of said Parcel 12, thence southeasterly 203.4 feet to a lot corner, thence west 182.3 feet, thence south 80 feet to the right-of-way of Marshall Avenue, thence southeasterly to the northeast corner of Parcel 5, Block 5, Tax Map 202, thence south 319.9 feet to the north boundary of Baugh Avenue, thence southeasterly to the northeast corner of Parcel 13, Block 6, Tax Map 202, thence south 87.4 feet, thence east 140.9 feet, thence south 374 feet more or less to the southeast corner of Parcel 17, Block 6, Tax Map 202, thence easterly 40 feet more or less to the centerline of Church Street, thence south along the centerline of Church Street 856 feet more or less, thence east to the northwest corner of Parcel 18, Block 2, Tax Map 204, thence easterly along north boundaries of Parcels 18, 21, 22, 23, 24A and 24, Block 2, Tax Map 204, thence southeasterly to the northwest corner of Parcel 6, Block 3, Tax Map 204, thence southeasterly 750 feet more or less to the northwest corner of Parcel 13, Block 3, Tax Map 204, thence south along the west boundary of said Parcel 13 to the centerline of East Main Street, thence northwesterly along the centerline of East Main Street to the centerline of Maple Street, thence south along the centerline of Maple Street, 329 feet more or less, thence westerly 470 feet more or less to the southwest corner of Parcel 3, Block 1, Tax Map 205, thence northerly along the west boundary of said lot 3, thence 500 feet to the south right-of-way line of East Main, thence northwesterly along the right-of-way l ine 315 feet to the northeast corner of Parcel 5, Block 1, Tax Map 205, thence south 200 feet, thence northwesterly along the south boundaries of Parcels 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 of Block 1, Tax Map 205, thence south 280 feet more or less to the southeast corner of Parcel 10, Block 1, Tax Map 205, thence westerly along the south boundaries of Parcels 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, and 24 of Block 1, Tax Map 205, thence southeasterly to the southeast corner of Parcel 10, Block 1, Tax Map 210, thence west to the east boundary of the Atlanta and West Point Railroad, thence north along said Atlanta and West Point Railroad to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-2)
Sec. 46-33. - Relationship to zoning districts. 
The historic district regulations as provided in this article for zones within the district are intended to preserve and protect the historic or architecturally worthy buildings, structures, sites, monuments, streetscapes, squares, and neighborhoods of the historic area. In all zoning districts lying within the boundaries of the historic district, the regulations for both the zoning district and the historic zone shall apply. Whenever there is conflict between the regulations of the zoning district and the regulations of the historic zone, the more restrictive shall apply. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-3)
Sec. 46-34. - Classification of buildings and structures. 
Within the historic district, all buildings and structures shall be classified and designated on the historic building map adopted and approved by the city council and made a part of the zoning map. Such buildings and structures shall be divided into two classes: 
(1)	Historic. Those buildings classified as historic shall possess identified historical or architectural merit of a degree warranting their preservation. Those buildings classified as historic shall be further classified as: 
a.	Exceptional;
b.	Excellent;
c.	Notable;
d.	Of value as part of the scene.
(2)	Contemporary. Those buildings and structures classified as contemporary are not classified on the historic building map as exceptional, excellent, notable, or of value as part of the scene. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-4)
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
Sec. 46-35. - Certificate of approval required. 
A certificate of approval issued by the mayor and council after study by the board of review shall be required before a permit is issued for any of the following: 
(1)	Within all zones of the historic district:
a.	Demolition of a historic building;
b.	Moving a historic building;
c.	Material change in the exterior appearance of existing buildings classified as historic by additions, reconstruction, alteration, or maintenance involving exterior color change. 
(2)	Within historic zone 1:
a.	Any new construction of a principal building or accessory building or structure subject to view from a public street; 
b.	Change in existing walls and fences, if along public street rights-of-way excluding lanes; 
c.	Material change in the exterior appearance of existing contemporary buildings by additions, reconstruction, alteration, or maintenance involving exterior color change, if subject to view from a public street. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-5)
Sec. 46-36. - Application for certificate of approval. 
Application for a certificate of approval shall be made in the office of the zoning administrator on forms provided therefor, obtainable at that office. Detailed drawings, photographs, descriptions or other information showing the proposed exterior alterations, additions, changes or new construction shall be provided as are reasonably required for the board of review to make a recommendation. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-6)
Sec. 46-37. - Action on application for certificate of approval. 
(a)	The zoning administrator shall transmit the application for a certificate of approval, together with the supporting information and material, to the board of review for its study. After completing its study of the application, the board of review shall submit its report directly to the mayor and council along with its recommendations as to what action should be taken on the application. The recommendations of the board of review shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the mayor and council. The board of review shall act upon the application within 30 days after the filing thereof, otherwise the application shall be deemed by the city council to be approved. 
(b)	Appeals from decisions of the mayor and council shall be taken to the appropriate courts. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-7)
Sec. 46-38. - Board of review. 
(a)	Creation and composition. There is hereby created a board of review, which shall consist of five members appointed by the city council. Members of the board of review shall be residents of the city interested in the preservation and development of the historic area. The board of review shall consist of one member of the city council, one member of the planning commission, and three members at large. 
(b)	Jurisdiction. 
(1)	The board of review's jurisdiction shall be limited to the historic district. The board of review shall be concerned with those elements of development, redevelopment, rehabilitation and/or preservation that affect visual quality of the historic area. The board of review shall not consider detailed design, interior arrangements or building features not subject to public view nor shall they make any requirement except for the purpose of preventing development or demolition obviously incongruous with the historic area surroundings. The board of review is authorized to seek funds, both private and public, and ways and means of preserving historic buildings within the historic district. The board of review is authorized to disperse those funds within the terms of the grants. However, the board of review shall not obligate the city council, any groups or individuals without their written consent. 
(2)	The board of review shall prepare a roster of all historic buildings within the historic district in accordance with the criteria set forth in subsection 46-34(1). 
(c)	Terms of office. The terms of office of the board of review shall consist of five members serving three-year staggered terms. Members of the board of review may be reappointed. Members of the board of review shall serve until new appointments have been made. 
(d)	Serve without pay. Members of the board of review shall serve without pay. The city council may appropriate funds to cover the expenses of board of review members in carrying out their duties such as travel and clerical expenses provided requests by the board for funds have been made prior to the incurring of those expenses. 
(e)	Organization. 
(1)	The board of review shall elect from its membership a chair, vice-chair and secretary-treasurer who shall serve for terms of one year and who shall be eligible for reelection. The chair shall preside over the board of review and shall have the right to vote. In the absence or disability of the chair, the vice-chair shall perform the duties of the chair. 
(2)	A majority of the members of the board of review shall constitute a quorum; however, no application for approval shall be denied except by the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire board. 
(3)	The board of review shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and consideration of applications not inconsistent with this article which shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and for the calling of special meetings. All meetings of the board of review shall be open to the public, and a public record shall be kept of the board's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(f)	Assistance of building inspector. The building inspector, as zoning administrator, shall provide such technical, administrative and clerical assistance as required by the board of review. 
(g)	Meetings. The board of review shall hold regular meetings, at least monthly, to review applications for certificates of approval. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-8)
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Historic preservation commission, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-24; powers of historic preservation commission, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-25. 
Sec. 46-39. - Development standards. 
(a)	Preservation of historic buildings within all zones in the historic district. A building or structure, classified as historic, or any part thereof, or any appurtenance related thereto including but not limited to stone walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, paving and signs shall be moved, reconstructed, altered or maintained only in a manner that will preserve the historical and architectural character of the building, structure or appurtenance thereto. 
(b)	Demolition of historic buildings. Whenever a property owner shows that a building classified as historic is incapable of earning an economic return on its value, as appraised by a qualified real estate appraiser, and the board of review fails to approve the issuance of a certificate of approval, such building may be demolished; provided, however, that before a demolition permit is issued, notice of proposed demolition shall be given as follows: 
(1)	For buildings rated exceptional, 12 months;
(2)	For buildings rated excellent, six months;
(3)	For buildings rated notable, four months;
(4)	For buildings of value as part of the scene, two months.
Notice shall be posted on the premises of the building or structure proposed for demolition in a location clearly visible from the street. In addition, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general local circulation at least three times prior to demolition, the final notice of which shall be not less than 15 days prior to the date of the permit, and the first notice of which shall be published no more than 15 days after the application for a permit to demolish is filed. The purpose of this section is to further the purposes of this article by preserving historic buildings which are important to the education, culture, traditions and economic values of the city, and to afford the city, interested persons, historical societies or organizations the opportunity to acquire or to arrange for the preservation of such buildings. The board of review may at any time during such stay approve a certificate of approval in which event a permit shall be issued without further delay. 
(c)	Relocation of historic buildings. A historic building shall not be relocated on another site unless it is shown that the preservation on its existing site is not consistent with the purposes of this section, or such building will not earn an economic return for the owner of such building on such site. 
(d)	Protective maintenance of historic buildings. Historic buildings shall be maintained to meet the requirements of the minimum housing code and the building code. 
(e)	Contemporary buildings, zone 1. The construction of a new building or structure, and the moving, reconstruction, alteration, major maintenance or repair involving a color change materially affecting the external appearance of any existing contemporary building, structure, or appurtenance thereof within zone 1 shall be generally of such design, form, proportion, mass configuration, building material, texture, color and location on a lot as will be compatible with other buildings in the historic area, and particularly with buildings designated as historic and with squares and places to which it is visually related. 
(f)	Visual compatibility factors. Within zone 1, new construction and existing buildings and structures and appurtenances thereof which are moved, reconstructed, materially altered, repaired, or changed in color shall be visually compatible with buildings, squares and places to which they are visually related generally in terms of the following factors: 
(1)	Height. The height of the proposed building shall be visually compatible with adjacent buildings. 
(2)	Proportion of the building's front facade. The relationship of the width of the building to the height of the front elevation shall be visually compatible with the buildings, squares and places to which it is visually related. 
(3)	Proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship of the width of the windows to the height of the windows in a building shall be visually compatible with buildings, squares and places to which the building is visually related. 
(4)	Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. The relationship of solids to voids in the front facade of a building shall be visually compatible with buildings, squares and places to which it is visually related. 
(5)	Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of the building to the open space between it and adjoining buildings shall be visually compatible with buildings, squares and places to which it is visually related. 
(6)	Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projection. The relationship of entrances and porch projections to sidewalks of a building shall be visually compatible with the buildings, squares and places to which it is visually related. 
(7)	Relationship of materials, texture and color. The relationship of the materials, texture and color of the facade of a building shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in buildings to which it is visually related. 
(8)	Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building shall be visually compatible with the buildings to which it is visually related. 
(9)	Wall of continuity. Appurtenances of a building such as walls, wrought iron fences, evergreen landscape masses and building facades shall, if necessary, form cohesive walls of enclosure along a street to ensure visual compatibility of the building with buildings, squares and places to which it is visually related. 
(10)	Scale of a building. The size of a building, the building mass of a building in relation to open spaces, the windows, door openings, porches and balconies shall be visually compatible with buildings, squares and places to which it is visually related. 
(11)	Directional expression of front elevation. A building shall be visually compatible with buildings, squares and places to which it is visually related in its directional character, whether this be vertical character, horizontal character or nondirectional character. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-9)
Sec. 46-40. - Interpretation. 
This article is not intended to interfere with or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties. However, where this article imposes a greater restriction upon the use of property or requires greater space than is imposed by other resolutions or by private easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(Code 1988, § 8-3-10)
Chapter 50 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; courts, ch. 26; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54; personnel, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94.
State Law reference— Powers concerning police protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; Georgia Peace Officers Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; compensation of officers restricted, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9; liability for torts of police officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; obstructing or hindering law enforcement officers O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24; subsistence allowance, O.C.G.A. § 35-1-3.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1—50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 50-31—50-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE OFFICERS AUTHORITY 

Sec. 50-46. - Resisting, obstructing, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist, obstruct or oppose any police officer in making or attempting to make a legal arrest of any person or in serving or attempting to serve any legal process or order issued by the authorities of the city, county or state. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2000)
Sec. 50-47. - Authorized to summon aid; compliance. 
Any police officer of the city shall have the power to summons to his aid any number of citizens, if any person shall resist his authority, or attempt to escape custody or to avoid an arrest; and it shall be unlawful for any person so summoned to refuse to obey the call of such police officer or give the assistance required. It shall be unlawful for any person summoned by any police officer to aid in suppressing an affray, riot, breach of the peace or other outrage, to refuse to do so, or to refuse when summoned as provided in this section to aid in arresting any offender against the law. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2000)
Sec. 50-48. - Escape; attempted escape. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to escape or attempt to escape from any city police officer, or from the city jail or from any officer or other person in charge of a work gang. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2000)
Sec. 50-49. - Impersonating police officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear on the streets wearing clothes or uniforms or badges adopted by the police force or to do any other similar act or to in any way impersonate a police officer. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2000)
Sec. 50-50. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
Secs. 50-51—50-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CHIEF OF POLICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-81 et seq.

Sec. 50-66. - Powers and duties. 
The chief of police, or city police officers under his direction, shall: 
(1)	Regularly attend meetings of the city council and any other meetings as directed by the city council; 
(2)	Execute all orders and directions of the city manager;
(3)	Abate or remove any nuisance when so directed upon order of the municipal court;
(4)	Maintain the peace, good order and tranquility of the city by the enforcement of all municipal ordinances and state laws; 
(5)	Place upon the municipal court docket the names of all persons violating any of the municipal ordinances and arrest and take into custody all persons who violate any of the city ordinances or state laws; 
(6)	Under the direction of the city manager, be in charge of the police department and have supervision over the members thereof in the exercise of their powers, duties and authority and in hiring, discharging or suspending any members; 
(7)	Should any arrested person be confined in the city holding cell, enter or cause to be entered the name of the person arrested, the date of arrest, and the name of the arresting officer or other person, on the station docket; 
(8)	Post with the city a performance bond for the faithful performance of duties in an amount set by the city council payable to the city; all monies received by the officer while acting in the capacity of a law enforcement officer or while executing his administrative duties shall be paid over to the city clerk; 
(9)	Serve all subpoenas and warrants, of the municipal court; and
(10)	Approve appearance bonds.
(Code 1988, § 4-1-1)
State Law reference— Chief of police designation, O.C.G.A. § 35-1-12. 
Sec. 50-67. - Police department rules and regulations. 
Under the direction of the city manager, the police chief shall maintain written rules and regulations for the operation of the police department as are necessary. Changes in the departmental rules and regulations shall be proposed in writing by the police chief. Such changes shall be submitted to the city manager for his approval and submission to council. These rules and regulations shall become effective following approval by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 4-1-2)
Secs. 50-68—50-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PATROL POWERS 

Sec. 50-93. - Patrol powers generally. 
(a)	The police officers of the city shall have the authority to patrol over any street, alley, path, sidewalk or park, in and around any stores, cafes, taverns, restaurants, dance halls, service stations or any other establishment in the city. 
(b)	An officer while on duty for the city shall have authority to enter any type of business while open to the public and check to see if everything is being carried on in a lawful manner. After business hours, and while closed to the public, an officer for the city has authority to check places of business to see if the doors and windows are safely locked. 
(c)	An officer for the city shall have the authority to check and investigate, enter and patrol any park, business, residential section or public place within the city limits if the officer has reason to believe some act is being committed which would involve the violation of a law or a city ordinance, a personal injury or damage to property, or if any of the these situations appear to be imminent. 
(d)	No police officer shall enter a private dwelling without a search or arrest warrant unless he has the voluntary consent of the owner or occupant or he is in pursuit of a fugitive who the officer has personal knowledge or probable cause to believe has committed or attempted to commit a felony. 
(Code 1988, § 4-1-3)
Sec. 50-94. - Authority and duties of police officers generally. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or any officers assigned by the chief of police, to enforce this Code and all traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city or any other state laws violated in this city. 
(b)	Officers of the police department, or any officers assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformity with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency, to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Code 1988, § 4-1-4)
Chapter 52 - LIBRARIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of municipalities for libraries, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; power as to acquisition and operation, O.C.G.A., § 36-34-3; lease agreements for providing library services, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5.1; city public libraries, O.C.G.A. § 20-5-20 et seq.; local and regional public libraries, O.C.G.A. § 20-5-40 et seq.

Sec. 52-1. - Board of trustees; members. 
(a)	There is hereby created a board of trustees to be known as Trustees for the Hogansville Public Library, consisting of five members to be appointed for three-year staggered terms. In addition, one advisory, nonvoting, member, who is a resident of the county, but not the city, shall be appointed by the council to serve for one year. Appointments shall be made by council during the month of June of each year to fill the terms of the trustees which expire on June 30 next following. 
(b)	Any vacancy occurring during the term of office of any member of the board of trustees shall be filled by the city council at its next regular meeting. 
(c)	Members of the board of trustees shall serve without pay from the city or from monies donated by others for library purposes. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-1)
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 52-2. - Supervision; personnel. 
The board of trustees shall exercise a strict and rigid supervision over the Hogansville Public Library, and shall pass all rules and regulations for the government and control of the library. The board of trustees shall employ a competent librarian and, if necessary, an assistant librarian, and shall fix the salary or compensation of the librarian and assistant librarian, and have the right to dismiss or discharge the librarians, for just cause, at any time. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-2)
Sec. 52-3. - Budget; expenditures. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the board of trustees to prepare and submit an annual budget to the city council for the council's approval. Library funds from whatever source shall not be expended otherwise than as shown in the budget or some interim revision of it approved by the city council. 
(b)	All sums of money appropriated to Hogansville Public Library by the city, and all donations given by others shall be received, held in custody by, and expended under the direction of the board of trustees in accordance with its budget. 
(Code 1988, § 7-2-3)
Chapter 54 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Municipalities are prohibited by law from enacting ordinances covering matters which have been preempted by general law and are prevented from regulating conduct which has been made a violation of any criminal law of the state. See Ga. Const. art. II, § VI, ¶ IV, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2).
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 50; tire disposal, § 78-71 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94.
State Law reference— Abandonment of airtight containers, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100; fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; disorderly houses, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-44; peeping toms, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Noise prohibitions. 
(a)	General prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the city. 
(b)	Acts enumerated. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but the enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)	Racing motors. The unnecessary racing of the motor of any truck tractor, motor vehicle, motorcycle, farm tractor, road tractor and other motor-driven vehicle in such a manner as to emit loud noises. 
(2)	Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, truck tractor, or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(3)	Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)	Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)	Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(6)	Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle (except tractors) except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)	Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(8)	Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(9)	Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, or church while the school, institution of learning, or church are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the street is a school or hospital street. 
(10)	Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(11)	Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale. 
(c)	Loudspeakers. It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to play, use or operate for advertising purposes, or for any other purpose whatever, on or upon the public streets, sidewalks, or thoroughfares in the city, any device known as a sound truck, loudspeaker or sound amplifier, or radio or phonograph with a loudspeaker or amplifier, or any kind of instrument known as a calliope or any instrument of any kind or character which emits therefrom loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle operated or standing upon the streets or public places mentioned in this subsection. 
(d)	Controlling volume of coin-operated music machines. 
(1)	It shall be the duty of the operator of a coin-operated music machine to lock the volume control on such machine and to maintain such volume as to eliminate disturbance to the public or to the occupants of adjoining property. 
(2)	In the event of the complaint of any citizens that such machine is a nuisance, the chief of police may, upon investigation, cause the removal of such machine, and after such removal, it shall be necessary to secure a new license to operate a machine at the same location or place of business before such machine or another coin-operated machine may be installed. 
(e)	Boisterous conduct in establishments where music machines are located. No owner or operator of a public business establishment shall allow any loud or boisterous conduct in or near the place where coin-operated music machines are allowed to operate. 
(Code 1988, § 11-1-1)
Sec. 54-2. - Discharging and carrying firearms. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any firearm within the city limits except by the permission of the city council for military parades. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any airgun, air pistol, or like instrument within the city limits except as provided in this section: 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person at any time within the city limits to shoot any airgun, air pistol or like weapon except upon and within the confines of the person's own private property, and then in such a manner as not to injure or endanger another or the property of another. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 14 years to shoot any airgun, air pistol or like weapon except under the supervision of an adult. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 14 years to possess upon the streets or public property of the city any firearm, airgun, air pistol or like weapon: and it shall be a violation for any adult, parent or guardian having custody of such child under the age of 14 years to allow that child to possess such weapons upon the streets or public property of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 11-1-2)
Sec. 54-3. - Minors in poolrooms. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person who has not yet reached the age of 21 years to enter any poolroom or billiard parlor or to engage in the playing of pool or billiards in a poolroom or billiard parlor maintained and operated for the public. 
(b)	It shall be further unlawful for any person operating a poolroom or billiard parlor to allow any person who has not attained the age of 21 years to enter into or participate in any game of pool or billiards or any other game operated in any such poolroom or billiard parlor. It shall be the duty of the operator of a poolroom or billiard parlor to prevent any minor from entering the building in which a poolroom or billiard parlor is operated for the public. 
(Code 1988, § 11-1-3)
Sec. 54-4. - Unauthorized persons on public school grounds or facilities. 
No person shall be allowed on the grounds or in a facility of any city public school unless the person is an employee of the city board of education, a member of the city board of education, a member of the city council, or is specifically authorized to be on those grounds or in that facility by the principal or assistant principal of a school; provided that students shall be allowed on the grounds or in the facility of any city public school only during regular school hours and during after-school hours for authorized school activities. Such authorized school activities shall be those designated by the principal, assistant principal or a teacher of the school. 
(Code 1988, § 11-1-4)
Sec. 54-5. - Loitering or littering in public places. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in a public park, on a public street, or in a public parking area, or for anyone to litter a public park, public street, or a public parking area. 
(b)	The term "loiter" shall mean being in a public park, on a public street, or in a public parking area at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity of that area. 
(c)	The term "litter" shall mean the scattering or strewing of trash, garbage, or any discarded items or objects on the public park grounds, on the public streets, or on a public parking area. 
(Code 1988, § 11-1-5)
State Law reference— Authority to proscribe loitering, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36; littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-48. 
Sec. 54-6. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person to: 
(1)	Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby a reasonable person would be placed in fear of safety for life or limb; 
(2)	Place the property of another in serious danger of being destroyed or damaged;
(3)	Use fighting words directed toward another, who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; 
(4)	Violently interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; or
(5)	Congregate with others to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear the way when ordered by lawful authority to do so. 
(Code 1988, § 11-1-6)
State Law reference— Authority to punish disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 54-7. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be and appear in an intoxicated condition on any public property, on private property open to the public, or for any person to occupy the seat or any portion of a motor vehicle upon the public streets of the city while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or drugs, or to be within the curtilage of any private residence not his own, other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant. Such condition must be made manifest by boisterousness or by indecent condition or acting or by vulgar, profane or unbecoming language, or loud and violent discourse of the person so intoxicated. 
(Code 1988, § 11-1-7)
State Law reference— Authority to proscribe public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 54-8. - Opprobrious and abusive words. 
A person who without provocation, uses to or of another, in his presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in his presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words." 
(Code 1988, § 11-1-8)
State Law reference— Fighting words and incite to act, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 54-9. - Curfew for minors. 
It is unlawful for any minor 16 years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots, or any place unsupervised by an adult having lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of 12:00 midnight on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)	When any such minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor; 
(2)	When any such minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor; 
(3)	When any such minor is returning directly home from a scheduled and approved school function, activity or entertainment such as a recreational activity or dance; 
(4)	When any such minor is returning directly home from a place of lawful employment so as to make it necessary for such minor to be in such place of employment during the prescribed period of time; 
(5)	When any such minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; or 
(6)	When any such minor is in a motor vehicle traveling through the city with no intent to stop or sojourn in the city. 
(Code 1988, § 11-1-9)
Sec. 54-10. - Parental responsibility; violation; penalty. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any child 16 years of age or younger to permit, or by insufficient control or supervision, to allow any such child to be in or upon the public streets or any other place listed in section 54-9 within the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight on any day and 6:00 a.m. the succeeding day except under the circumstances set forth in section 54-9. Upon conviction of violation of this section for the first time, in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court, such person may be given a warning citation. Upon further conviction, a person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs, imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days, work on the public streets or on the public works of the city for not more than 60 days or to any one or more of such punishments. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	As an alternative to the penalty provision provided in subsection (a) of this section, the judge of the municipal court of the city may, in his discretion, order any person in violation of the provision of such subsection to attend and participate in, at their expense, an alternative treatment or intervention program recommended and approved by the court. 
(Code 1988, § 11-1-10)
Sec. 54-11. - Disorderly houses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person keep a disorderly house, where noisy or riotous persons assemble to the annoyance of citizens in the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 08-11-3-1, § 1, 11-3-2008)
Secs. 54-12—54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY AND NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Abatement of scrap tire nuisance, § 78-74.
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; abatement of nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq.; littering control, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-43, 16-7-46.

Sec. 54-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible material. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Refuse means all putrescible or nonputrescible waste (except body waste), including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial waste. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible waste (including ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste, including, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
Unauthorized accumulation of refuse means refuse which is stored or accumulated on any premises in the city in such manner as to create unsanitary conditions, or to create fire hazards; or to cause offensive and obnoxious odors; or to provide a breeding place for insects or a harboring place for vermin; or to invite plundering; or to endanger the safety of children as well as adults; or to reduce property values; or in any way to adversely affect the health, safety, welfare and well-being of the public. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-32. - Containers. 
(a)	Refuse containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the premises and shall be maintained in good condition. Any container that does not conform to the provisions of this section or that may have ragged or sharp edges or any other defect liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof shall be promptly replaced upon notice. 
(b)	Garbage containers shall be made of metal or plastic, equipped with suitable handles and tightfitting covers, and shall be watertight. Garbage containers shall have a capacity of not more than 40 gallons. Paper or plastic bags manufactured specifically for the storage of garbage may be used provided the bags are attached to a bag holder which is equipped with a watertight lid made of durable metal or plastic. Garbage containers shall be kept clean, neat and in a sanitary condition at all times and shall be located on the premises at a place easily accessible to the collectors. Each owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the premises shall provide an adequate number of garbage containers to hold the amount of garbage accumulated between collections. 
(c)	Rubbish containers shall be of the kind suitable for collection purposes and the location and type shall be approved by the authorized representative of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-2)
Sec. 54-33. - Scattering refuse. 
(a)	No person shall place refuse in any street, alley or other public place, or upon any private property, whether owned by such person or not within the city except as prescribed in this article. 
(b)	No person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of water.
(c)	No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place, or into any occupied premises within the city. 
(d)	Scattering refuse as provided in this section is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-3)
State Law reference— Littering, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-43, 16-7-48. 
Sec. 54-34. - Unauthorized accumulations generally; abandoned motor vehicles; motor vehicles parts. 
(a)	Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Such nuisance shall be abated as prescribed in section 54-39. 
(b)	The accumulation of one or more motor vehicles or any major part thereof which is in any one of the following conditions: 
(1)	Resting on blocks;
(2)	Without wheels;
(3)	With major parts missing;
(4)	Without tires; or
(5)	In a state of repair which precludes further use;
is declared to be an unauthorized accumulation of refuse, except where vehicles are stored in an enclosed building or located on the premises of a licensed business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of such licensed business enterprise; provided, however, where any such motor vehicle or major part thereof is not located in an enclosed building, such premises shall be screened on all sides by fence and shrubbery so as to shield such accumulation from sight. 
(c)	In addition to the prohibitions stated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, no vehicles, parts of vehicles, or former vehicles (including, but not limited to, vehicle tires and truck trailers) shall be parked or stored openly. This prohibition shall not apply to vehicles which bear an up-to-date license and for which all ad valorem taxes have been paid. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-4; Ord. of 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 13-04-15C, § 1, 4-15-2013)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-04-15C, § 1, adopted Apr. 15, 2013, retitled the catchline of § 54-34 from "Unauthorized accumulations generally; abandoned motor vehicles" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 54-35. - Unauthorized disposal areas. 
It shall be unlawful to dump, deposit or dispose of any refuse on any lot of record, as defined by section 102-2, public street, alley or roadway within the city, unless an application for the designation of a disposal area showing such use of the area has been authorized by the city. Failure to comply with this section is declared to be a nuisance. The location and boundaries of such disposal areas must be filed in the office of the city manager and must be approved by the city manager prior to use as a disposal area. The city manager shall have the authority to impose restrictions on type of disposal. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-5)
Sec. 54-36. - Burning leaves; rubbish. 
Leaves, rubbish or refuse of any kind shall not be set on fire or burned on any paved street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-6)
Sec. 54-37. - Unsightly or unhealthful growth prohibited. 
No person shall allow or permit weeds, grass and other such vegetable matter to grow and be upon his lot of record, as defined in section 102-2, uncut so as to render the premises unsightly or unhealthful, or so as to constitute a fire hazard, a breeding place for mosquitoes, or cause other peril from the growth and accumulation of such weeds, grass or other vegetable matter. Any such growth in excess of one foot in height shall be deemed to constitute such prohibited condition. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-7)
Sec. 54-38. - Declaration of nuisance. 
To permit the growth and accumulation of weeds, grass or other vegetable matter so as to create any condition mentioned in section 54-37 is declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-8)
Sec. 54-39. - Complaint; trial; order to abate nuisance. 
Any nuisance on private property created by the failure of any person to comply with the requirements of sections 54-33—54-38 may be removed on the written complaint of any officer or inhabitant of the city, which complaint must set forth particularly the nature and location of the nuisance and the person complained against. On such complaint being filed with the city clerk, the city clerk shall issue a summons to the person charged with maintaining the nuisance, requiring him to show cause before the municipal judge at some time therein specified, not more than five days off, why the nuisance complained of should not be abated; which notice shall be served by any police officer, on the person complained against at least one day before the hearing, by handing him a copy or leaving the summons at his residence or place of business. At the trial the court shall hear evidence as to the facts and pass such order as may be just. If the thing complained of is a nuisance, the order shall specify within what time it is to be abated by the defendant; or should the municipal judge find that it would be unreasonable to order the nuisance abated under the facts presented to him, he may order that the person charged with maintaining the nuisance shall within 30 days from the date of the hearing go before the mayor and council at either a regular or called meeting and petition the council to remove a portion or all of the lot complained of from the provisions of this section. If the council, by a majority vote, elects to remove a portion or all of the petitioner's lot of record from the provision of this section, the nuisance shall be abated only on any portion that remains within a time set by the municipal judge at the hearing. If it is not abated within the time specified in the order, the clerk shall issue a writ directed to the chief of police, directing and requiring the abatement of the nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-9)
Sec. 54-40. - Collection of abatement expense. 
Whenever the person creating or maintaining any nuisance within the city shall fail to abate after notice to do so, and it shall become necessary to issue a writ, directed to the chief of police, requiring him to remove the nuisance, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep an account of the necessary expenses incurred and to render to the clerk a statement of those expenses. The clerk shall issue execution against the owner for that amount, which execution shall be levied upon and collected in the same manner as is provided for the levy and collection of executions for taxes. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2-10)
Sec. 54-41. - Unsightly conditions in residential areas. 
(a)	No person shall maintain residential property in which such person is residing in an unsightly condition. The term "unsightly condition" shall include, but is not limited to, unkept yards, porches, steps or stoops and the cluttering of yards, porches, steps or stoops with any items which would detract from or have any adverse effect on the aesthetics of the neighborhood. 
(b)	Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 9-18-95)
Sec. 54-42. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
Secs. 54-43—54-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION 

Sec. 54-50. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Commercial solicitation or to commercially solicit means any request made in person without a permit, asking for an immediate donation of money or other thing of value, including the purchase of an item or service for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances in which a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is a donation. "Commercial solicitation" shall include passively standing or sitting with a sign or other indication that one is seeking donations without addressing the request to any specific person. 
Downtown development area means the area as designated by the City of Hogansville in conjunction with its activation of the Downtown Development Authority of the City of Hogansville, which area is specifically described within "Exhibit A," attached to Ordinance No. 13-04-15D, and is generally described as follows: 
That area of the City of Hogansville bounded on the south by East Boyd Road and Boyd Road; bounded on the west by Pine Street, Ware Street and the railroad right of way; bounded on the north by Green Avenue and Lincoln Street; and bounded on the east by Industrial Drive. 
Highway 54 commercial corridor means that area of Highway 54 from the downtown development area running east to the termination of the city limits, as well as 500 feet on both sides of Highway 54. 
(Ord. No. 13-04-15D, § 1, 4-15-2013)
Sec. 54-51. - Certain commercial solicitation prohibited; area of restriction. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commercially solicit when the person solicited is in any of the following places within the City of Hogansville, unless otherwise provided for in section 54-52 below: 
(1)	On private property if the owner, tenant or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)	Within the streets, sidewalks or other public areas of the Downtown development area and Highway 54 commercial corridor as defined in section 54-50 above. 
(Ord. No. 13-04-15D, § 1, 4-15-2013)
Sec. 54-52. - Exceptions. 
The following persons are exempt from the provisions of this article which ban commercial solicitation: 
(1)	Educational institutions and those organizations, foundations, associations, corporations, charities and agencies operated, supervised or controlled by or in connection with a nonprofit educational institution, provided that any such institutional organization is qualified under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; 
(2)	Fraternal, civic, benevolent, patriotic and social organizations, when solicitation of contributions is carried on by persons without any form of compensation and which solicitation is confined to their membership; 
(3)	Any charitable organization whose total gross revenue has been less than $25,000.00 for both the immediately preceding and current calendar years; 
(4)	Religious organizations; and
(5)	Political parties, candidates for federal or state office, and political action committees required to file financial information with federal or state elections commissions. 
(Ord. No. 13-04-15D, § 1, 4-15-2013)
Sec. 54-53. - Permit required. 
(a)	No person shall engage in commercial solicitation pursuant to this article unless a permit shall have been obtained from the city manager or his designee. An application for a commercial solicitation permit shall be made to the city manager at least two weeks prior to the proposed date(s) of the commercial solicitation and shall contain all necessary information relating to the same including but in no way limited to: 
(1)	The name of person sponsoring and/or conducting the commercial solicitation;
(2)	The purpose of the commercial solicitation;
(3)	The date and beginning and ending hours of the commercial solicitation;
(4)	The location(s) within the City of Hogansville of the proposed commercial solicitation;
(5)	The estimated number of participants expected to engage in the commercial solicitation; and 
(6)	The name, address and telephone number of a contact person with the sponsor of the commercial solicitation who will be familiar with all aspects of same. 
(b)	Written approval or denial of the application for commercial solicitation permits shall be issued by the city manager within seven days of the filing of the application. Any person denied a permit or who disagrees with the restrictions placed on the permit may appeal such decision to the next regular meeting of the mayor and council. There shall be no cost for the permit. 
(c)	The city manager shall receive and investigate all applications for commercial solicitation permits and is authorized to issue such permits based on the information contained in the application, provided the commercial solicitation is otherwise lawful and when, in the discretion of the city manager, the proposed solicitation will allow for proper traffic control and pedestrian safety. The city manager shall have the right to impose reasonable restrictions on the solicitation including the date, hours, location and number of participants when, in his judgment, such reasonable restrictions are necessary or desirable for the safety, protection and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 13-04-15D, § 1, 4-15-2013)
Sec. 54-54. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this ordinance shall upon conviction in the municipal court of the city be punished as provided in Code section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 13-04-15D, § 1, 4-15-2013)
Chapter 62 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82.
State Law reference— Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; Transient Merchant Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Peddler means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, or provisions, and who offers and exposes such goods, wares or merchandise for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance. 
Itinerant merchant means any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, and whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purposes, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, or public room in any hotel, lodginghouse, apartment, or shop within the city for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. 
(Code 1988, § 9-5-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 62-2—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS 

Sec. 62-31. - License required. 
Each peddler and itinerant merchant who does business within the city shall obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 9-5-2)
Sec. 62-32. - Exemptions. 
The license required by this article shall not be applicable to traveling salesmen of nonresident merchants, nor to newsboys, nor to bona fide merchants who merely deliver goods in the regular course of business, nor to bona fide charitable, religious, or philanthropic organizations, nor to nonresident merchants selling through licensed flea markets. 
(Code 1988, § 9-5-3)
Sec. 62-33. - Application for license. 
Application for a license shall be made as provided in section 18-34, except that the application shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)	The fingerprints of the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business, or in lieu thereof, at least three letters of recommendation from reliable property owners in the county in which the business is to be conducted, certifying as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or other evidence which establishes the good character and business responsibility of that person to the satisfaction of the city manager; 
(2)	The place or places in the city where it is proposed to carry on the applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that the business shall be conducted; 
(3)	The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where the applicant within the six months next preceding the date of the application conducted a transient business, stating the nature thereof and giving the post office and street address of any building or office in which such business was conducted; 
(4)	A statement of the nature, character, and quality of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant in the city; the invoice value and quality of such goods, wares and merchandise; where the goods or property to be sold are manufactured or produced; and where such goods or products are located at the time such application is filed; 
(5)	A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done in order to attract customers; and, if required by the city manager, copies of all advertising, whether by handbills, circulars, newspaper advertising, or otherwise, shall be attached to the application; and 
(6)	Whether or not the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business has been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor, or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense, and punishment assessed therefor. 
(Code 1988, § 9-5-4)
Sec. 62-34. - Bond. 
Before any license shall be issued for engaging in a transient or itinerant business as provided in this article, the applicant for the license shall file with the city clerk a bond running to the city in the sum of $2,000.00, executed by the applicant, as principal, and two sureties upon which service of process may be made in the state. Such bond shall be approved by the city attorney, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all of the provisions of the ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state regulating and concerning the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, and will pay all judgments rendered against the applicant for any violation of those ordinances or statutes, or any of them, together with all judgments and costs that may be recovered against him by any person for damage growing out of any misrepresentation or deception practiced on any person transacting such business with the applicant, whether the misrepresentations or deceptions made were practiced by the owners or by their servants, agents or employees, either at the time of making the sale or through any advertisement of any character whatsoever, printed or circulated with references to the goods, wares and merchandise sold or any part thereof. Action on the bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use of the aggrieved person. Such bond must be approved by the city attorney, both as to form and as to the responsibility of the sureties thereon. 
(Code 1988, § 9-5-5)
Sec. 62-35. - Service of process. 
Before any license shall be issued for engaging in business as a peddler or itinerant merchant, the applicant shall file with the city clerk an instrument nominating and appointing the city clerk his true and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on behalf of the applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the business transacted under the license and the bond given as required by this article, or for the performance of the conditions of the bond, or for any breach thereof, which instrument shall also contain recitals to the effect that the applicant for the license consents and agrees that service of any notice or process may be made upon the agent, and when so made shall be taken and held to be as valid as if personally served upon the person applying for the license, and waiving all claim or right of error by reason of such acknowledgement of service or manner of service. Immediately upon service of process upon the city clerk, as provided in this section, the city clerk shall send to the licensee at his last known address, by registered mail, a copy of that process. 
(Code 1988, § 9-5-6)
Sec. 62-36. - Fee established. 
The business license fee for each peddler and itinerant merchant doing business in the city shall be as fixed from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 9-5-7)
Sec. 62-37. - Loud noises and speaking devices. 
No licensee, nor anyone in his behalf, shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any other sound device including any loudspeaker or amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks, or other public places of the city or upon any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which the licensee proposes to sell. 
(Code 1988, § 9-5-8)
Secs. 62-38—62-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; municipality authorized to adopt additional regulations, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-17.

Sec. 62-61. - Registration required. 
Any person who wishes to solicit donations or contributions for, or sell any insignia or novelty on the streets of the city on behalf of, or under the sponsorship of, any charitable, religious, social, patriotic, or civic club or organization shall be required to register such solicitation or sale with the city clerk at least 48 hours in advance of such event and to obtain a permit for such solicitation. 
(Code 1988, § 9-5-21)
Sec. 62-62. - Form of registration. 
The registration required by this division shall be in writing, shall be signed by the chief officer of the club or organization, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The name and object of the charitable, religious, social, patriotic or civic club or organization conducting or sponsoring the solicitation or sale to which the registration relates; 
(2)	The day or days on which the solicitation or sale will take place;
(3)	The object for which the funds to be derived from the solicitation or sale will be utilized; and 
(4)	The name and address of the chief officer of the club or organization conducting or sponsoring the solicitation or sale. 
(Code 1988, § 9-5-22)
Sec. 62-63. - Exemption. 
This article shall not apply to any local established organization or church operated exclusively for charitable or religious purposes if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies of any such organization or church. 
(Code 1988, § 9-5-23)
Sec. 62-64. - Duty to exhibit permit. 
Charitable solicitors shall exhibit their permits at the request of any citizen. 
(Code 1988, § 9-5-24)
Sec. 62-65. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to submit a registration which contains any false statement. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit donations or contributions or sell any insignia or novelty on the streets of the city purportedly on behalf of, or under the sponsorship of, any charitable, religious, social, patriotic or civic club or organization which does not in fact exist. 
(Code 1988, § 9-5-25)
Sec. 62-66. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
Chapter 66 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 50.
State Law reference— Municipality personnel system, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; personnel benefits authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; employee benefits, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - General purpose. 
The general purpose of this chapter is to establish a system of personnel administration that meets the social, economic and program needs of the people of the city. This system shall provide means to recruit, select, develop and maintain an effective and responsible work force, and shall include policies and procedures for employee hiring and advancement, training and career development, job classifications, salary administration, retirement, fringe benefits, discharge and other related activities. All appointments and promotions in the city service shall be made without regard to sex, race, religion or political affiliation, and shall be based on merit and fitness. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-11)
Sec. 66-2. - Career service. 
(a)	The career service shall be a permanent service to which this law shall apply and shall comprise all tenured positions in the public service now existing or hereafter established, except the following: 
(1)	The mayor and members of the city council;
(2)	Members of boards and commissions, the city manager, and the city attorney;
(3)	Persons employed to make or conduct a temporary and special inquiry, investigation, or examination on behalf of the council, a committee thereof, or the city manager; 
(4)	Part-time or temporary positions unless specifically covered by action of the city manager or council. 
(b)	Nothing in this section shall be construed as precluding the appointing authority from filling any position in the manner in which positions in the career service are filled. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-12)
Sec. 66-3. - Administration. 
(a)	There shall be a personnel department in the city, the executive head of which shall be the city manager or other person designated by Charter or the council. In carrying out his duties as personnel director, he may designate any member of his staff to assist him. 
(b)	The city manager is executive head of the personnel department and shall direct all of its administrative and technical activities and appoint its employees. It shall be the duty of the city manager to: 
(1)	Encourage and exercise leadership in the development of effective personnel administration within the several departments in the government service, and to make available the facilities of the personnel department to this end; 
(2)	Advise the city council on manpower utilization;
(3)	Foster and develop programs for the improvement of employee effectiveness;
(4)	Investigate from time to time the operation and effect of this chapter and of the policies made under this chapter and to report his findings and recommendations to the council; 
(5)	Establish and maintain records of all employees in the government service, in which there shall be set forth as to each employee the class, title, pay or status and other relevant data; 
(6)	Make an annual report to the council regarding the work of the department; and
(7)	Apply and carry out this chapter and the policies under this chapter and to perform any other lawful acts which may be necessary or desirable to carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-13)
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 66-4. - Personnel policies. 
The city manager or a consultant empowered by the city council shall draft personnel policies for the city. Adequate public notice of proposed personnel policies, or additions or changes therein, shall be given to all interested parties. All proposed regulations shall be submitted to the city council for their review and approval by resolution. The policies shall provide: 
(1)	For the preparation, maintenance and revision of a position classification plan for all positions in the career service, based upon similarity of duties performed and responsibilities assumed, so that the same qualifications may reasonably be required for, and the same schedule of pay may be equitably applied to, all positions in the same class. After such classification plan has been approved by the city council, the personnel director shall allocate or reallocate the position of every employee in the career service to one of the classes in the plan. Any employee affected by the allocation or reallocation of a position to a class, shall, after filing with the city manager a written request for reconsideration thereof in such manner and form as the city manager may prescribe, be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard thereon. 
(2)	For the annual submission of a pay plan to the city council.
(3)	For recruitment of capable persons and for administering fair open evaluations, to determine the relative fitness of applicants for positions in the public service. 
(4)	For the certification to the appointing authority of the names of persons who are categorized as qualified to fill a vacancy. 
(5)	For the establishment and maintenance of eligible lists for appointment and promotion, upon which lists shall be placed the names of successful candidates. 
(6)	For promotions which shall give appropriate consideration to the applicant's qualifications, record of performance and ability. 
(7)	For a period of employee probation, upon appointment or promotion, not to exceed one year, prior to permanent appointment. 
(8)	For emergency employment for not more than 90 days with the consent of the city manager and for provisional employment without open evaluation when there is no appropriate eligible list available. No such provisional employment shall continue longer than six months nor shall successive provisional appointments be allowed except during the first year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived. 
(9)	For the establishment of programs, including trainee programs, designed to attract and utilize persons with minimal qualifications, but with potential for development, in order to provide career development opportunities among members of disadvantaged groups, handicapped persons and returning veterans. Such programs may provide for permanent appointment upon the satisfactory completion of the training period without further examination. 
(10)	For keeping records of performance of all employees in the career service, which performance records shall be considered in determining salary increments or increases for meritorious service; as a factor in promotions; as a factor in determining the order of layoffs because of lack of funds or work and in reinstatement; and as a factor in demotions, discharges and transfers. 
(11)	For layoffs by reason of lack of funds or work or abolition of a position, or material change in duties or organization, and for reemployment of employees so laid off. 
(12)	For establishment of a plan for resolving employee grievances and complaints.
(13)	For establishment of disciplinary measures such as suspension, demotion in rank or grade, or discharge. Such measures shall provide for presentation of charges, hearing rights, and appeals for all permanent employees in the career service. 
(14)	For establishing and publicizing fringe benefits such as insurance programs, retirement and leave policies. 
(15)	For establishing hours of work, holidays and attendance regulations in various classes of positions in the career service. 
(16)	For development and operation of programs to improve work effectiveness including training, safety, health, welfare, counseling, recreation and employee relations. 
(17)	For such other policies and administrative regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter as may be proper and necessary for its enforcement. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-14)
Sec. 66-5. - Certification of payroll. 
The city manager or his authorized agent shall be responsible for certification of the payroll vouchers that the persons named therein have been appointed and employed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the policies under this chapter. No city disbursing or auditing officer shall make or approve or take any part in making or approving any payment for personal service to any persons holding a position in the city government unless the payroll voucher or account of such pay bears the certification of the city manager or his authorized agent. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-15)
Sec. 66-6. - Grievance procedure. 
(a)	A grievance is any dispute concerning the interpretation or application of this chapter, or of the personnel policies governing personnel practices or working conditions, or decisions relative to any disciplinary action, dismissal, demotion or charge of discrimination. 
(b)	Grievances shall be processed in accordance with procedures established by the city council in personnel policies. 
(c)	An appeals board is hereby created, the chair of which shall be the mayor. The chair shall be empowered to select necessary councilmembers in cases where needed to complete the appeals board. The appeals board shall have the power to settle grievances and in more serious cases to review and recommend attention to the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-16)
Sec. 66-7. - Agreements authorized. 
(a)	The city is authorized and empowered to enter into reciprocal agreements, upon such terms as may be agreed upon, for the use of equipment, materials, facilities and services with any public agency or body for purposes deemed of benefit to the public personnel system. 
(b)	The city manager, acting in behalf of the city council, may cooperate with other governmental agencies charged with public personnel administration in conducting personnel tests, recruiting personnel, training personnel, establishing lists from which eligibles shall be certified for appointments and for the interchange of personnel and their benefits. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-17)
Sec. 66-8. - Political activities. 
(a)	No city employee in the career service shall hold an elective office in the city government, nor shall he give or solicit any contributions or assessments, or services, nor publicly endorse any candidate for any city elective office. 
(b)	Nothing contained in this chapter shall affect the right of an employee to contribute to, hold membership in, serve as an officer of, or support a political party, to vote as he chooses, to support or campaign for county, state, or national political candidates, to express privately his opinions on all political subjects and candidates, to maintain political neutrality or to attend political meetings. 
(c)	Any city employee who, as a normal and foreseeable incident to his principal job or position, performs duties in connection with an activity financed in whole or in part by federal loans or grants, comes under the Federal Hatch Act which prohibits the following: 
(1)	Use of official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with an election or nomination for office, or affecting the result thereof; 
(2)	Directly or indirectly coercing, attempting to coerce, commanding or advising any other officer or employee to pay, lend, or contribute any part of his salary or compensation or anything else of value to any party; committee, organization, agency, or person for political purposes; 
(3)	Active participation in political management or in political campaigns.
(Code 1988, § 2-4-18)
Sec. 66-9. - Unlawful acts prohibited. 
(a)	No person shall make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or report with regard to any test, certification or appointment made under any provision of this chapter or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of this chapter and policies of this chapter. 
(b)	No person shall, directly or indirectly give, render, pay, offer, solicit, or accept any money, service, or other valuable consideration for any appointment, proposed appointment, promotion, or proposed promotion to, or any advantage in, a position in the career service. 
(c)	No employee of the personnel department, examiner, or other person shall defeat, deceive or obstruct any person in his right to examination, eligibility, certification or appointment under this chapter, or furnish to any person any special or secret information for the purpose of affecting the rights or prospects of any person with respect to employment in the career service. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-19)
Secs. 66-10—66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOCIAL SECURITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Benefit System, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-20.

Sec. 66-31. - Coverage extended. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend at the earliest date possible under the agreement entered into by the state and the Federal Security Administrator, to the employees and officials thereof, and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this article, the benefits of the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-31)
Sec. 66-32. - Agreements. 
The mayor or other chief executive officer of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the employees' retirement system and officials as provided for in section 66-31. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-32)
Sec. 66-33. - Employee contributions. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in section 66-31 are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-33)
Sec. 66-34. - Contributions by city. 
There shall be appropriated from general funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employers' contributions, administrative expenses, and a guaranty fund to assure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a result of the agreement referred to in section 66-32. Such funds shall be paid over to the employees' retirement system of the state in accordance with regulations established by that agency. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-34)
Sec. 66-35. - Records; reports. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-35)
Sec. 66-36. - Excluded persons. 
(a)	There is hereby excluded from this article any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official now covered, or authorized to be covered, by any other ordinance or law creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the city or its instrumentalities. 
(b)	There is hereby excluded from this article any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1988, § 2-4-36)
Secs. 66-37—66-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 66-61. - Penalties. 
Any person who willfully violates any provision of this chapter or of the personnel policies established under this chapter may, upon hearing by the city council, have one of the following judgments rendered: 
(1)	Dismissal from government service;
(2)	Demotion in rank or grade;
(3)	Ineligibility for appointment to or employment in a position in the city service for a period of time or indefinitely; 
(4)	Suspension for a period of time up to two weeks, as stipulated by the city manager.
(Code 1988, § 9-5-20)
Chapter 70 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; flood damage prevention, ch. 42; historical preservation, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 86; PUD, planned unit development district, § 86-291 et seq.; utilities, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 102.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1—70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.

Sec. 70-31. - Creation. 
In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the city which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the planning commission is hereby created and established. 
(Code 1988, § 8-1-1)
Sec. 70-32. - Membership. 
The planning commission shall consist of eight members, who shall be residents of the city, appointed by the city council. The terms of the members of the planning commission shall be for four years, which terms shall be staggered. Any vacancy in membership of the planning commission shall be filled for the unexpired term by the city council which shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1988, § 8-1-2)
Sec. 70-33. - Organization; rules, staff; finances. 
(a)	The planning commission shall elect its chair from among its members. The term of the chair shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the city. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission, unless otherwise exempted by law, shall be open to the public. All records of the planning commission shall be a public record. 
(b)	The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the federal, state, or local public or semipublic agencies and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for that purpose by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 8-1-3)
Sec. 70-34. - Powers and duties. 
It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to make such careful and comprehensive surveys and studies, or participate with agencies in making those surveys and studies, of existing conditions and probable future development and to prepare such plans for physical, social and economic growth as will best promote the public welfare and prosperity, as well as the efficiency and economy in the development of the entire area of the city. In particular, the planning commission shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)	Prepare a master plan or parts thereof for the development of the city;
(2)	Prepare and recommend for adoption to the city council a zoning ordinance and map for the city; 
(3)	Prepare and recommend for adoption by the city council regulations for the subdivision of land, and administer the regulations that may be adopted; and 
(4)	Prepare and recommend for adoption to the city council a plan or official map showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widened or narrowed streets, public open spaces or public building sites, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings or other structures within such lines, within the city. 
(Code 1988, § 8-1-4)
Secs. 70-35—70-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY-COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.

Sec. 70-61. - Creation. 
There is hereby created the planning and development commission of Hogansville, LaGrange, West Point, and Troup County. 
(Code 1988, § 8-1-11)
Sec. 70-62. - Membership. 
The membership of the planning and development commission shall consist of five members appointed by the City of LaGrange, four members appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Troup County, three members each appointed by the cities of Hogansville and West Point. All members so appointed to the commission must be residents of Troup County and/or residents of West Point, Hogansville and LaGrange, Georgia. Any expert or other employees need not be residents of the county. 
(Code 1988, § 8-1-12)
Sec. 70-63. - Appropriations. 
There is hereby designated from city funds such sums as appropriated from time to time by the city council to the use of the planning and development commission. 
(Code 1988, § 8-1-13)
Chapter 74 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; signs for sexually oriented businesses, § 18-176; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 102.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ground sign means any permanent or temporary sign supported by uprights or braces placed upon the ground, not supported by or suspended from any building. 
Projecting sign means any sign which is attached perpendicular to a building or other structure and extended from the plane of such building walls. 
Public property means any street, alley, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare in the city. 
Separate use sign means a sign advertising a product or service which is offered other than on the premises where the sign is located. 
Sign means any representation with letters, numerals or pictures, graphic, or advertising display including, but not limited to, any announcement, declaration, demonstration or insignia used to advertise or promote the interest of any person. 
Wall sign means any sign which is attached flat to, painted on, or pinned away from the parallel to a wall. 
(Code 1988, § 8-4-2)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-2. - Signs extending over public property—Prohibited. 
No wall sign or projecting sign shall extend more than 18 inches over or onto public property and no ground sign shall extend over public property to any extent. 
(Code 1988, § 8-4-3)
Sec. 74-3. - Same—Restrictions. 
Any ground sign which shall extend over public property and any wall or projecting sign which shall extend over public property more than 18 inches is hereby declared to be a nonconforming sign and can only be maintained, repaired or restored. Such sign must be removed or changed or altered to conform with the provisions of this chapter, in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 8-4-4)
Sec. 74-4. - Separate use signs; location restrictions. 
Separate use signs are permitted within the city limit area along Highway I-85, SR 403, SR 14, SR 54, and SR 100 where zoned commercial or industrial. 
(Code 1988, § 8-4-5)
Sec. 74-4.1. - Billboards permitted in light industrial district. 
(a)	Billboards shall be allowed in light industrial districts. "Light industrial district" is defined as to provide areas for light manufacturing uses that primarily involve finishing or assembly of previously manufactured goods. The district is also intended to provide for location of wholesale use as well as other uses. 
(1)	Light industrial district excludes manufacturing or industrial uses that emit noxious fumes, odors, dust, gas noise or vibration outside of any building on the premises. It also excludes hazardous materials such as those involving bulk storage of gasoline or toxic chemicals. 
(2)	The district is designed for industrial and warehousing uses that do not have detrimental effect on adjoining residential or commercial developments. 
(b)	Billboards will require a building permit; permit fee will be based on cost of construction. The permit application will require structural drawings sealed by a professional engineer. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-07, 3-7-2005)
Sec. 74-5. - Traffic hazards. 
No sign or other advertising structure shall be erected at the intersection of any street in such a manner as to obstruct the free and clear vision, or at any location where by reason of the position, shape or color thereof, such sign may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device, or which makes use of the words "Stop," "Look," "Danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol or character so as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
(Code 1988, § 8-4-6)
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
Sec. 74-6. - Obscene signs. 
No person shall use any sign to advertise any obscene, indecent or immoral matter, nor shall any such obscene, indecent or immoral matter be used in or upon such sign. 
(Code 1988, § 8-4-7)
State Law reference— Obscene material defined, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80; restriction on outdoor signs, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75. 
Sec. 74-7. - Nonconforming signs; removal. 
Nonconforming signs, signs which on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived do not conform with the requirements of this chapter, must be removed, changed, or altered to conform with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 8-4-8)
Sec. 74-8. - Maintenance of nonconforming signs. 
Minor maintenance and repairs of nonconforming signs such as repainting and electrical repairs shall be permitted but changes in the size or shape of the sign shall not be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 8-4-9)
Sec. 74-9. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1988, § 8-4-10)
Sec. 74-10. - Remedies. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this chapter and for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the building inspector or other appropriate official of the city shall have the right to seek and undertake the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter in the superior court of the county, such right of enforcement being in addition to and cumulative of the enforcement provisions contained in section 74-9, including but not limited to a right to compel demolition of any such nonconforming sign and to enjoin the owner of such sign from the continued maintenance of any such sign, and to enjoin the erection of a sign which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 8-4-11)
Secs. 74-11—74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INTERSTATE SIGNS 

Sec. 74-31. - General sign provisions. 
(a)	This article shall apply to all outdoor advertising signs abutting or visible from the Interstate 85 right-of-way in the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)	No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this article. 
(c)	Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition, and not permitted to become dilapidated. 
(d)	All signs located on sites abutting or visible from the Interstate 85 right-of-way shall conform with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. (The Georgia Outdoor Advertising Code) and shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit under that code. In instances where the sign controls of this article are more strict, the regulations of this article shall apply. 
(e)	Any sign which advertises an activity, business, product or service which has ceased operation or production shall be removed within six months of the discontinuance of that activity, business, product or service. 
(Code 1988, § 8-4-21)
Sec. 74-32. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)	Signs imitating warning signals are prohibited. No sign shall display lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles; nor shall any signs use the words, slogans, dimensional shapes and sizes, or colors of governmental traffic signs. 
(b)	No signs, except traffic signs and signals and informational signs erected by a public agency, are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way. 
(c)	Signs painted or attached to natural features such as trees or rocks, telephone poles, utility poles, or fence posts are prohibited. 
(d)	Fluttering ribbons and banners are prohibited.
(e)	Signs within 300 feet of any officially designated historical site or monument, except signs pertaining to that particular site or monument, are prohibited. 
(Code 1988, § 8-4-22)
State Law reference— Designated signs, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-73. 
Sec. 74-33. - Regulations for specific types of signs. 
(a)	Home occupation signs. For home occupation signs, one nonilluminated professional or business name plate not exceeding two square feet in area is permitted. 
(b)	Signs of work under construction. For signs of work under construction, one nonilluminated sign not exceeding 40 square feet in area displaying the name of the building, the contractors, the architects, the engineers, the owners, the financial selling and development agencies is permitted upon the premises or any work under construction, alteration, or removal. Such signs shall be removed from the site within 30 days after completion of the project. 
(c)	Temporary subdivision signs. Temporary signs, not exceeding 40 square feet in area, announcing a land subdivision development are permitted on the premises of the land subdivision. Such signs shall be spaced not less than 300 feet apart. Such signs shall be removed when 75 percent of the lots are conveyed. 
(d)	Roof signs. Not more than one roof sign structure may be erected on the roof of any one building. No roof sign structure shall extend more than 25 feet above the elevation of the roof. 
(e)	Wall signs. Signs on the walls of a building, including signs attached flat against the wall, painted wall signs and projecting signs, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Signs on the broad surface of a building. The total area of signs on the exterior surface of a building shall not exceed 25 percent of the front surface of a building. 
(2)	Signs on the side and roof surface of a building. The total area of signs on a side or roof surface of a building shall not exceed 50 percent of the exterior side or roof surface of a building, respectively. 
(3)	Projecting signs. Wall signs attached flat against a wall may extend not more than 24 inches from a wall. Signs attached at an angle to a wall may extend from the wall of a building not more than five feet. 
(f)	Illuminated signs. Illumination devices shall be so placed and so shielded that light from the sign itself will not be directly cast into any residential district, sleeping rooms in any district or the eyes of an automobile or vehicular driver. 
(g)	Outdoor advertising signs. Outdoor advertising signs shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Uniform size. The outside measurements of all outdoor advertising signs shall be 12 feet in height and 50 feet in length, with or without trim, or such other measurements as approved by the state department of transportation. 
(2)	Illumination. All illuminated signs shall use base mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting, including but not limited to neon, animation and running lights, is prohibited. 
(3)	Height above interstate grade. All signs shall be a minimum of ten feet above adjacent interstate pavement measuring from the lower portion of the sign face. Signs shall not exceed 30 feet in height. Two signs in the same location (back to back or "V" formation) shall be the same height above the interstate's surface. 
(4)	Extrusions prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
(5)	Number of signs per location. Only one sign shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back to back or "V" formation signs but prohibits two signs (side by side) facing the same direction. 
(6)	Spacing. Sign locations shall be no less than 500 feet apart measuring from the two closest points. 
(7)	Number near interchanges. Three outdoor advertising signs are allowed per quadrant of any interchange adjacent to the interstate highway. These signs must be within commercially or industrially zoned areas as specified in state law and are restricted to any area 1,200 feet long beginning 500 feet from the point where the pavement widens on the main traveled way to accommodate the longest entrance or exit ramp. 
(8)	Marsh and historic area locations prohibited. No sign shall be placed in or obstruct the view of a marshland area or any area of designated historic interest. 
(9)	Advertisement limitations. Outdoor advertising shall be limited to the following: 
a.	Travel service facilities including lodgings, gas, food, camping.
b.	Areas of scenic beauty.
c.	Public attractions including historic, natural, scientific or recreational amenities.
d.	Other motorist services.
e.	Any combination of the facilities listed in subsection (9)a—d of this section. Further, the content of all advertising shall be directional in nature. 
(h)	On-premises signs. On-premises signs located within 100 feet of a regularly used part of the activity being advertised and located on the same property and for sale or for lease signs located on the property being advertised are not prohibited. 
(i)	Nonconforming signs. Any legally erected sign which would become nonconforming as a result of this article would be allowed to remain until purchased by the state department of transportation or the county, provided that the sign owner meets the requirements of state laws and rules and regulations governing such signs. 
(Code 1988, § 8-4-23)
Sec. 74-34. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1988, § 8-4-24)
Chapter 78 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animal waste, § 10-59; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; utilities, ch. 98.
State Law reference— Authority to control solid waste, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2).

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Collector means a person who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions, and/or similar locations, or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from his own single-family dwelling unit. 
Curbside junk means any items placed on a curb or sidewalk adjacent to a public street or on the public street with the obvious intent of disposing of such items. The term "curbside junk" shall include, but is not limited to, old tires, construction debris, any household belongings, supplies, furniture, clothing and appliances, except stoves and refrigerators. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing, or deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Disposal operation means the performance of solid waste disposal including administration, personnel, land, equipment, design and other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal. 
Disposal site means the location or land area where the final disposition of solid waste occurs. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological wastes; highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; sewage sludges; and other waste material determined to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety, or environment, except radioactive waste materials as provided for in Rules of the Department of Natural Resources, Chapter 391-3-9-01 et seq., entitled "Radioactive Waste Material Disposal." 
Industrial waste means waste materials generated in industrial operations. 
Open dump means a disposal site at which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn or to otherwise create environmental pollution or nuisance. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms, including kitchen wastes, manure, offal, hatchery and poultry wastes, and garbage. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing solid wastes for future use in accordance with an approved plan. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body waste), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid commercial and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. 
Sanitary landfilling means a method of disposing of putrescible waste and/or hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded waste materials. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes (except water carried body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludges, animal manure, industrial wastes, residue from incineration, food processing wastes, construction wastes, hazardous wastes, and any other waste material in a solid or semisolid state not otherwise defined in this chapter. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposing of solid wastes, or any combination thereof. 
Transfer station means a facility used to transfer solid wastes from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal facility. 
(Code 1988, § 5-2-2)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the rules and regulations contained in this chapter is to provide for the protection of the public health by prescribing the manner of storage, collection, transportation and disposal of residential and industrial waste, garbage and refuse. 
(Code 1988, § 5-2-1)
State Law reference— Authority to adopt regulations, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.9. 
Sec. 78-3. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Generally. The public works director shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. In the exercise of his solid waste management duties, the director shall: 
(1)	Supervise the collection of solid waste, including the operation and maintenance of equipment and the supervision of personnel; 
(2)	Establish collection schedules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
(3)	Supervise the operation and maintenance of the sanitary landfill and/or other disposal sites or facilities; and 
(4)	Inspect and regulate the operations of private collectors and private transportation and disposal systems to ensure that such operations are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	Limitations of authority. All regulatory actions of the public works director shall be subject to the review of the city manager. 
(c)	Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a requirement of, or a fee charged by, the public works director shall have the right to appeal to the city council, which may, upon hearing, confirm, modify or revoke such requirement or fee. 
(Code 1988, § 5-2-3)
Secs. 78-4—78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 78-31. - Precollection practices. 
(a)	Generally. No person shall keep or store solid waste outside of any residence or building within the city, except in proper containers for collection or unless otherwise prepared, as set forth in this chapter or under the express prior approval of the public works director. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The public works director shall notify the owner or occupant by written notice to remove the accumulation of solid waste from the property owned or occupied by him. Failure to remove such accumulation within two weeks of the date of such written notice shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and shall subject the violator to penalties set forth in this chapter. Each day during or upon which such unlawful accumulation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)	Containers. 
(1)	Garbage containers shall be provided by the owner or occupant of each residence or establishment sufficient in number to accommodate all waste generated by the resident or establishment between collections. Containers shall be of durable metal or plastic, watertight, nonabsorbent, rust-resistant, rodentproof, and easily cleanable. Containers shall be equipped with handles and tightly fitted covers and shall have a capacity of not less than 15 nor more than 40 gallons, except that bulk containers may be used of a type accepted by the public works director as suitable for mechanical collection by publicly owned equipment used for such collection. Containers which do not meet the standards of this section or which have defects causing waste to be scattered upon the ground during collection or which hamper or injure the persons collecting wastes shall be promptly replaced. 
(2)	Paper or plastic bags of a type, size and material designed for solid waste disposal may be used to contain refuse for storage and collection, provided they are unbroken, sealed and loaded in such manner that normal handling will not cause the bag to open. 
(c)	Rubbish. Rubbish may be stored for collection in paperboard boxes or other throwaway containers strong enough to retain the waste; loose paper or cuttings shall be tied in bundles. Rubbish containers or bundles shall not exceed 50 pounds in weight. Limbs or cuttings shall not exceed five inches in diameter nor five feet in length. 
(d)	Placement. On days designated as collection days for the respective routes, rubbish shall be placed for collection on the curb or beside the roadway in front of the residence or establishment owning such garbage or rubbish, but not in the gutter or in the street or alley in such manner as to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Garbage shall be placed in a proper container at the rear of the dwelling or building. 
(e)	Scavenging. No person other than the owner or authorized collection personnel shall sift the contents of or remove anything from containers, boxes or bundles containing garbage or rubbish. 
(f)	Vehicles. The accumulation of one or more motor vehicles or any major part thereof which does not have a current state license plate or which is in one of the following conditions: 
(1)	Resting on blocks;
(2)	Without wheels;
(3)	With major parts missing;
(4)	Without tires; or
(5)	In a state of repair which precludes further use;
shall be an unauthorized accumulation of refuse, except where the vehicle is stored in an enclosed building or located on the premises of a licensed business enterprise operating in a lawful place and manner and the vehicle is necessary to the operation of such business. Where the motor vehicle or a major part thereof is not located in an enclosed building, such premises shall be screened on all sides by a fence or shrubbery so as to shield such accumulation from sight. 
(Code 1988, § 5-2-4)
Sec. 78-32. - Collection. 
(a)	Frequency. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected from residential premises at least weekly. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected from commercial and business establishments in congested areas daily except Sundays and legal holidays. 
(b)	Limitations. 
(1)	Industrial waste, large animals over 50 pounds, or waste from construction, demolition, landscaping or processing operations will not be collected, transported or disposed of by public equipment or facilities. Such waste collection, transportation, and disposal shall be by the owner and/or generators of such waste or animals, unless suitable arrangements are made with the city manager for proper disposal and fees. 
(2)	It shall be a violation of this chapter to place or cause to be placed in any container, box, or bundle, or otherwise for collection, any hazardous waste of any kind except upon specific prior arrangement with the public works director. 
(c)	Collection vehicles. Vehicles used for collection and transportation of solid waste shall be kept clean and in good repair. Vehicles used for collection and transportation of solid waste shall be constructed in such a manner that the contents thereof cannot be spilled, leaked or blown from the vehicle. Vehicles used for collection and transportation of solid waste shall be readily identifiable by letter, not less than three inches high and easily legible, painted on the door of the vehicle cab or in an equally conspicuous place, showing the owner's name, telephone number, state permit number, truck number, and rated load capacity in cubic yards. The rated load capacity shall be as specified by the public works director following his measurement of the load-carrying portion of the truck body. City-owned vehicles are exempt from the requirement of this subsection. 
(d)	Private contractors. No person other than employees of the city will collect, transport or dispose of solid waste for pay in the city without having first applied for and received a license to engage in such business. 
(e)	Limitations on use of public disposal sites. No vehicle shall discharge waste at a publicly operated disposal site unless the operator thereof has in his possession a valid permit signed by the city clerk. 
(Code 1988, § 5-2-5)
Sec. 78-33. - Disposal. 
All disposal of solid waste shall be at disposal sites operated in accordance with state laws and with rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources, and at no other place. Waste deposited during operating hours at any site operated by the municipality shall be placed as designated by the attendant on duty. Waste deposited at any time the facility is not open shall be placed in a bulk container located near the site entrance gate for the purpose of receiving such waste. Operating hours shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays. Motor vehicle bodies or major parts thereof, large appliances, stumps, or logs over four feet in length shall not be deposited at publicly operated disposal sites except by prior arrangement with the public works director. Fees for such disposal shall be fixed and collected as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 5-2-6)
Sec. 78-34. - Fees. 
(a)	Charges for public collection and disposal. Monthly charges for public collection and disposal of solid waste shall be as fixed from time to time by the city council. 
(b)	Billing. 
(1)	Service charges are levied against both the owner and the occupant of premises served, jointly and severally, but collecting from one shall relieve the other. 
(2)	Charges for solid waste collection and disposal service shall be billed and collected monthly in advance and shall be payable by the owner or occupant at the office of the city clerk. Billings shall be combined with charges for city utility service. Due dates and penalties shall be as provided for delinquent utility payments. 
(3)	The municipal landfill attendant shall make a record of each time a vehicle discharges waste at a public disposal site. Such record shall show the date, time of day, vehicle owner's name, vehicle number, and its rated load capacity in cubic yards. The original copy shall be retained by the attendant and filed daily at the office of the city clerk for billing and collection. The failure of any person to pay such accrued charges within 15 days shall be sufficient reason to deny such person or his employee or agent the right to continue using the municipal disposal site until all such charges are paid in full. 
(Code 1988, § 5-2-7)
Sec. 78-35. - Open burning. 
There shall be no open burning of solid waste in the city except in accordance with regulations of the state department of natural resources and a written permit from the city. 
(Code 1988, § 5-2-8)
Cross reference— Open burning, § 38-37. 
State Law reference— Open burning, Admin. Reg. of the State of Georgia, Dept. of Natural Resources, § 391-3-1-.02(5). 
Sec. 78-36. - Curbside junk prohibited. 
No person shall place curbside junk on the curb or sidewalk adjacent to a public street or on a public street in the city. Each day such curbside junk remains on the property shall be a separate violation of this section and violators may be fined up to $200.00 for each violation. 
(Ord. of 9-18-1995, § 5-2-10)
Sec. 78-37. - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1988, § 5-2-9)
Secs. 78-38—78-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TIRE DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54.

Sec. 78-71. - Purpose; authority. 
(a)	This article is enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city and to provide for the orderly and safe disposal of scrap tires. 
(b)	This article is enacted pursuant to the general assembly's express provision contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1(1), (6), granting municipalities authority to abate or clean up scrap tires which are a threat or potential threat to human health. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2003, § A(a), (j))
Sec. 78-72. - Tires on public rights-of-way or private property. 
The city will not collect or dispose of any tires found on public rights-of-way or private property. It shall be unlawful to store any tires on residential property, to have tires exposed in residential areas, or to place tires on public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2003, § A(b))
Sec. 78-73. - Scrap tires. 
(a)	All tire retailers shall be responsible for handling and disposing of scrap tires in accordance with state law. Purchasers of new or used tires should leave their scrap tires with the tire retailer for handling and disposal. 
(b)	All scrap tire generators must be issued a state and city identification number. In addition, all scrap tire generator facilities must be issued a state and city identification number. 
(c)	All scrap tire carriers must be issued a permit to transport scrap tires. All scrap tire carriers must keep an accurate manifest and record of tires transported and removed. Scrap tire carriers shall only take scrap tires to an approved facility which must have identification that it is an approved facility. 
(d)	Scrap tire generators, carriers and sorters must maintain disposal records and shall make records available upon request. 
(e)	The city shall provide information to its residents and citizens on the proper manner for disposing of scrap tires, and shall identify carriers that have been permitted to transport scrap tires. On certain dates and times, as may be announced by the public works director, scrap tires may be disposed of at the city transfer station. 
(f)	City residents, exclusive of commercial businesses and industries located within the city, may dispose of scrap tires and scrap tire materials free of charge by taking the scrap tires or scrap tire materials to the recycling center, located at the city transfer station. Proof of residency may be shown by providing a current utility bill and picture identification with address indicated. All others shall be subject to a fee per tire as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2003, § A(c)—(h))
Sec. 78-74. - Abatement of scrap tire nuisance. 
(a)	Abatement of the nuisance created by scrap tires or scrap tire materials shall be as follows: 
(1)	The city may abate any threat or potential threat to public health or the environment created or which could be created by scrap tires or other scrap tire materials by removing or processing the scrap tires or other scrap tire materials. Before taking any action to abate the threat or potential threat, the city shall give any person having the care, custody, or control of the scrap tires or materials or owning the property upon which the scrap tires or scrap tire materials are located notice of the city's intention and order the responsible party to abate the threat or potential threat in a manner approved by the city. 
(2)	Whenever the public works director has reason to believe that a violation of any provision of this section has occurred, he shall attempt to obtain a remedy with the violator by conference, conciliation, or persuasion. In the case of failure of such conference, conciliation, or persuasion to effect a remedy to such violation, the public works director may issue an order directed to such violator. The order shall specify the provisions of this section or rule or regulation alleged to have been violated and shall order that necessary corrective action be taken within a reasonable time to be prescribed in such order. Any order issued by the public works director under this section shall be signed by the public works director. Any such order shall become final unless the person named therein request in writing a hearing no later than 30 days after such order is served on such person. 
(3)	If the responsible party is unable or unwilling to comply with such order or if no person who has contributed or is contributing to the scrap tires or scrap tire materials which are to be abated can be found, the public works director may undertake the cleanup of the site. 
(4)	The public works department or its contractors may enter upon the property of any person at such time and in such manner as deemed necessary to effectuate the necessary corrective action to protect human health and the environment. 
(5)	The city shall not be liable for any loss of business, damages or taking of property associated with the corrective action. 
(b)	The city may bring an action or proceeding against the property owner or the person having possession, care, custody or control of the scrap tires or other scrap tire materials to enforce the corrective action order issued and to recover any reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the solid waste department, including administrative and legal expenses. The public works department's certification of expenses shall be prima facie evidence that the expenses are reasonable and necessary. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any generator of scrap tires who is identified as being a contributor to the materials which are the object of the abatement and who can document that he has fully complied with this section and all rules promulgated pursuant to this section in disposing of such scrap tires shall not be liable for any of the cost of recovery actions of the abatement. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2003, § A(i))
Cross reference— Maintenance of property and nuisances, § 54-31 et seq. 
Chapter 82 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Paving at railroad crossings, § 7.01; authority to improve streets, §§ 3.01(u), 7.02; control of public ways, § 3.01(v).
Cross reference— Any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessments saved from repeal, § 1-12(7); any ordinance dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley saved from repeal, § 1-12(8); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; cemeteries, ch. 22; environment, ch. 34; flood damage prevention, ch. 42; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 62; planning and development, ch. 70; signs, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 86; general requirements for streets and other rights-of-way, § 86-131 et seq.; street design requirements, § 86-171 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94; leaving vehicles on streets; repairing, displaying for sale, § 94-34; washing vehicles on streets, cleaning up oil and grease by garages, § 94-35; utilities, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 102.
State Law reference— Constitutional powers regarding streets, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); authority of municipalities to own, operate and maintain streets, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; street obstructions, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; municipal street administration, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; assessments for improvements, O.C.G.A., § 36-39-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 82-1—82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET IMPROVEMENT 

Sec. 82-31. - Permit to dig in streets. 
No person shall make any excavations or openings or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles or for any other purposes, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the city clerk. A permit shall not be required where the work is performed under a contract with the city but in the event that work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the city clerk and the police department at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-1)
Sec. 82-32. - Application for permit; indemnification of city. 
(a)	All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street or sidewalk, as set forth in section 82-31, shall make written application therefor, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. 
(b)	Any person obtaining a permit as provided for in section 82-31 and subsection (a) of this section agrees, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's operations. 
(Code 1988, §§ 5-1-2, 5-1-3)
Sec. 82-33. - Street repair. 
When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making the excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening. Any person neglecting, refusing or failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof; and where any neglect, refusal or failure is continued, after notice from the city clerk, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-4)
Sec. 82-34. - Excavations; leaving unprotected. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who obtains a permit under the sections of this chapter to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the city without placing and maintaining proper guardrails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the work, sufficient to warn the public of any excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of work. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-5)
Sec. 82-35. - Sidewalk construction. 
No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any person of any brick, wood or other material without a written permit from the city. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-6)
Sec. 82-36. - Streets and sidewalks not to be damaged. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drag or run, or cause to be dragged or run, any harrow or other implement, engine, machine or tool upon any asphalt, bithulitic, warrenite or other type of permanently paved street or sidewalk of the city which shall be liable in any way to injure or cut the surface thereof. It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the same manner. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-7)
Sec. 82-37. - Heavy vehicles on city streets. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle in excess of 12,500 pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW) on any street within the city limits, unless said vehicle is making a local pickup or delivery, except on the following state highways and county roads, to wit: Georgia Highways 14, 54 and 100; county roads Mountville-Hogansville Road, Bass Cross Road and Mobley Bridge Road. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in excess of 12,500 pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW) on any street in the city limits, public parking areas, public right-of-way, public land, or private property (unless said private property is zoned commercial or industrial) unless such vehicle has a valid truck parking permit issued by the city manager. 
(c)	In issuing a permit to park a vehicle in excess of 12,500 pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW), the city manager shall receive and consider the following: 
(1)	Application for truck-parking permit in the format established by the city manager;
(2)	A scaled sketch of the proposed parking site;
(3)	A photograph of the area proposed for vehicle parking;
(4)	Appropriateness of proposed parking place for vehicle;
(5)	Appropriateness of route of vehicle to and from proposed parking place and ability of such roadway to support such vehicle traffic; 
(6)	Public comments made during a ten-day public comment period; and
(7)	Whether, in the opinion of the city manager, the proposed permit would adversely affect the neighborhood at issue. 
(d)	No tractor-trailer combination will be eligible for the parking permit established herein. 
(e)	Permits shall be issued on a calendar year basis at a cost as may be established from time to time by the city council. Permits will be prorated for any partial year on a quarterly basis. 
(f)	All persons found guilty of a violation of this ordinance shall be punished in accordance with section 1-7 of the Code. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-8; Ord. No. 07-04-02-B, § 1, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 13-04-15A, § 1, 4-15-2013; Ord. No. 15-06-01, § 1, 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 82-38. - Violation. 
All persons found guilty of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-9)
Secs. 82-39—82-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUMBERING OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 82-61. - Numbering required. 
Every building, place of residence or place of business and all premises, including vacant lots, whether reserved for commercial or residential purposes, which front on any public street, are required to have a number according to the system established by this article. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-21)
Sec. 82-62. - Attachment of numbers to structures. 
The number or numbers assigned to any building shall be permanently attached to the outside of the building in a conspicuous place easily discernible from the street upon which the building faces; provided that if any building is set back from the curbline of the street it faces more than 100 feet, the number assigned to the building shall also be displayed in a manner determined by the building inspector in a conspicuous place of the premises not further than 50 feet from the curbline of the street on which the building faces. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-22)
Sec. 82-63. - Duties of building inspector. 
It shall be the duty of the building inspector to assign each building a number or numbers, to attach or to have attached the assigned number or numbers and to do all things necessary and practical to carry into affect the intent and provisions of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-23)
Cross reference— Building inspector, § 14-51 et seq. 
Sec. 82-64. - Numbering districts. 
The city is hereby divided into street numbering districts as follows: 
(1)	Northeast district. The northeast district is that part of the city lying north of the centerline of Main Street and east of the centerline of U.S. Highway 29. 
(2)	Southeast district. The southeast district is that part of the city lying south of the centerline of East Main Street and east of the centerline of U.S. Highway 29. 
(3)	Southwest district. The southwest district is that part of the city lying south of the centerline of Main Street and west of the centerline of U.S. Highway 29. 
(4)	Northwest district. The northwest district is that part of the city lying north of the centerline of Main Street and west of the centerline of U.S. Highway 29. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-24)
Sec. 82-65. - Assignment of numbers. 
The building inspector is hereby directed to assign, within a reasonable time, street numbers to every building and vacant lot within the certain street numbering districts as follows: 
(1)	The centerline of Main Street and the centerline of U.S. Highway 29 are hereby declared to be the zero coordinates or axes of this numbering system. Numbers assigned to buildings or vacant lots shall run from zero both north and south from Main Street, and from zero both east and west from U.S. Highway 29. 
(2)	Numbers shall be assigned to buildings and lots using only odd numbers on the righthand side of streets, and using only even numbers on the lefthand side of the street, proceeding from the point on the given street nearest the zero coordinate that governs, and moving away from the governing coordinate. 
(3)	The numbers shall be assigned by the building inspector as follows: Beginning with the first building or lot on any given street at the point nearest the zero coordinate, the number of the first lot on the righthand side of the street shall be number one and the next lot or building on the same side of the street shall be three, etc., in numerical sequence, using odd numbers only, the numbers shall be assigned throughout the block as shown on the map on file in the office of the building inspector; beginning with the second block, the first building or lot on the righthand side shall bear number 101, etc.; the first building or lot in the third block shall be 201, etc. The buildings and lots on the lefthand side of the street shall be assigned even numbers in the same manner as enumerated in this subsection for the righthand side of the street. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-25)
Sec. 82-66. - New streets. 
All new streets opened shall be plotted and delineated on the official street numbering map by the building, and numbers shall be assigned by the building inspector to buildings or lots thereon. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-26)
Sec. 82-67. - Furnishing of numerals. 
The city shall furnish the first and initial number or numbers to be attached under the provisions of this article to any and all buildings now or hereafter erected, without cost or expense to the owners or occupants of the buildings. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent owners or occupants from attaching numbers furnished by them, provided no attempt is made to change the assigned number or numbers of the building or buildings, and provided the numbers furnished by the owners or occupants are of a size and type approved by the building inspector. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-27)
Sec. 82-68. - Interference with system. 
Any person who intentionally and unlawfully interferes or attempts to interfere with the carrying into effect of the provisions of this article, or removes, defaces or attempts to remove or deface the numbers attached to buildings or located on the premises under the provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1988, § 5-1-28)
Chapter 86 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision saved from repeal, § 1-12(9); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; flood damage prevention, ch. 42; planning and development, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 102.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined. Words in the present tense include the future tense; those used in the plural include the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive. Terms not defined in this section shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways, roads or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the subdivider may determine the outline of the block. 
Building inspector means a qualified person designated by the city council to review specifications and inspect construction. 
Comprehensive plan means any element or part of the overall plan for development adopted by the planning commission. 
Easement means a grant by the landowner of the use of land for a specific purpose, including access to maintain utility structures, drainage and other purposes. 
Health department means the county health department. 
Lot means a parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description as on a subdivision plat or record of a survey map or as described by metes and bounds, and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. For the purpose of this chapter, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
Planning commission means the city planning commission. 
Street means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, road, boulevard, highway, expressway, land, alley or other way; and for the purposes of this chapter, streets are divided into the following categories: 
(1)	Major or arterial streets. Major or arterial streets are those streets which serve primarily as major traffic ways for travel through and within the municipality and county. 
(2)	Secondary or collector street. A secondary or collector street is used to carry traffic from the "minor streets" to the "major streets" and includes, but is not limited to, the principal entrance and circulation streets of a subdivision. 
(3)	Minor or local streets. Minor or local streets are streets used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
(4)	Alley. An alley is a minor way used for service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(5)	Cul-de-sac. A cul-de-sac is a minor street having one end open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated with a paved turnaround. 
(6)	Dead end. A dead-end street is a stub street in a subdivision which will at a later time be continued into another portion of the subdivision. 
Subdivider means the person or other legal entity having such a proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under this chapter, or the authorized agent of such person for the purpose of undertaking activities covered by this chapter. 
Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other division for the purpose whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy or building development, and includes all division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision; provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition: 
(1)	The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the municipality; 
(2)	The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved.
(Code 1988, § 8-6-3)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-2. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes: 
(1)	To encourage economically sound and stable land development;
(2)	To ensure the provision of required streets, utilities and other facilities and services to land developments; 
(3)	To ensure the provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land developments; and 
(4)	To ensure that land is developed in conformity with the comprehensive plan of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-2)
Secs. 86-3—86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATTING JURISDICTION ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Approval by planning commission or governing authority on plat of subdivision required for filing or recording in superior court clerk's office, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d); The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; Georgia Land Sales Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq.; Georgia Condominium Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-70 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60; authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; department of highway approval, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-150 et seq.

Sec. 86-31. - Platting authority. 
From and after the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived, the planning commission shall be the official platting authority, and no plat of land subdivision shall be entitled to record in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county unless it shall have the approval of the planning commission inscribed thereon. The filing and recording of a plat of a subdivision without the approval of the planning commission and the city council, as required by this chapter, is declared to be a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-11)
Sec. 86-32. - Use of a plat. 
The transfer of, sale of, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell land by reference to or exhibition of or other use of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval by the planning commission and the city, and recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county is prohibited, and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from penalties. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-12)
Sec. 86-33. - Plat approval. 
After this chapter shall have been put into effect, any subdivision that fails to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be disapproved by the planning commission. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-13)
Sec. 86-34. - Acceptance of streets. 
No public authority shall accept, improve or maintain any street not shown on an approved and recorded final plat unless such street shall have received the legal status of a public street prior to the adoption of this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-14)
Sec. 86-35. - Lots must abut public streets. 
The transfer of, sale of, agreement to sell or negotiation to sell land, lots or property which does not abut a public street, a street accepted as a public street in accordance with this chapter or a street which had attained the status of a public street prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-15)
Secs. 86-36—86-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLATTING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 86-61. - Preapplication review procedure. 
(a)	Prior to the preparation of a subdivision plat, the subdivider is urged to confer with the planning commission, which shall review the sketch plan of the proposed subdivision to determine whether the subdivision can meet all requirements of this chapter. This step does not require formal application or filing of the plat. 
(1)	The sketch plan should show in sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots, street names, subdivision title and other features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a freehand sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey, if available. The sketch plan should include the existing topographic data or as much of this information as is necessary for consideration of the proposed plan. 
(2)	General information should be available to describe the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development as necessary to supplement the sketch plan. This information shall include data on land characteristics, existing and proposed covenants, community facilities, utilities, and streets, and information describing the subdivision proposal such as number of lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, minimum floor area in structures, business areas, playgrounds, parks and other areas. 
(b)	Under no circumstances shall favorable consideration by the planning commission be construed as approval. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-21)
Sec. 86-62. - Application for preliminary plat approval. 
Following the preapplication review of a proposed subdivision and the payment of a $50.00 fee, nonrefundable, the subdivider shall submit to the planning commission chair, at least 15 days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission, the following: 
(1)	A letter requesting review and approval of a preliminary plat and giving the name and address of a person to whom the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the preliminary plat shall be sent. 
(2)	Six copies of the preliminary plat and other related documents to be utilized as follows:
a.	Planning commission;
b.	Health department, if applicable;
c.	City council.
One copy shall be returned to the subdivider or his agent with a notation of the action taken by the planning commission. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-24)
Sec. 86-63. - Review of preliminary plat. 
(a)	The planning commission shall check the plat for conformance to this chapter and shall afford a hearing on the preliminary plat, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the chair of the planning commission by registered or certified mail (or a signed statement by the developer or designated representative acknowledging the date of the hearing will satisfy the requirements of this subsection) to the person designated in the letter requesting preliminary plat review and approval not less than five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)	Thereafter, the planning commission shall give conditional approval or disapproval to the preliminary plat, including a statement of the reasons for disapproval if the preliminary plat is disapproved. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider or his agent and one copy added to the records of the planning commission. 
(c)	Approval of a preliminary plat does not constitute approval of a final plat. Preliminary plat approval shall expire and be null and void after a period of one year unless an extension of time requested by the subdivider or his representatives is approved by the planning commission. 
(d)	If action on a preliminary plat is not taken by the planning commission within 30 days of the date of the hearing, the preliminary plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand. However, the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-23)
Sec. 86-64. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
(a)	Scale. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller than 100 feet to one inch and no scale may be used that shall destroy the intent of this chapter. 
(b)	Sheet size. Sheet size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet of this size, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
(c)	Ground elevations. The preliminary plat shall show ground elevations, based on the datum plane of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, or other approved datum plane, with contour lines at intervals of not more than five feet for land that slopes more than five percent or contour lines at intervals of not more than two feet for land that slopes less than five percent. 
(d)	Information to be provided on preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Name and address of owner of record and of subdivider;
(2)	Proposed name of subdivision and its acreage;
(3)	North point and graphic scale and date;
(4)	Vicinity map showing location and acreage of the subdivision;
(5)	Exact boundary lines of the tract of bearing and distances;
(6)	Names of owners of record of adjoining land;
(7)	Existing streets, utilities, and easements on and adjacent to the tract;
(8)	Proposed layout, including streets and alleys with proposed street names, lot lines with approximate dimensions, easements, land to be reserved or dedicated for public uses, and any land to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings; 
(9)	Block numbers, lot numbers, and any development states;
(10)	Provisions for water supply, sewerage and drainage to be reviewed by the city;
(11)	Such street cross sections and centerline profiles as may be required to determine conformance to these subdivision regulations; 
(12)	Other conditions on the tract; watercourses, existing structures, existing sanitary and storm sewers, water mains and culverts within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto, location and size of nearest water main, sanitary sewer, storm sewer outlet, and other significant features. 
(e)	Certificate of preliminary approval. A certificate of approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: 
Pursuant to the land Subdivision Regulations of the City of Hogansville, Georgia, all the requirements of Preliminary Approval having been fulfilled, this Preliminary Plat was given Preliminary Approval by the City of Hogansville Planning Commission on 
____________, 20____________ 
This Preliminary Approval does not constitute approval of a Final Plat. This Certificate of Preliminary Approval shall expire and be null and void on (one year from preliminary approval): 

 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-24)
Sec. 86-65. - Application for final plat approval. 
After the preliminary plat of a proposed land subdivision has been given conditional approval by the planning commission, the subdivider may, within one year from conditional approval, submit to the planning commission: 
(1)	A letter requesting review and approval of a final plat and giving the name and address of the person to whom the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the final plat shall be sent. 
(2)	Six copies of the final plat and other related documents, as specified, the original of which shall be drawn in ink on durable tracing material. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-25)
Sec. 86-66. - Review of final plat. 
(a)	The planning commission shall check the final plat with the rules and regulations of this chapter and shall afford a hearing on the final plat, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the planning commission by registered or certified mail or a signed statement, etc., to the person designated in the letter requesting final plat review and approval, not less than five days prior to the date of hearing. 
(b)	Thereafter, the planning commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat. A notation of the action shall be made on all copies of the final plat, including a statement of the reasons therefor if the final plat is disapproved. If action is not taken by the planning commission within 30 days of the date of the public hearing, the final plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand. However, the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. Not later than three days after the hearing, the planning commission shall transmit its recommendations to approve or disapprove the final plat to the city for their approval or disapproval at the next regular meeting of the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-26)
Sec. 86-67. - Recording of final plat. 
Upon approval of the final plat by the planning commission and the city council, it shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-27)
Sec. 86-68. - Final plat for development in stages. 
The subdivider may submit a final plat for approval of a section of the preliminary plat, such section having been approved by the planning commission. Such final plat shall meet all specifications for final plat approval before recording by the chair of the planning commission. All necessary improvements must be installed prior to the recording or the procedure in section 86-232 shall be followed. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-28)
Sec. 86-69. - Information required on final plat. 
The final plat shall show but not be limited to the following: 
(1)	Sufficient data to locate readily and reproduce on the ground the bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, and building line. This shall include, but not be limited to, the radius, length of arch, central angle and tangent distance for the centerline of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary of curved streets. 
(2)	Tract boundary lines, street rights-of-way lines, easement and other right-of-way lines, building setback lines and property lines of lots and other sites. 
(3)	All dimensions shall be accurate to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and angles accurate to the nearest minute. 
(4)	Name and width of all streets or other rights-of-way.
(5)	Subdivision name and location, north point, date, and scale.
(6)	Location, dimensions, purposes and holder of any easements and any areas or sites to be dedicated to public use or for uses other than residential with statement of purpose and limitations. 
(7)	Lots and sites in numerical order and blocks in alphabetical order.
(8)	Accurate location, description, and material of monuments and markers.
(9)	A statement, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document, of any private covenants. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-29)
Sec. 86-70. - Certifications. 
The following certifications shall appear directly on the plat. 
(1)	Engineer's or surveyor's certification. An engineer's or surveyor's certification as follows: 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "future," and their location, size, type exist or are marked as "future," and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Hogansville, Georgia, have been fully complied with. 

 
(2)	Owner's certification. An owner's certification as follows: 
Owner's Certification 
State of Georgia, County of Troup 
 The owner of the land shown on this Plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that this plat was made from an actual survey, that all state and county taxes or other assessments now due on this land have been paid. 

 
(3)	Certificate of dedication. A certification by the owner setting forth the description of the areas and improvements he dedicates to the public and the extent of the title he is dedicating. 
Certificate of Ownership and Dedication. 
 I (We) hereby certify that I (we) adopt this plan of subdivision, establish the minimum building setback lines, and dedicate all streets, alleys, walkways and other open spaces to public use as noted. 

 
(4)	Certification of approval of water system. Certification of approval of water system as follows: 
 I hereby certify that the community or public water supply and distribution system installed, or to be installed, and/or the plans for private water supplies in the subdivision plat attached hereto meets the requirements of the health department. If provided by the city, must meet city requirements. 

 
(5)	Certification of sewer system. Certification of sewer system attached to the final plat as follows: 
 I hereby certify that the community or public sewerage collection and disposal system installed, or to be installed, and/or the plans for private sewage disposal system in the subdivision plat attached hereto meets the requirements of the health department. If city sewerage is provided, must meet city requirements. 

 
(6)	Certificate of approval for recording. Certificate of approval for recording, directly on the final plat as follows: 
 I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Hogansville, Georgia, and that it has been approved by the City of Hogansville Planning Commission for recording in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Troup County, Georgia. 

 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-30)
Secs. 86-71—86-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 86-101. - Suitability of land. 
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use or for any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety, or property destruction, unless the hazards can be and are corrected prior to final plat approval. No land shall be platted for residential use which would be in conflict with the floodplains. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-41)
Sec. 86-102. - Name of subdivision. 
The name of the subdivision must have the approval of the planning commission. The name of the subdivision shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-42)
Sec. 86-103. - Access. 
Subdivisions shall be located so as to gain access over a public street. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-43)
Sec. 86-104. - Conformance to adopted comprehensive plan and other plans. 
(a)	All streets, thoroughfares, and other features of the comprehensive plan of the city shall be taken into consideration by the subdivider. 
(b)	Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land to public use that the planning commission finds not required or suitable for such public use, the planning commission shall refuse to approve the plat, and shall notify the city council of the reasons for such action. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-44)
Sec. 86-105. - Clearing and grading. 
A soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance (chapter 34, article III, divisions 2 and 3) must be adhered to in all phases of development and supersede any regulations within this chapter concerning grading and clearing. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-45)
Secs. 86-106—86-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS AND OTHER RIGHTS-OF-WAY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82.

Sec. 86-131. - Continuation of existing streets. 
Existing streets adjacent to the subdivision shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case shall be less than the required width. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-51)
Sec. 86-132. - Street names. 
Street names shall require the approval of the planning commission. Streets that are obviously in alignment with streets already existing and named shall be given the name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate nor closely approximate those of existing streets. At all street intersections the subdivider shall erect at his expense street markers similar in construction and consistent with others posted in the city. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-52)
Sec. 86-133. - Street jogs. 
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-53)
Sec. 86-134. - Cul-de-sac. 
Except where topographic or other conditions make a greater length unavoidable, culs-de-sac shall not be greater in length than 600 feet. Culs-de-sac shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a property line radius of at least 50 feet with an outside pavement radius of at least 40 feet. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-54)
Sec. 86-135. - Development along major street, limited access highway or railroad right-of-way. 
Where a subdivision abuts or contains a major street, a limited access highway, or a railroad right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way either as a marginal access street, or at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the intervening land, with a nonaccess covenant or reservation. Due regard should be given to requirements for approach grades and future grade separations in determining distances. Such lots shall have no access to a major street, or limited access highway, but only to the access street. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-55)
Sec. 86-136. - Alleys. 
Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots used for multifamily, commercial or industrial developments. Alleys in residential subdivisions shall not be permitted, unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-56)
Sec. 86-137. - Reserve strips. 
Reserving strips which control access to streets, alleys and public grounds shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-57)
Sec. 86-138. - Easements. 
Easements having a minimum width of ten feet and located along the rear lot lines shall be provided for utility lines and underground mains and cables. The planning commission may require a watercourse easement, the width of which may vary according to the localized conditions. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-58)
Sec. 86-139. - Minor streets. 
Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-59)
Sec. 86-140. - Half streets. 
Half street rights-of-way shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and where it is determined to be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted with such tract. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-60)
Sec. 86-141. - Dead-end streets. 
Dead-end streets may be platted where the planning commission deems desirable. Where land adjoins property not subdivided, the streets shall be carried to the boundaries of such property. Temporary turnarounds shall be provided for dead-end streets which are to be extended at a later date. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-61)
Secs. 86-142—86-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STREET DESIGN REQUIREMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82.

Sec. 86-171. - Street right-of-way widths. 
(a)	The right-of-way width shall be the distance across a street from property line to property line. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
(1)	Major street widths as required by the city road specification.
(2)	Collector streets, 60 feet.
(3)	Minor streets and dead-end streets, 50 feet.
(4)	Alleys, 20 feet.
(5)	Where a subdivision abuts a public road or street which is less than 60 feet in width, the developer shall dedicate additional land to provide a width of 30 feet on the adjacent side of the centerline. Where a subdivision is traversed by a public road or street less than 60 feet in width, the developer shall dedicate additional land to provide a width of 30 feet on both sides of the centerline. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to obligate the city or developer to improve such road or street. 
(b)	Approval may be denied on a proposed subdivision where the planning commission and/or the city council deem a public road to the subdivision as being inadequate due to right-of-way width or construction until such time as the road has been brought up to city standards. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-71)
Sec. 86-172. - Street pavement widths. 
Street pavement widths shall be as follows: 
(1)	Major street widths as required by the state highway department.
(2)	Collector street widths as required by the state highway department.
(3)	Minor streets and dead-end streets, 24 feet from face of curb to face of curb.
(4)	Alleys, 18 feet.
(Code 1988, § 8-6-72)
Sec. 86-173. - Street grades. 
(a)	Maximum and minimum street grades shall be as follows:
(1)	Major streets, not in excess of five percent.
(2)	Collector streets, not in excess of eight percent.
(3)	Minor streets and dead-end streets and alleys, not in excess of 12 percent.
(b)	No street grade shall be less than one-half percent.
(Code 1988, § 8-6-73)
Sec. 86-174. - Horizontal curvature. 
The minimum radii of centerline curvature shall be as follows: 
(1)	Major streets, not less than 800 feet.
(2)	Collector streets, 200 feet.
(3)	Minor streets and dead-end streets and alleys, 100 feet.
(Code 1988, § 8-6-74)
Sec. 86-175. - Tangents. 
Between reverse curves, there shall be a tangent having a length not less than the following: 
(1)	Major streets, 200 feet.
(2)	Collector streets and minor streets, 100 feet.
(Code 1988, § 8-6-75)
Sec. 86-176. - Vertical alignment. 
Vertical alignment shall be such that the following requirements are met: 
(1)	Major streets shall have a sight distance of at least 500 feet at six feet above ground level. 
(2)	Collector streets shall have a sight distance of at least 200 feet at six feet above ground level. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-76)
Sec. 86-177. - Street intersections. 
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-77)
Sec. 86-178. - Curbline radius. 
The curbline radius at street intersections shall be at least 25 feet. Where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees, a longer radius may be required. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-78)
Secs. 86-179—86-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BLOCKS AND LOTS 

Sec. 86-201. - Block lengths and widths. 
Block lengths and widths shall be as follows: 
(1)	Blocks shall not be greater than 1,200 feet or less than 400 feet in length, except in unusual circumstances. 
(2)	Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots of minimum depths except where abutting upon major streets, limited access highways, or railroads or where other situations make this requirement impracticable. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-91)
Sec. 86-202. - Yard and lot sizes. 
(a)	Residential lots shall meet the lot width and lot area and yard requirements of the zoning regulations set forth in chapter 102. Commercial and industrial lots shall be adequate to provide service areas and off-street parking suitable to use intended as determined by the planning commission. 
(b)	Residential corner lots shall have adequate width to meet any building setback requirements from both abutting streets. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-92)
Sec. 86-203. - Lot lines. 
All lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines, unless not practicable because of topographic or other features. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-93)
Sec. 86-204. - Double and reverse frontage lots. 
Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-94)
Secs. 86-205—86-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 86-231. - Required improvements. 
(a)	In every subdivision, the following street improvements and utilities shall be planned for and provided by the subdivider, by installation and/or payment, prior to the approval of the final plat: 
(1)	Street base and paving requirements shall be in accordance with city or state requirements.
(2)	Where a public sanitary sewer is within 400 feet of the subdivision at its nearest point and connection by gravity flow is feasible, the subdivider shall connect with such sanitary sewer and provide a connection for each lot. The size of the mains shall be at least eight inches. The subdivider shall be responsible for the costs to existing facilities. Where sanitary sewers are not available, oxidation pond, septic tank, or other disposal device designed and installed according to the health department may be permitted. 
(3)	Where a public water main is within 400 feet of the subdivision at its nearest point, the subdivider shall connect with such water main. In such cases, mains of at least six inches shall be required. The subdivider shall be responsible for the costs of all taps and extensions to existing facilities. Where an adequate public water supply is not reasonably accessible as determined by the planning commission, the subdivider shall provide evidence of an individual water supply to be approved by the health department. 
(4)	A maintenance bond or other surety shall be furnished to the city which shall name the city as a principal equally with the owner and shall be worded to include in its coverage a one-year maintenance warranty period following acceptance of the improvements by the city. 
(b)	All utilities to be installed in the streets shall be placed and compacted prior to paving. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-101)
Sec. 86-232. - Surety for completion of improvements. 
In lieu of the completion of the required improvements in a subdivision, the subdivider may deposit surety for the completion of such improvements and present a final plat for approval. 
(1)	Requirements. To ensure the construction and installation of required improvements, the subdivider shall deliver to the city council a certified check, surety bond and other acceptable security in such aggregate amount as is estimated by the city council to be the total cost of the construction and installation of all public improvements which are the responsibility of the subdivider. 
(2)	Conditions. Bond or other surety posted shall run to the city and provide that the subdivider, his heirs or successors and assigns, and their agents and servants, will comply with applicable terms, conditions, provisions and requirements of this chapter and any other applicable requirements; will faithfully perform and complete the work of constructing and installing such facilities or improvements in accordance with this chapter and any other applicable requirements; and that the subdivider shall be responsible to the city for any unnecessary expense incurred through the failure of the subdivider, his heirs, successors and assigns, or their agent or servants, to complete the work of such construction in an acceptable manner, and from any damage growing out of negligence in performing or failing to perform such construction and installation. Before acceptance, any surety shall be approved by the city. If a bond is offered, it shall be executed by a surety or guaranty company qualified to transact business in the state. 
(3)	Duration and release. Bond and/or other surety posted pursuant to this chapter shall be released or returned, as the case may be, at such time as the facilities guaranteed thereby have been installed and accepted. Acceptances shall be in writing accurately identifying the improvements covered. Facilities shall not be accepted unless they conform to the applicable city specifications and requirements and have been maintained by the developer for a period of one year. 
(4)	Default. If the construction or installation of any improvements or facilities for which a bond or other surety is posted is not completed within three months after substantial completion of any building or structure which such improvements or facilities are designed to serve, or within two years after the date of recording of the final plat, whichever is sooner, or if such construction or installation is not in accordance with the applicable specifications and requirements, then the proceeds from such surety deposits shall be used to pay for such work. Such work may be done under contract or by the city personnel. To the extent that any portion of a cash deposit is not required or used, such excess cash shall be repaid to the person making the deposit. 
(5)	Certification of receipt of surety for required improvements. The following form shall be printed directly on the final plat as follows, where a final plat is recorded subsequent to the installation of the required improvements: 
 "I hereby certify that a security bond or certified check in the amount of $ ____________ has been received to assure completion of all required improvements in the subdivision plat attached hereto in the event of default by the developer." 

 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-102)
Secs. 86-233—86-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 86-261. - Variances and waivers. 
(a)	Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary and unnecessary hardships may result from strict compliance with this chapter, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such variations will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the master plan, or the zoning ordinance (chapter 102), if any or all of such exists. 
(b)	Where the planning commission finds that, due to the special circumstances of a particular plat, the provision of certain required improvements is not requisite in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare or is inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities adjacent or in proximity to the proposed subdivision, it may waive such requirements subject to appropriate conditions. 
(c)	In granting variances and modifications, the planning commission shall require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-111)
Sec. 86-262. - Amendments. 
(a)	This chapter may be amended from time to time by the city council, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. The planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its report. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposal. 
(b)	Before enacting an amendment to this chapter, the planning commission, acting for the city, shall hold a public hearing thereon, at least 15 days' notice of the time and place of which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-112)
Sec. 86-263. - Conflicting ordinances. 
Whenever the provisions of this chapter and those of some other statute, ordinance, covenant or resolution have requirements more rigid, the provision requiring the highest or more strict standard shall govern. 
(Code 1988, § 8-6-113)
Secs. 86-264—86-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PUD, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Planning and development, ch. 70.

Sec. 86-291. - Purpose and intent. 
The planned unit development district (PUD) is intended to: 
(1)	Provide flexibility in the application area, height, bulk, placement and other zoning controls; 
(2)	Provide for mixing a wide variety of residential housing types and arrangements;
(3)	Provide for the mixing of compatible residential, office, commercial and industrial land uses; 
(4)	Encourage imaginative and innovative design for the unified development of tracts of land; 
(5)	Provide an alternative for more efficient use of land, resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets, thereby resulting in lower construction and maintenance costs to the public; 
(6)	Preserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas within the development; and 
(7)	Promote land development in proper relation to the surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. of 5-17-1999, § 8-6-120)
Sec. 86-292. - Permitted uses. 
Any land uses and combinations thereof, including signs and accessory buildings and uses, which have been specifically proposed by the applicant and approved by the city council as a part of a planned unit development site plan, report and/or other supporting information are permitted. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1999, § 8-6-121)
Sec. 86-293. - Development summary report required. 
Applications for rezoning to, or development within a planned unit development district shall require a written report which explains the type, nature, size, intent and characteristics of the proposed development. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1999, § 8-6-122)
Sec. 86-294. - Site plan approval required. 
(a)	Applications for rezoning to, or development within a planned unit development district shall require a site plan, including, as a minimum, those items enumerated in section 86-295. The city manager or his designee, planning commission and/or city council may require, in addition, such other information, studies, plats, plans or architectural elevations deemed necessary to perform an adequate review of the proposed application. 
(b)	Site plans shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer, licensed architect, licensed land planner or licensed landscape architect, and his seal of registration or professional initials shall be indicated on such plans. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1999, § 8-6-123)
Sec. 86-295. - Filing. 
Any person desiring to subdivide land or develop a planned unit development shall file with the planning commission, through the city manager's office, five copies of the preliminary plat accompanied by a letter of application. The letter of application shall contain the name and address of the developer and his agent, the zoning of the property to be subdivided, whether or not the subdivision or planned unit development will be developed in phases, any plans for potential annexation of adjoining property and plans for serving the proposed subdivision with sewer and water facilities. The plat shall be prepared in accordance with this chapter and with applicable county and city specifications. 
(1)	Title block and north arrow. The plat will show the name of the proposed subdivision or planned unit development, its location by county and city, the name, address and registration number of the surveyor preparing the plat and the date of the plat. A north arrow shall be included with a notation referencing the bearings to magnetic north. 
(2)	General layout. The plat shall show information as to the proposed street layout and widths, layout of lots with a notation as to the minimum size and width of lots and any proposed open space. Any lands to be dedicated will be identified. Plat scale, total acreage of the site and total number of lots created shall also be indicated. Lot and block information and building setback lines shall also be indicated. 
(3)	Topography. The plat shall show existing contour lines dashed and any proposed contour lines solid, both sets of lines to be at two-foot intervals, mean sea level. Prominent drainage features such as lakes, depressions, streams, etc., which could affect the design of the subdivision shall be shown. Engineering data showing the high-water elevation and how it was established shall be submitted. 
(4)	Existing features. The plat shall show the locations and names of existing and platted property lines, streets and their rights-of-way, railroads and their rights-of-way, public and private rights-of-way, sanitary sewer (and size), easements, storm drainage (and size), parks and other public open spaces, land lot and land district lines, city limits lines and names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 
(5)	Location map. The plat shall include a small scale map of sufficient clarity so that the location of the proposed subdivision can be readily determined. 
(6)	Water and sewer. A statement from the subdivider or developer shall be submitted with the preliminary plat which will describe the method by which sanitary sewer and water facilities will be provided. As a minimum, the report shall include the following: 
a.	A complete listing of every land use proposed within the development, including total acreage and the amount of acreage devoted to each use. All uses not specifically included in the report or site plan and approved by the mayor and city council are prohibited unless subsequently the application is amended in accordance with applicable procedures. 
b.	Proposed development standards, including minimum lot sizes, minimum lot widths, minimum lot frontages, minimum floor areas or residential dwelling unit sizes, maximum number of dwelling units, maximum square footage figures for nonresidential developments, minimum yards/building setbacks, landscape strips and buffers, height limitations, restrictive covenants, and any other such applicable standard or requirement. The report should also indicate any proposed exceptions or variations from the size, setback, frontage, density or other standards which are required in other conventional zoning districts, along with justification for such proposed exceptions or variations. 
c.	The timeframe of development and provisions for ownership and management of the development.
d.	Intended plans for the provision of utilities, including water, sewer and drainage facilities. 
e.	All streets shall be built to state department of transportation and city standards and dedicated to the city upon completion and approval. All streets shall be named by the developer and approved by the city. 
(7)	Future tract plan. In cases where a subdivision or planned unit development is to be developed in stages with additional plats being filed with the planning commission at a later date, the filing of the initial plat will be accompanied by a future tract plan, a reasonably accurate plat in sketch form of the entire tract which will show the future street system and topography for the entire tract. Once the required tract plan has been given approval by the planning commission, five copies of the approved future tract plan must be provided for distribution to the various reviewing agencies and the city manager. 
(8)	Completeness. If any of the facts required in this section are omitted or misrepresented on the plat, the chair of the planning commission or city manager may refuse to review the plat and shall return the plat to the subdivider or developer to be completed or revised. 
(9)	County and state requirement. The plat shall comply with all county and state requirements for filing in the deed records. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1999, § 8-6-124)
Sec. 86-296. - Report and site plan to be minimum requirements. 
The approved development summary report, site plan and all other information, studies, plats, plans, or architectural elevations submitted in the application, or required to be submitted by the city council, shall establish the standards and minimum requirements for the subject property and shall become the zoning regulations that apply to the subject property, regardless of changes in property ownership. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1999, § 8-6-125)
Sec. 86-297. - Revisions to approved application. 
Any additions in the types of land uses, increases in square footage or density, decreases in lot sizes, changes in the location or dimensions of streets, decreases in dwelling unit floor areas, major alterations in the land use patterns, or other substantial changes which, in the opinion of the city manager or his designee, result in a development of such intent and character which has not been conceptually approved by the city council shall require additional approval. Otherwise minor changes may be approved by the city manager prior to issuance of building permits. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1999, § 8-6-126)
Sec. 86-298. - Minimum site area and frontage required. 
The minimum site area for a planned unit development district shall be subject to approval by the planning commission and city council according to preliminary plat. A planned unit development shall have a minimum lot width of 100 feet and the site must have a minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a public street, which shall provide access to such public street. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1999, § 8-6-127)
Sec. 86-299. - Site planning guidelines. 
The following specifications are guidelines to be utilized in preparation of site plans for planned unit developments: 
(1)	Land uses which have traditionally been viewed as incompatible (e.g., single-family subdivision and a manufacturing plant) shall not be proposed in the same planned unit development. 
(2)	Office and commercial uses shall be located adjacent to major thoroughfares or in other areas with suitable access that will not result in traffic through residential areas. 
(3)	Lot sizes, lot widths, unit sizes and other characteristics of residential development within the planned unit development should be similar to those characteristics of adjacent or nearby residential subdivisions or provide a suitable transition from such adjacent uses. 
(4)	Location of land uses should conform substantially with land use plan goals, policies and suggested types of uses. 
(5)	Street lengths, alignments, patterns and other characteristics should conform to city subdivision regulations or standard planning principles. 
(6)	Proposed developments should make maximum use of natural features of the land.
(7)	For developments that are predominantly residential, only limited commercial uses of up to ten percent of the total development site area can be of a retail nature. 
(8)	The commercial and retail portion of predominantly residential developments shall be limited to uses not onerous to the residential development. These commercial uses shall be limited to those that do not affect the traffic volume or the character and nature of traffic, i.e., no trucks or vehicles with more than two axles. Commercial uses within these predominately residential areas shall be limited to those uses that do not produce waste that cannot be handled by a standard solid waste handler. Those uses that produce waste that must be disposed of in a hazard waste facility shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1999, § 8-6-128)
Chapter 90 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-12(1); any ordinance levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-12(10); administration, ch. 2; finances, § 2-121 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 90-1—90-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Statutory authority for ad valorem taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-31. - Levy; rate. 
There is hereby set and levied an annual ad valorem tax at such millage rate as established by ordinance of the city council upon all real and personal property within the city, to meet the ordinary current expenses of the city and an additional levy for payment of principal and interest on school gymnasium bonds. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-1)
State Law reference— Power to levy, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350. 
Sec. 90-32. - Assessment and fair market value. 
All property subject to municipal ad valorem taxation shall be assessed for ad valorem tax purposes in accordance with applicable state law. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-2)
State Law reference— Determination of fair market value for municipal ad valorem taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-352. 
Sec. 90-33. - Appeal of assessment. 
Any taxpayer may appeal from an assessment by the county board of tax assessors to the county board of equalization as to matters of taxability, uniformity of assessment and value. Decisions of the board of equalization may be appealed to the superior court of the county. All such appeals shall be made in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-311(e), (f). 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-3)
Secs. 90-34—90-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAX RETURNS 

Sec. 90-51. - When taxes due and payable. 
Ad valorem taxes shall be deemed delinquent if not paid by November 15. Tax bills showing the assessed valuation, amount of taxes due, tax due dates, and information as to delinquency dates and penalties shall be sent to all taxpayers, but failure to send tax bills shall not invalidate any tax. Delinquent taxes shall bear interest at 12 percent per annum from the due date. 
(Ord. of 3-7-1994)
State Law reference— Interest rate on delinquent taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40. 
Secs. 90-52—90-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FAILURE TO PAY TAXES 

Sec. 90-71. - Failure to pay tax; penalties. 
Any taxes due on November 15 of each year and not paid by the first day of the following month, December 1, shall be turned over for collection and all necessary and actual costs of collection shall be assessed in addition to the penalty prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-44. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-5)
Sec. 90-72. - Lien for defaulted payment. 
The city shall forthwith issue an execution against any person who has defaulted in the payment of any ad valorem tax to be paid. The execution issued shall be a lien on all the property of such person, both real and personal, and shall be placed in the hands of the city officer responsible for collection by levy and sale. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-6)
State Law reference— Levy for unpaid tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-2-55; lien priority, O.C.G.A. § 48-2-56. 
Sec. 90-73. - Against whom charged. 
Taxes are to be charged against the owner of the property, if known, or against the specific property itself if the owner is not known. Life tenants and those who enjoy the use of property are chargeable with the tax thereon. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-7)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-9. 
Sec. 90-74. - Exempted property. 
The following property shall be exempt from ad valorem taxation: 
(1)	All public property;
(2)	All places of religious worship and places of burial;
(3)	All buildings used as a college, university or other seminary of learning.
(Code 1988, § 3-2-8)
State Law reference— Exempt property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-41. 
Sec. 90-75. - Municipal tax sales. 
(a)	Time, place and manner of sale. The time, place and manner of the sale of property, both real and personal, for taxes due the city shall be the same that are provided by law for sheriffs' sales for state and county taxes. 
(b)	Sales by parcels. When not impracticable, all property sold for municipal taxes shall be so offered for the sale that the smallest amount that will bring the amount of taxes and costs shall be sold. 
(c)	Purchases by city. The city clerk/treasurer shall attend all sales of property for the taxes due the city, and in the event no one person bids for the property put up to be sold as much as the tax due thereon, the clerk/treasurer shall place a bid for such property for the city, and if the bid is accepted, take custody of the deed for the city. No property so purchased by the city shall ever be sold by the city except at public sale thereof to the highest bidder. 
State Law reference— Purchases by city, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359. 
(d)	Redemption of property sold for taxes. Any person whose property is sold in obedience to an execution issued for the collection of municipal taxes shall have such rights of redemption of that property as are set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-40 et seq., and other provisions of law not inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-9)
State Law reference— Tax sales, O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq. 
Secs. 90-76—90-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATION, PROFESSION AND BUSINESS TAXES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18.
State Law reference— Municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Business means any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or calling of any kind for gain or profit, directly or indirectly. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. 
Engaged in business means engaging in business and thus subject to the requirements of this article when he performs any act of selling any goods or service or solicits business or offers goods or services for sale or for payment in an attempt to make a profit, including the sales or services of the character as made by a wholesaler or retailer or as involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, either as an owner, operator or agent in any business, trade, profession or occupation within the city. 
Location and office mean any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project, or a vehicle used for sales and delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
Manufacturer means a person who, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or commercial use any articles, substances or commodities; including all the activities of a commercial nature wherein labor or skill is applied by hand or machinery, to materials so that as a result thereof a new, different, or useful article of tangible personal property or substance of trade or commerce is produced; and including the production or fabrication of specially or custom made articles; and including the making, fabricating, processing, refining, mixing, slaughtering, packing, aging, curing, preserving, canning and preparing and freezing of fresh foods, fruits, vegetables and meats. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person means sole proprietors, corporation, partnerships, nonprofit, or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioner of profession and practitioner of occupation mean a person who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Retailer means a person who sells to the consumer or any other person for any purpose other than for resale in the form of tangible personal property. 
Services means accommodating or performing a duty or work by a person utilizing time or talents for direct or indirect remuneration. 
Wholesaler means a person who sells to jobbers or to another person other than the consumer anything in the form of tangible personal property. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-21)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 90-102—90-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OCCUPATIONAL TAX 

Sec. 90-121. - Occupation tax required. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation. Such tax, or evidence of payment thereof, and any applicable registration, shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax, or evidence of payment thereof, and any applicable registration, shall be shown to the revenue collection officer or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of the city upon request. 
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, § 1; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
Sec. 90-122. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied in this division is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-28. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, § 9; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
Sec. 90-123. - Administrative fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)	A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $20.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, renewal, or reopening of those accounts, notwithstanding the date of application. 
(b)	Any business applying or registering under this division for initial startup, renewal, or reopening on or after June 1 of any tax year shall pay the prorated amount of one-half of the amount prescribed as the annual amount to be paid as occupation tax under the terms of this division. 
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, § 3; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
Sec. 90-124. - Information required. 
Any business or practitioner of profession or practitioner of occupation applying, registering or paying under this division shall provide the city such information as may be required by the city regarding the site of any location or office of, and payment of any occupation taxes or other fees to other local governments by, such business or practitioner of profession or practitioner of occupation. 
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, § 3A; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
Sec. 90-125. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)	Tax levied. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner per employee, according to the following occupation tax table, entitled "Business License Fee List." 
(b)	Occupation tax table per employee. The tax rate and amount determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the city council: 

 
Note: A $20.00 administration fee will be added regardless of date of application. 
(c)	The number of employees of the business or practitioner shall be computed on a full-time position basis or full-time position equivalent basis; provided that for purposes of this computation, an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee, and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and the sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents; and provided, further, that the occupation tax table per employee shall apply to the number of full-time basis employees and full-time equivalent basis employees only. 
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, § 4; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
Sec. 90-126. - Taxation of employees within jurisdiction. 
Only employees who work within the jurisdiction of the city will be counted for taxing purposes. 
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, § 11; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
Sec. 90-127. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in georgia. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner; 
(1)	Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)	Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, § 5; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
Sec. 90-128. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, § 6; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
Sec. 90-129. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in the city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, § 7; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
Sec. 90-130. - Taxation of separate businesses. 
Should more than one business on which a tax is levied by this division be conducted in or in conjunction with one place or kind of business, each such business shall be subject to a separate tax under this division unless such a combination is listed in the tax schedule. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-23)
Sec. 90-131. - Prohibitions; restrictions; exemptions. 
(a)	A business or practitioner shall not be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each office or location; provided that businesses and practitioners with multiple services or products shall be classified according to dominant service or product. 
(b)	Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(c)	No payment of any kind or by whatever name shall be required of a business or practitioner for the cost of ascertaining whether such a business or practitioner has paid any occupation tax to another local government. 
(d)	No occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be levied upon any state or local authority or nonprofit organization. 
(e)	No occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be levied upon any applicant under this division who is certified by the Veterans Administration of the United States as a Disabled American Veteran. 
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, § 8; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
Sec. 90-132. - Regulatory fee required. 
Every person engaged in any business, occupation or profession within the city, upon which a tax is imposed or levied by this division, shall pay a regulatory fee for that business, occupation or profession with the city clerk on or before January 1 of each year, except for a new business or practitioner beginning business on that date shall pay a regulatory fee immediately before beginning business, upon forms to be supplied by the city clerk, giving the name, address and type of business, occupation or profession and any other information as may be required by the city clerk for the purpose of determining the amount of tax to be imposed or assessed by this division. A city business license application shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-24)
State Law reference— Time for payment, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20. 
Sec. 90-133. - When tax or regulatory fee due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax or regulatory fee delinquent—Current businesses. 
(a)	Each occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(b)	Such regulatory fee or occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each calendar year and shall, if not paid by February 1 of each year, be delinquent and subject to an interest charge of 1.5 percent per month until paid. 
(c)	Should such regulatory fee or occupation tax not be paid before April 1, an additional penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee shall also be due. 
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, § 10; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
State Law reference— Penalty for failure to pay tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21; issuance of execution against delinquent taxpayer, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26; amount of tax due from business commencing business on or after July 1, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
Sec. 90-134. - Same—New businesses. 
(a)	On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the city:
(1)	Occupation tax is due within 30 days of January 1 of each year or within 30 days following commencement of a new business, whichever occurs first. 
(2)	Regulatory fees shall be delinquent if not paid to the city immediately upon beginning business. 
(3)	However, the regulatory fees may be paid after commencing business or the practice of a profession when: 
a.	The work done or service provided is necessary for the health or safety of one or more individuals; 
b.	The work done or service provided has no adverse effect on any other person; and
c.	Regulatory fees are tendered within two business days after commencing business or the practice of a profession. 
(b)	If the occupation tax or regulatory fee is not paid, it shall be subject to an interest charge of 1.5 percent per month until paid. Additionally, should such occupation tax or regulatory fee not be paid within 90 days of the first date the business transacted business in the city, an additional penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee shall also be due. 
(c)	Any new profession, trade or calling beginning business in the city on or after July 1 shall be taxed at 50 percent of the annual rate pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-22. 
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, § 10; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
State Law reference— Penalty for failure to pay tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21; issuance of execution against delinquent taxpayer, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26; amount of tax due from business commencing business on or after July 1, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
Sec. 90-135. - Collection of occupation tax or regulatory fee. 
(a)	The tax or regulatory fee provided for in this division shall be issued by the tax clerk and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a tax or fee shall, after such regulatory fee or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this division without having first obtained such tax or fee, such offender shall, upon conviction by the city, be punished pursuant to section 1-7. 
(b)	In addtion to the other remedies available to the city for the collection of occupation taxes and regulatory fees due from persons subject to the tax or fee who fail or refuse to pay the tax or fee, the tax clerk shall issue executions against the delinquent taxpayers for any or all of the following: 
(1)	The amount of the taxes or fees due when the taxes or fees become due;
(2)	Any penalty imposed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21(a);
(3)	Any interest imposed by the local ordinance in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21(b).
(c)	The municipal court may also impose a civil fine for failure to pay the occupation tax or regulatory fee. Such a civil fine shall not exceed $500.00 and may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. 
(d)	No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax or regulatory fee for each of its locations. 
(e)	No occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, § 10; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
State Law reference— Penalty for failure to pay tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21; issuance of execution against delinquent taxpayer, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26; amount of tax due from business commencing business on or after July 1, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
Sec. 90-136. - Payment of tax. 
Payment of the tax may be made personally to the city clerk in cash, or by company check, money order, bank draft, certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city. The tax shall be payable in a single installment. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-25)
Sec. 90-137. - Businesses not covered by this division. 
(a)	Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this division shall be exempt from such registration or tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless more than 50 percent of the entire proceeds from such business is devoted to such purpose. 
(b)	Additional exemptions. The following additional businesses are not covered by the provisions of this division but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)	Those business regulated by the state public service commission;
(2)	Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.;
(3)	Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness; 
(4)	Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105;
(5)	Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq.;
(6)	Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 6-7-15;
(7)	Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meat, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls); 
(8)	Those businesses involving agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356; 
(9)	Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93;
(10)	Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55.
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, §§ 12, 17; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
Sec. 90-138. - Inspection of books and records. 
The city manager or other duly authorized collection official of the city, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business or person for which the returns are made. Such inspecting officer shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business for which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of such inspecting officer, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business within the city. Adequate records shall be kept within the city by each business for which returns are made for examination by the city manager or other duly authorized collection or inspection officer at the officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, a penalty of one percent per month times the amount deficient will be assessed for the period of delinquency. 
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, § 18; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
Sec. 90-139. - Evidence of state registration required, if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)	Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq., shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)	Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, § 13; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
Sec. 90-140. - Evidence of qualification required, if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, § 14; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
Sec. 90-141. - Issuance of tax certificate. 
Upon the payment of the taxes assessed in this division, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to issue to each person a business or occupational tax receipt and certificate. A city business license shall be sufficient for this section. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-26)
Sec. 90-142. - Certificate to be displayed. 
All persons shall exhibit and display the city tax certificate or city license in some conspicuous place in their business establishment. Any transient or nonresident person doing business within the city shall carry the certificate or license either upon his person or on any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in the business, and the person shall exhibit the license to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when requested to do so. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-27)
Sec. 90-143. - Change of address. 
Any person moving a nontransient business from one location to another shall notify the city clerk of the move and the new address in writing, no later than ten days after moving. The same tax certificate shall be valid at the new location. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-28)
Sec. 90-144. - Change of ownership; transfers. 
No tax certificate may be transferred from one person to another. Additions to or deletions from the ownership of a business, which do not affect the liability and the principal ownership of a business for which the certificate is issued, may be made without canceling the old business or occupational tax certificate and applying for a new certificate. Whenever any person shall lease, operate or control the business franchise or property of other persons, such person shall obtain a separate business tax certificate for each such business; provided no business shall pay the tax more than once under such an arrangement. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-29)
Sec. 90-145. - Enforcement. 
The city clerk shall issue executions for the collection of all outstanding and unpaid taxes imposed and assessed by this division. The unpaid taxes and executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes due the city. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-30)
Sec. 90-146. - Criminal penalties; licenses revoked. 
Any person, including the officers, agents or employees of such person, violating the provisions of this division, upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. Each day a person is in violation of this division shall be a separate offense under this division. Any person so convicted shall be subject to the revocation of any city business license. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-32)
Sec. 90-147. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this division shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this division, and in default thereof all such persons and the officer and officers, or agent or agents, soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as are persons who fail to obtain a registration under this division. Any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any such business, trade, profession or occupation, or the officer or officers, or agent or agents, of such person, without first having so obtained such registration, shall be subject to the same penalties provided in this division. 
(Ord. of 1-11-1999, § 15; Ord. of 12-20-1999)
Sec. 90-148. - Special provisions for insurers. 
(a)	Insurer's license fees. There is levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $40.00. For each separate business location in excess of one which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $14.00. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(b)	License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this division, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, such insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $14.00 per location each year. 
(c)	Insurance agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. There is levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by subsection (a) of this section, in the amount of $50.00 for each such location within the city. 
(d)	Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. There is levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this subsection, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this subsection is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)	Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. There is levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the city in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this subsection, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(f)	Due date for license fees. License fees imposed in subsections (a)—(c) of this section shall be due and payable on March 1 of each year. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-33)
Sec. 90-149. - Financial institutions business license tax. 
(a)	Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, and state building and loan associations at the rate of one-fourth of one percent of the state gross receipts of those institutions as defined and allocated in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-95. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institutions pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(b)	For purposes of this section, the term "gross receipts" shall mean the total amount of revenue generated from the sources itemized in this subsection during the calendar year immediately preceding the date on which the tax imposed by the section is due: 
(1)	Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to banks are as follows: 
a.	Interest and fees on loans, less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; 
b.	Interest on balances with other depository financial institutions;
c.	Interest on federal or correspondent funds sold and securities purchased under agreements of resale; 
d.	Interest on other bonds, notes and debentures, excluding interest on obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; 
e.	Dividends on stocks;
f.	Income from direct lease financing;
g.	Income from fiduciary activities;
h.	Service charges on deposit accounts;
i.	Other service charges, commissions and fees; and
j.	Other income.
(2)	Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to savings and loan associations are as follows: 
a.	Interest on mortgage loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold in service for others; 
b.	Interest on mortgages, participations, or mortgage-backed securities;
c.	Interest on real estate sold on contract;
d.	Discounts on mortgage loans purchased;
e.	Interest on other loans, excluding interest on obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; 
f.	Interest and dividends on investments and deposits;
g.	Loan fees;
h.	Loan servicing fees;
i.	Other fees and charges;
j.	Gross income from real estate owned operations;
k.	Net income from office building operations;
l.	Gross income from real estate held for investment;
m.	Net income from service corporations and subsidiaries;
n.	Miscellaneous operating income;
o.	Profit on sale of real estate owned, investment securities, loans, and other assets; and 
p.	Miscellaneous nonoperating income.
(3)	The following items shall be deducted from gross receipts calculated pursuant to subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section: 
a.	An amount equal to the amount of interest paid on all liabilities for the period;
b.	An amount equal to income derived from the authorized activities of any domestic international banking facility operating pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 7-1-730 et seq.; 
c.	An amount equal to any income arising from the conduct of a banking business with persons or entities located outside of the United States, its territories or possessions; 
To the extent that any deductions are made pursuant to subsections (b)(3)b and (b)(3)c of this section, any deductions taken under subsection (b)(3)a of this section shall be reduced by the same proportion that the deductions in subsections (b)(3)b and (b)(3)c of this section bear to the gross receipts of the depository financial institution as calculated before making any deductions pursuant to subsections (b)(3)a—(3)c of this section. 
(c)	Due date; filing of return. 
(1)	Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city by March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the state department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in that return. 
(2)	The due date of taxes levied by this section shall be April 1 of each year.
(Code 1988, § 3-2-34)
Secs. 90-150—90-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 10-09-20-A, § 1, repealed the former art. IV, § 90-171, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new art. IV as set out herein. The former art. IV pertained to the levy of a hotel-motel tax and derived from Code 1988, § 3-2-35.

Sec. 90-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City means the City of Hogansville and, variously, the incorporated territory of the city, wherein the City of Hogansville is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
City clerk means the duly appointed City Clerk of the City of Hogansville or his or her designee. 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability means the lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax(es), and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, truckstop, tourist cabin, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Lodging provider means any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of the year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than 30 continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 10-09-20-A, § 2, 9-20-2010)
Sec. 90-172. - Tax rate. 
Under authority of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(2), there shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of eight percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-09-20-A, § 2, 9-20-2010)
Sec. 90-173. - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in this city shall collect a tax of eight percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under this article. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax(es) applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. 
(Ord. No. 10-09-20-A, § 2, 9-20-2010)
Sec. 90-174. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign diplomat exempted by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is exempt from this tax. 
(Ord. No. 10-09-20-A, § 2, 9-20-2010)
Sec. 90-175. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in this city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that the ordinance from which this article is derived becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 10-09-20-A, § 2, 9-20-2010)
Sec. 90-176. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)	Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)	Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)	Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)	Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the state commissioner of revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)	Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(f)	Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the 20th day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the 20th day of the succeeding month. 
(g)	Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than 12 consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. 
(h)	Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 10-09-20-A, § 2, 9-20-2010)
Sec. 90-177. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)	Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)	Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 90-176. 
(c)	Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)	Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. No. 10-09-20-A, § 2, 9-20-2010)
Sec. 90-178. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)	Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 90-177(c). 
(b)	Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 90-176. 
(Ord. No. 10-09-20-A, § 2, 9-20-2010)
Sec. 90-179. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)	Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)	Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)	Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)	Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)	Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action within 60 days of the date said written claim is filed. 
(Ord. No. 10-09-20-A, § 2, 9-20-2010)
Sec. 90-180. - Administration of article; recordkeeping. 
(a)	Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)	Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)	Application for sales tax audit reports. Each year, in the month of January, the city clerk shall request in writing from the state commissioner of revenue any reports of sales tax audits conducted of hotels in the city during the preceding calendar year. 
(d)	Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)	Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 10-09-20-A, § 2, 9-20-2010)
Sec. 90-181. - Violations. 
Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 90-173 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement in the county for a term not to exceed three months, or both fine and confinement. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 90-176, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 10-09-20-A, § 2, 9-20-2010)
Secs. 90-182—90-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE EXCISE TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6.
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.

Sec. 90-201. - Excise tax, levied; amount, payment, duties of dealers and wholesalers. 
(a)	In addition to all other taxes or license fees heretofore or hereafter imposed upon retail dealers engaged in the city in the business of selling alcoholic beverages, as defined under the laws of the state, there is imposed and levied upon all hereinafter described dealers within the city an excise tax to be computed and collected as set forth in this section. 
(1)	Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a propportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
(2)	Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(3)	There is imposed an excise tax on the sale of wine of $0.80 per gallon or $0.22 per liter, or proportionately, so as to prorate the tax on bottles and containers of various sizes. 
(4)	There is imposed an excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits tax for the package of $0.22 per liter of distilled spirits, excluding fortified wine and a proportionate tax at the same rate as all fractional parts of a liter. 
(5)	There is imposed an excise tax on the sale of distilled sprirts tax by the drink when and where such sale is permitted by law of three percent of the charge to the public for the beverage. 
(b)	It shall be a violation of this article for any person to sell at retail within the city any alcoholic beverages on which the taxes provided in this section have not been paid. 
Sec. 90-202. - Duties of dealers and wholesalers. 
(a)	Computation, payment, duties of wholesale dealer and distributor. The tax imposed shall be computed and payable monthly. Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping, or delivering alcoholic beverages to any retail dealer in the city shall, as a condition to the privilege or conducting the business in the city: 
(1)	Keep and maintain true and correct records of all sales, shipments or deliveries of alcoholic beverages to each retail dealer in the city, such records to be preserved for a period of not less than one year and to be made available on request for the inspection of any duly authorized representative of the city. 
(2)	Collect from each retail dealer in the city at time of delivery of alcoholic beverages, the amount of tax due under the terms of this section and hold the same in trust for the city until such tax is remitted to the city as herein provided. 
(3)	On or before the tenth day of each calendar month, make a verified and comprehensive report to the city which shall correctly show and reflect all sales and deliveries of alcoholic beverages to or for retail dealers in the city for the calendar month immediately preceding the date of such report. Such report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the amount of excise tax collected under the terms of this section, and such other reasonable information as may be requested by the city. Such report shall be accompanied by remittance payable to the city for all taxes collected or due, as shown on such report. 
(4)	The excise tax levied in this section is hereby levied upon the retailer licensed to do business in the city and is the intent of this article to so levy this tax but require the payment of the tax at the time of delivery by the retailer to the wholesaler, who shall have the responsibility of remitting the tax to the city on behalf of the retailer on or before the tenth day of each calendar month, as hereinbefore required. If the tax hereunder is not paid on or before the tenth day of each calendar month, a ten percent penalty on the gross tax will be levied by the city against each defaulting retailing licensee for whom the tax is not paid on or before the tenth day of the month. 
(5)	To ensure payment of the excise tax levied hereby and prior to the issuance of any retail liquor license on the city, an applicant must post and file with the city council, along with his application, a performance bond conditioned upon the faithful observance and performance by the applicant of the rules and regulations contained in this article, and upon the payment of any part thereof, such bond will be forfeited as determined by the mayor and council at a hearing held for that purpose upon three days written notice given to the licensee concerned. Bond shall be payable to the clerk of the city and shall be in the amount of $1,000.00 and shall be in a form furnished by the city and must be approved by the mayor and council. 
(b)	Noncompliance by wholesale dealer, distributor. If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the reports required herein, the city shall notify such dealer or distributor in writing and if the reports are not made and the taxes remitted within five days from the date of such notice, such wholesale dealer or distributor shall be prohibited from making any further deliveries in the city and the retail licensees served by such wholesale dealer or distributor from whom the taxes have not been paid shall be subject to having their license suspended or revoked as herein provided. 
(c)	Unlawful retail sales. It shall be a violation of this article for a person to sell at retail within the city any alcoholic beverages on which the taxes herein provided for have not been paid. 
(d)	Unlawful deliveries. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any wholesale dealer or distributor or other person to deliver any alcoholic beverages to any retail dealer in the city without at the time of such delivery collecting the excise taxes herein provided for. 
(e)	Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or who shall assist any retail dealer in alcoholic beverages in the city to evade or avoid the payment of the taxes herein provided for shall be guilty of a violation of this section and on conviction thereof in the municipal court shall be fined or sentenced as provided by this Code and any such person so convicted shall also be subject to having his license suspended or revoked, if he shall be a licensed dealer in alcoholic beverages at retail. 
(Code 1988, tit. 9, ch. 2, art. A; Ord. of 5-2-1997)
State Law reference— Levy of tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60; levy of tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; levy of tax on distilled spirits by the package, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; levy of tax on distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 
Sec. 90-203. - Retailers' records. 
All retail dealers in malt beverages and/or wine, and all persons selling malt beverages and/or wine at retail, shall keep a complete and correct record of all purchases of malt beverages and wine, and shall require all persons from whom they purchase malt beverages or wine to furnish and deliver to them, at the time of delivery of such beverages, a correct invoice of purchase, which invoice shall be kept and preserved by the retailer at his place of business for a period of six months from the date of purchase. Such invoices and all records of retailers of malt beverages and/or wine shall be subject to inspection by any authorized representative of the city. All records of purchase shall be kept for a period of at least three years from the date of such purchase or sale before being destroyed. 
(Code 1988, § 3-2-43)
State Law reference— Maintenance of records, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-6. 
Secs. 90-204—90-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTRIC SUPPLIER TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 98.

Sec. 90-231. - Gross receipts business tax established; verified statement of revenues to be filed. 
Each electric supplier, including specifically electric membership corporations whether or not operated for profit, within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq., distributing and selling electric power within the city which is not otherwise paying a franchise fee pursuant to a franchise agreement, and whether or not such electric supplier has, operates and maintains offices within the city, shall pay a gross receipts tax at the rate of four percent on any and all gross revenue derived from distribution and sale of electric power to their customers, members, or purchasers within the city, according to the verified statement of such gross revenues which shall be submitted by such electric supplier at the time such taxes are paid. This gross receipts business tax is levied pursuant to authority granted the city in 1976 Ga. Laws (Act No. 784), page 2588, § 6.09. 
(Ord. of 11-20-1995, § 1)
Sec. 90-232. - Taxes payable monthly; taxes to be in lieu of certain other taxes. 
The taxes set out in this article shall be due and payable to the city on the 20th day of each month, calculated on gross revenues billed for the immediately preceding month. Also, the percentage of such gross revenues prescribed to be collected in this article shall be in lieu of all other license and business or occupation taxes, but shall not at any time be considered to interfere with, or in any way prevent the collection of ad valorem taxes upon the property of the electric supplier in the same manner as all other property, real and personal, in the city is taxed. 
(Ord. of 11-20-1995, § 1)
Sec. 90-233. - Electric service within the city. 
Electric suppliers distributing and selling electric power within the city, and which do not have a franchise agreement with the city, do not acquire any additional rights by the payment of the tax levied under this article other than those rights granted under the Georgia Electric Territorial Service Act (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.). 
(Ord. of 11-20-1995, § 1)
Sec. 90-234. - Enforcement and administration. 
(a)	The city clerk shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article and shall have the power to prepare and provide the necessary forms for the collection of the tax levied in this article. 
(b)	The city clerk shall issue executions for the collection of all outstanding and unpaid taxes imposed and assessed by this article. The unpaid taxes and executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes due the city. 
(Ord. of 11-20-1995, § 1)
Chapter 94 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 50; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54; signs as traffic hazards, § 74-5; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82.
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; drivers' licenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-5-1 et seq.; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; sirens, whistles and bells prohibited on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-70(b); responsibility of railroad employees for obstructing crossings, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-197; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; Handicapped Parking Law, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-220 et seq.; bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; proof of financial responsibility, O.C.G.A § 40-9-80 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles act, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; traffic offenses triable on complaint without indictment except in superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-3; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a); use of radar speed detection devices, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-1 et seq.; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4).

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 94-1—94-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-31. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
(a)	Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road (except for O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-393 and 40-6-394), are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this article. 
(b)	Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-7. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-1)
Editor's note— O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21 grants jurisdiction to the municipal court over all violations relating to traffic upon the public roads, streets and highways where the penalty for the offense does not exceed that of the grade of misdemeanor. O.C.G.A. § 40-13-22 grants jurisdiction to the municipal court over operators of unregistered or unlicensed vehicles. O.C.G.A. § 40-5-124 grants jurisdiction to the municipal court over offenses involving driver's licenses. 
Sec. 94-32. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-2)
Sec. 94-33. - Traffic, speed, truck, parking and other zones, signs and traffic control devices. 
(a)	Except as may otherwise be provided in this article, upon approval by resolution of the city council, the city manager is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices: 
(1)	Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway; 
(2)	Other safety zones for pedestrians;
(3)	Traffic lanes;
(4)	Speed, parking, truck or other traffic control zones;
(5)	Stop, yield, one-way and other directionals and devices; and
(6)	Any other sign, marking, device or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. 
(b)	All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this article for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(c)	The city clerk shall keep and maintain an accurate official map setting out all traffic zones, markings, signs and other traffic control devices. The map and any amendments or changes thereto shall be adopted by resolution of the city council and the map shall be known as the official traffic control map of the city. An official copy thereof shall be kept in the office of the city clerk; shall be available to the public; and copies certified by the city clerk shall be admissible in court as proof of the location of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device. 
(d)	No person shall be charged with violating a traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device unless appropriate signs, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on streets involved. 
(e)	Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this article shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-3)
Sec. 94-34. - Leaving vehicles on streets; repairing, displaying for sale. 
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on the public streets of the city for the purpose of making repairs on the vehicle. It shall be unlawful for a vehicle not in use to be parked on the public streets of the city for sale. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-4)
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
Sec. 94-35. - Washing vehicles on streets; cleaning up oil and grease by garages. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or proprietor of any garage to wash or allow to be washed any motor vehicle on the streets or sidewalks. The sidewalks in front of garages and oil and gasoline filling stations shall be kept clean from oil and grease. Containers of oil and grease shall not be kept adjacent to sidewalks or in any place where oil or grease leaking from or wasted around such containers shall drain to the street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-5)
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
Sec. 94-36. - Putting glass, etc., on highway prohibited. 
(a)	No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or highway any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, rubbish, garbage, trash, or other dangerous or unsightly material which is likely to injure any person, animal, or vehicle upon such street or highway. 
(b)	Any person who drops or throws, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any street or highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove that material or cause it to be removed. 
(c)	Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from such vehicle. 
(Code 1988, § 10-1-6)
State Law reference— Local litter ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-48. 
Sec. 94-37. - Driving over curb. 
No person shall drive or back a vehicle over the curb on any street except at a point where a driveway is provided. 
(Code 1988, § 10-2-1)
Secs. 94-38—94-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPEED LIMITS 

Sec. 94-56. - Traffic speed limits. 
(a)	Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-183 and 40-6-376, the Uniform Rules of the Road Act, the city is given the authority to alter and regulate speed limits within the city. The following speed zones are established: 
(1)	On-system: 

 
Signs to be erected by state department of transportation 
(2)	Off-system: 

 
Signs to be erected by the city. 
(b)	Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided for by law. 
(Ord. of 2-21-1994)
Secs. 94-57—94-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HEAVY TRUCK TRAFFIC 

Sec. 94-70. - No thru truck traffic. 
(a)	Unless making a pickup or delivery on said street, no vehicle in excess of 12,500 pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW) shall be allowed to travel on the following streets within the city: 
(1)	East Boyd Road from its intersection with Wilkes Drive to its intersection with Georgia Highway 54/100; 
(2)	Oak Street from its intersection with Boyd Street to its intersection with Main Street; and 
(3)	Johnson Street from its intersection with Main Street to its intersection with Highway 29. 
(b)	Any area designated within this section shall be posted as a "No Thru Truck Road."
(Ord. No. 13-04-15B, § 1, 4-15-2013; Ord. No. 13-05-06, § 1, 5-6-2013)
Secs. 94-71—94-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Off-street parking and loading, § 102-511 et seq.

Sec. 94-81. - Parking, markings designating parking areas and manner of parking. 
Parking areas and the manner of parking shall be designated by appropriate markings on the street or on the curb, or by appropriate signs. Yellow lines on the curb or a no parking sign adjacent to the street right-of-way shall signify a no parking area. In areas where parking is permitted, parking shall be in accordance with the parking lines shown on the street surface and, where there are no lines, parking shall be parallel to the curb on the right side of the street in such a manner so as to allow the safe and proper flow of traffic. 
(Code 1988, § 10-3-1)
Sec. 94-82. - Parking beyond curb. 
No vehicle shall be parked in the space between the property line and the curb. 
(Code 1988, § 10-3-2)
Sec. 94-83. - Parking of bus/motor carriers. 
No person operating a bus and/or motor carrier upon the public streets or highways of the city shall stop or park such vehicle for the purpose of taking on or discharging passengers on or along those streets or highways unless it is at least eight feet removed from the centerline of the street or highway, and the vehicle shall be so parked that no portion thereof shall be within eight feet of the centerline of the street or highway; providing further that any operator of such vehicle may stop or park only on the right side of any street or highway in the direction in which the vehicle may be traveling. 
(Code 1988, § 10-3-3)
Sec. 94-84. - Parking at city hall. 
Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday of each week, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the north side of Main Street in front of the city hall for periods of more than five minutes; and during those hours the parking limit at that location shall be five minutes. The police department shall park and keep appropriate notice of this parking limit at or near the parking spaces in front of the city hall. 
(Code 1988, § 10-3-4)
Sec. 94-85. - No overnight parking on lots; parking in spaces. 
There shall be no overnight parking in the parking lots or city streets between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., nor shall there be parking in the parking lots or city streets except in marked and metered parking spaces. 
(1)	Parking is prohibited on the east side of Lawrence Street for a distance of 225 feet from the intersection of Church Street to the entrance of Melson Homes. 
(2)	The no parking zone on the north side of East Main Street located near 412 East Main Street, also known as the Old Post Office, is a two-hour parking zone. 
(Code 1988, § 10-3-5)
Sec. 94-86. - Parking restrictions of designated areas. 
(a)	The area located on the north side of East Main Street, known as 406 E. Main Street, one parking space shall be designated as handicapped parking only. 
(b)	Parking shall be prohibited on both sides of the 100 block of College Street.
(c)	On the west side of Bass Road, parking shall be as follows:
(1)	The parking of motor vehicles along the west side of Bass Road from its intersection with Highway 54 South to Williams Street shall be limited to vehicles with no more than two axles and a height of no more than eight feet. 
(2)	Any vehicle parking along Bass Road with more than two axles or a height greater than eight feet shall be subject to a fine of $50.00 and the impoundment of the vehicle at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1988, § 10-3-6; Ord. of 6-2-1997; Ord. of 12-1-1997)
Sec. 94-87. - Collection from parking meters. 
The city council shall cause the containers placed in parking meters for the purpose of receiving deposited coins, pursuant to the provisions hereof, to be sealed at the time they are placed in the meters. The city clerk/treasurer is authorized to assign competent persons to make such collections. Collection shall be made by removing the sealed containers from the meters, and replacing the containers with empty sealed containers. The person making such collection shall then promptly turn over the collected containers with the seals unbroken, together with all contents thereof, to the city clerk/treasurer, who shall break the seals on the containers and remove the money therefrom. 
(Code 1988, § 10-3-18)
Sec. 94-88. - Use of proceeds. 
The coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided in this article are levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the public streets and also to cover the costs of supervision and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones, and to cover the costs of the purchasing, regulation and control of the parking meters described in this article. 
(Code 1988, § 10-3-19)
Secs. 94-89—94-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RAILROADS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipal governments to control form of grade crossings, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-190 et seq.

Sec. 94-111. - Railroads required to provide protection at grade crossings. 
In the interest of public safety, and for the protection of those using the streets of the city, it shall be the duty of every person operating trains across grade crossings in the city to provide at each such grade crossing complete public safety from danger from approaching trains for all persons using the streets at such crossings. For this purpose, persons operating trains, or having control of the tracks, shall place and keep at all times a watchman or flagman, or shall install, operate and maintain standard automatic gates or signaling devices sufficient to protect the public fully from the danger of any approaching train. The sufficiency of such standard signaling devices shall be approved by the city council prior to installation. 
(Code 1988, § 10-4-1)
State Law reference— Authority to require protective devices at grade crossings, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-200; no duty to erect blowposts in cities, railroad engineer must signal on approach of intersection, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-191. 
Sec. 94-112. - Train not to cross unprotected grade crossing. 
No train shall be run across any grade crossing where adequate provision, as required in this article, has not been made for the protection of human life. 
(Code 1988, § 10-4-2)
Sec. 94-113. - Speed limits for trains. 
No train shall proceed across any grade crossing in the city at a greater rate of speed than 35 miles per hour, nor shall any train be run anywhere within the city at a greater rate of speed than 35 miles per hour. 
(Code 1988, § 10-4-3)
Sec. 94-114. - No orders to be given requiring excess speed. 
No person shall issue any order requiring a greater rate of speed for trains than 35 miles per hour across grade crossings and 35 miles per hour at other places within the city. 
(Code 1988, § 10-4-4)
Sec. 94-115. - Train without engine not to be run across grade crossings; exception. 
No train shall be run by any means across a grade crossing without having a locomotive attached thereto, unless there is a watchman at the crossing at the time. 
(Code 1988, § 10-4-5)
Sec. 94-116. - Unnecessary blowing of whistle prohibited. 
No locomotive whistle shall be blown within the city limits, except where it is necessary to prevent accidents, or where it is necessary to signal the engineers of other trains of the approach of any passenger train or any section following the passenger train, or when it is necessary to signal a brakeman to protect the rear of such train when the train has made a nonscheduled stop and there is danger of a rear end collision. 
(Code 1988, § 10-4-6)
State Law reference— Tolling of bell in lieu of blowing whistle inside cities, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-191. 
Sec. 94-117. - Train, freight cars not to stand on grade crossing. 
(a)	Trains. No train shall stand at rest upon any grade crossing for a longer period than three minutes at any one time, nor shall any train or part thereof stand at rest in such position so as to obstruct any grade crossing for a longer period. 
(b)	Freight cars. Freight cars shall not be permitted to stand at rest at any grade crossings for the purpose of discharging or taking on freight of any character. 
(Code 1988, §§ 10-4-7, 10-4-8)
Sec. 94-118. - Persons responsible for violations. 
Responsibility for failure to comply with the requirements of this article shall be upon the person or persons operating trains, together with all the officers, employees and agents of persons operating trains who have it within their power or authority to comply or to enforce compliance with such requirements; and any of such persons may be convicted and punished for violation of any such requirement. 
(Code 1988, § 10-4-9)
State Law reference— Limitation of liability of certain officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-197. 
Secs. 94-119—94-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highway, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3).

Sec. 94-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city. 
Parade permit means a permit as required by this article. 
(Code 1988, § 9-7-2)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-142. - Permit required. 
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police. 
(Code 1988, § 9-7-3)
Sec. 94-143. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)	Funeral processions;
(2)	Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
(3)	A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
(Code 1988, § 9-7-4)
Sec. 94-144. - Application for parade permit. 
(a)	Requirement. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by the city. 
(b)	Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than 48 hours nor more than 30 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(c)	Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)	The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the parade;
(2)	If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of that organization; 
(3)	The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade leader and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(4)	The date when the parade is to be conducted;
(5)	The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point;
(6)	The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute the parade; the type of animals, and description of the vehicles; 
(7)	The hours when the parade will start and terminate;
(8)	A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(9)	The location by streets of any assembly areas for the parade;
(10)	The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any assembly area or areas; 
(11)	The interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade;
(12)	If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf; and 
(13)	Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(Code 1988, § 9-7-5)
Sec. 94-145. - Late applications for parade permit. 
The chief of police, where good cause is shown, shall have the authority to consider any application under this article which is filed less than 48 hours before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(Code 1988, § 9-7-6)
Sec. 94-146. - Parade permit fee. 
There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade permit such fee as fixed from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 9-7-7)
Sec. 94-147. - Standards for issuance of parade permit. 
The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for under this article when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)	The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)	The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)	The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)	The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(5)	The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(6)	The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; and 
(7)	The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Code 1988, § 9-7-8)
Sec. 94-148. - Notice of rejection of application for parade permit. 
The chief of police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within three days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant, within five days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Code 1988, § 9-7-9)
Sec. 94-149. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within three days after notice. The city council shall act upon the appeal within 14 days after its receipt. 
(Code 1988, § 9-7-10)
Sec. 94-150. - Alternative permit. 
The chief of police in denying an application for a parade permit shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under, this article. 
(Code 1988, § 9-7-11)
Sec. 94-151. - Notice to city and other officials. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)	The city manager;
(2)	The mayor;
(3)	The city attorney;
(4)	The fire chief.
(Code 1988, § 9-7-12)
Sec. 94-152. - Contents of parade permit. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)	Starting time;
(2)	Minimum speed;
(3)	Maximum speed;
(4)	Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade;
(5)	The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;
(6)	The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;
(7)	Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 9-7-13)
Sec. 94-153. - Duties of permittee. 
A permittee under this article shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Code 1988, § 9-7-14)
Sec. 94-154. - Possession of permit. 
The parade chair or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Code 1988, § 9-7-15)
Sec. 94-155. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)	Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)	Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle, streetcar or trackless trolley shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)	Parking on parade route. The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 9-7-16)
Sec. 94-156. - Revocation of parade permit. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under this article upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1988, § 9-7-17)
Sec. 94-157. - Horses. 
Any person or group riding or otherwise directly in control of any horse, mule, donkey or other animal in a parade shall provide, at such person's own expense, a follower, who shall follow along behind such animal or group of animals and collect any excrement dropped by such animal before the next person or vehicle crosses over the point where such waste was dropped. 
(Ord. No. 13-01-07A, § 1, 1-7-2013)
Chapter 98 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; electrical, § 14-81 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; flood damage prevention, ch. 42; historical preservation, ch. 46; planning and development, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 86; electric supplier tax, § 90-231 et seq.
State Law reference— Grants for water and sewer service, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; powers concerning water system, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 98-1. - Administrative responsibility. 
(a)	The municipal electrical distribution system shall be under the immediate supervision of the chief electrician, who shall perform all acts necessary for the prudent, efficient, and economical management and protection of the electrical system, subject to the approval and confirmation of the city manager. 
(b)	The municipal gas distribution system shall be under the immediate supervision of the gas superintendent, who shall perform all acts necessary for the prudent, efficient, and economical management and protection of the gas system, subject to the approval and confirmation of the city manager. 
(c)	The municipal water distribution and sewage systems shall be under the immediate supervision of the superintendent of water and wastewater, who shall perform all acts necessary for the prudent, efficient, and economical management and protection of the water and sewage systems, subject to the approval and confirmation of the city manager. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-1)
Sec. 98-2. - Backflow prevention and cross connection control. 
The supervisor of the water distribution department of the city is authorized and directed to prepare and promulgate policies and procedures relating to control of the sewer system and the water system so as to enforce backflow prevention and cross connection controls applicable thereto. Such policies and procedures when developed and after approval and adoption by the mayor and council at a regular meeting shall be enforced and shall have the same effect as laws and ordinances of the city. A copy of the policies and procedures as adopted and as amended by the mayor and council shall be available for inspection. 
(Code 1988, § 6-4-1)
Sec. 98-3. - Franchise fees payable by city. 
Use by the City of Hogansville of the streets, alleys, public places and other property of the city for the operation of the city's water, sewer, electric and natural gas utilities is expressly conditioned upon payment of franchise fees as hereinafter set forth. Beginning in May 2013, and on a monthly basis thereafter, each utility enterprise of the city shall add to its bills, collect and pay to the general fund of the city the following percentage of the gross sales for the previous month of water, sewer, electric and natural gas services to all of the city's customers served within the corporate limits of the city, to wit: 

 
(Ord. No. 12-09-17A, § 1, 9-17-2012; Ord. No. 13-05-20, § 1, 5-20-2013)
Secs. 98-4—98-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER, SEWERS AND ELECTRICITY 

Sec. 98-31. - Use of public waters required. 
(a)	The owner of each house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public water line of the city, shall install at his expense suitable water facilities therein, and shall connect the facilities directly with the proper water line in accordance with the provisions of this section, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so; provided that a public water line is within 200 feet of the owner's property line and access is available over public land or through a public utility easement. 
(b)	This section shall not apply to any such owner who already has suitable water facilities by use of a well on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-1.1)
Sec. 98-32. - Inspections. 
The city manager, or other designated employees, may enter the premises of any utility user at any reasonable time to examine the condition of the pipes, meters and fixtures. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-2)
Sec. 98-33. - Application for utilities. 
Application for the use of utilities shall be made to the city clerk by the owner or agent of the property to be benefitted, designating the location of the property and stating the purpose for which utilities may be required. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-3)
Sec. 98-34. - Connection charges. 
(a)	In addition to the $100.00 per tap fee per lot, the charges for installing, at the request of the customer, underground electric service shall be as follows: 
(1)	Primary cables, per foot .....$2.50 
Minimum charge .....375.00 
(2)	Secondary cables, per foot .....2.50 
Minimum charge .....225.00 
(b)	Except for the $100.00 per tap fee per lot, there shall be no charge to the customer for: 
(1)	Overhead electric service; or
(2)	Underground electric service which is determined to be in the best interest of the city. 
(c)	All cables between the city's metering equipment and the customer's switch gear shall be installed, owned and maintained by the customer. 
(d)	The city may charge a customer for relocating any overhead or underground electrical service when such relocation is at the request of, for the benefit of, or due to the fault of the customer. The charge for such relocation shall be equal to the labor, materials and overhead costs of the city. 
(e)	All fees shall be paid before the city's work is begun.
(Ord. of 8-15-2002, § 6-1-19)
Sec. 98-35. - Tapping and connection charges. 
(a)	Upon the application for a new tap and service connection by the consumer for water, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk such amount as established from time to time by the city council to cover the cost of the meter, fittings, pipe from the main to the property line, labor and fire protection costs. For larger meters, the customer will be charged for the cost of the meter, plus the cost of installation. 
(b)	Upon application for a new service tap and service connection by any consumer for gas, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk such sum as established from time to time by the city council for the first 25 feet of service line, plus the cost of the service line for each additional foot required to place service at the desired location. 
(1)	The customer or builder shall provide a location for the gas meter acceptable to the city. The city reserves the right to refuse to set a meter in an unacceptable position. Meters will not be located within less than six feet of heating appliances, near furnaces, nor inside or under houses, nor placed in any situation where they will be inaccessible or liable to injury. 
(2)	When, to accommodate different tenants, two or more meters are desired in a building, the city will set as many meters as there are separate customers, connecting the meters to one service pipe, provided the risers of pipes leading to these different tenants are terminated according to city specifications. 
(c)	Upon application for new electrical service, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk such sum as established from time to time by the city council for the first 50 feet of service line and first utility pole and the city's cost for wire thereafter to place service at the desired location. 
(d)	Upon application for connection to the city's sanitary sewerage lines, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk such sum as established from time to time by the city council. 
(e)	When any tap requires the cutting of pavement, sidewalks, curbing or the boring of the road, the customer is required to pay this cost in addition to the cost in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)	The city shall own and maintain the gas line from the main to the meter and the property owner shall own and maintain the service line from the meter. 
(g)	The city shall own and maintain the electric line from the pole to the masthead for the service wire to enter the building and the property owner shall own and maintain the line therefrom. 
(h)	All work upon the service line shall be performed by a licensed plumber, electrician, or owner, as may be applicable. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-4)
Sec. 98-36. - Meters. 
Each building or structure using city utilities shall have a meter installed by the city. All such meters are the property of the city. The city reserves the sole right to turn on, turn off, disconnect, move, or reset all meters. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-5)
Sec. 98-37. - Service line regulations. 
Each gas and/or water service line shall contain a stopcock and waste cock where the gas and/or water may be turned off on the owner's premises. Only pipe approved for potable water shall be used for any water service line. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-6)
Sec. 98-38. - Waste prohibition. 
(a)	Consumers shall prevent unnecessary waste of water and keep all water outlets closed when not in actual use. Hydrants, urinals, water closets, bathtubs and other fixtures must not be left running for any purpose other than the use for which they were intended. When any such waste occurs, the water service may be terminated. 
(b)	Consumers should be energy conservation conscious. Temperatures of the interiors of buildings and that of hot water should be maintained at comfortable, but not at unnecessarily high or low (according to the season) settings. Furnaces should be cleaned and properly adjusted. Efforts should be made to make buildings energy efficient. When any such waste occurs on a continuing basis, utility service may be discontinued until corrections are made. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-7)
Sec. 98-39. - Sprinkling restrictions. 
In case of water shortage or scarcity, the city council may by resolution place any restrictions upon the use of water for irrigation or sprinkling purposes which it deems necessary. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-8)
Sec. 98-40. - Use during fire alarms. 
During all fire alarms, the use of hoses and other apparatus maintaining a constant flow of water by persons other than municipal firefighters is absolutely forbidden. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-9)
Sec. 98-41. - Interruptions in service. 
(a)	The uninterrupted service of any utility provided by the city is not guaranteed to any party purchasing or receiving those services from the city. No liability will be assumed by the city for damage to equipment or property or injuries to persons due to interruptions in any utility services. 
(b)	The term "interruptions" as employed in this section shall be defined as the occurrence of some act during the period of use or prescription which is sufficient to cause a deviation from the norm, regardless of the cause of that act. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-10)
Sec. 98-42. - Utility rates. 
(a)	Electric. Electric rates shall be as established from time to time by the mayor and council, with the exception of the environmental compliance cost recovery factor (ECCR) and the annual adjustment for total cost of power. The monthly environmental compliance cost recovery adjustment in cents per kWh shall be added to all electric meters for service. The ECCR shall represent an amount no higher than that which may be calculated using the environmental compliance cost recovery reporting issued annually by the City of Hogansville's electric supplier MEAG Power. 
Beginning with bills calculated after September 1, 2012, the electric rate charges per unit (kWh) shall be modified on an annual basis to reflect the increase or decrease in total cost of power purchased by the City of Hogansville from the Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia (MEAG). Variances of such wholesale total power supply costs, either in excess or shortfall, shall be included within the rate calculation for each of the city's customers on equal per kWh basis. 
(1)	Residential service. The residential service schedule is applicable to all residential customers for domestic use in individual residences or apartments where the largest motor does not exceed 7½ horsepower. This service is only applicable to that required to operate residential lighting, cooking, heating, refrigeration and incidental power when applied to one meter to each residence or apartment unit. Power normally supplied under this rate will be normal 120-240 volts, single phase. 
(2)	Outdoor lighting service, city owned system. Outdoor lighting service is available in all areas served by the city electric system. Where poles other than wood are desired by a customer, he shall install, own and maintain such poles and the city shall install, own and maintain the brackets and lighting equipment. Where the use of underground conductors is desired by the customer, he shall install, own and maintain the underground conductors and the risers up the poles. Security lighting service will be provided only at locations which are accessible to the city trucks for servicing purposes. 
a.	The customer shall pay, in advance of installation, the actual cost of materials necessary for installation, to include necessary poles, wire, and luminaire. 
b.	When the customer pays for the total cost of 175 watt luminaire, pole, labor, etc., the city shall make a charge as fixed from time to time by the city council for energy and maintenance. 
c.	The term "maintain," as it applies to security lights, means the replacement of lamps and glassware as required at regular intervals or as soon as can reasonably be done after notification is received by the city that service has been interrupted. However, the customer shall reimburse the city for the cost of any such maintenance work which is required because of vandalism. 
(3)	Industrial service. 
a.	Generally. Industrial service is applicable to industrial customers whose main function is the manufacture of finished products, the extraction, fabrication or processing of raw materials, the preservation of raw materials or finished products, for all legitimate power and residential lighting requirements in the operation of the industrial plants. No electricity may be resold, transmitted to other premises, nor used in related commercial enterprise without the express consent of the city. Motor starting current must conform to city requirements. 
b.	Determination of demand. The demand shall be based on the highest 30-minute kW measurements during the current month and the preceding 11 months and not less than 100 percent of the highest demand occurring during any previous summer month (June through October). In no case shall the demand be less than 50 kW. 
c.	Purchased power adjustment rider. Purchased power adjustment rider will be added to established rates. 
d.	Taxes. The established rates do not include tax. 
(b)	Fuel charges and sales tax. Fuel charges and state sales tax shall be added to all rates where applicable. 
(c)	Gas. Rates for consumers of natural gas of and from the natural gas distribution system of the city shall be established from time to time by the city council. 
(1)	The industrial schedule is available to any commercial, institutional or industrial user for any purpose exclusive of resale and for service at one location through one metering point and where the customer maintains adequate standby fuel and equipment. The availability of service at this schedule is dependent upon the city having gas delivery capacity in excess of the then existing requirements of other customers and having available from its supplier at the delivery point nearest to the customer an adequate supply of natural gas to meet the customer's requirements. 
(2)	State sales tax is added when applicable.
(3)	Unauthorized use of gas. If, upon one-hour notice by the city, the customer fails to comply with a curtailment notice calling for complete or partial curtailment of gas deliveries and by reason thereof the city is charged by its supplier with overrun penalties, the customer shall be billed for the amount of such penalties which are due to its failure to comply with such curtailment notices. 
(4)	The payment of an overrun penalty shall not, under any circumstances, be considered as giving the customer the right to take unauthorized overrun gas, nor shall payment be considered to exclude or limit any other remedies (including turning off the gas service valve at the customer's premises) available to the city or other customer against the offending customer for failing to comply with its obligation to operate within the provisions of all curtailment orders. 
(5)	The availability of service at the rate schedule shall be at the city's option and is dependent upon the city having gas delivery capacity in excess of the requirements of all other customers during the period of curtailment. 
(6)	Deliveries under the industrial schedule shall be subject to curtailment or complete interruption wherever in the discretion of the city such curtailment or complete interruption of service is necessary in order to assure continuous service to customers served on a firm basis and equitable allocation of gas among all customers of the city. 
(7)	The rates fixed in this subsection are based upon rates presently authorized by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). In the event the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission shall hereafter authorize an increase or decrease in the cost of such gas to the city, the city clerk shall adjust the rates contained in this subsection to reflect the same ratio of cost to selling price as are contained in this subsection, i.e., basic cubic foot selling price to residential customers is the cost to the city multiplied by 1.1. The city clerk shall notify the council of any raises or pending raises as soon as it becomes known to the city clerk. 
(d)	Sanitary sewage. Customers shall be billed for sewage services in accordance with a schedule as established from time to time by the city council. 
(e)	Water. 
(1)	Generally. Municipal water rates for customers shall be as established from time to time by the city council. 
(2)	Fire protection service rates. Fire protection service water rates are applicable to all customers having water facilities which are designed and used exclusively for the purpose of fire protection and suppression. The charge is for availability of water for fire protection and suppression purposes and is based upon the facilities available for such purposes, and shall be as established from time to time by the city council. The annual fire protection service charge shall be prorated and billed on the city monthly utility bill and shall be due and payable by the tenth of each month. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-11; Ord. No. 12-09-17B, § 1, 9-17-2012; Ord. No. 12-09-17C, § 1, 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 98-43. - Reading meters; utility bills. 
Meters shall be read on the same day of each month, as nearly as possible, and bills shall be mailed within ten working days thereafter. All bills shall be due and payable within 15 days of the date of the bill. Bills not so paid shall have a penalty of ten percent added thereto. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-12)
Sec. 98-44. - Collection policy; discontinuance of service for failure to pay utilities. 
It is the policy of the city to administer a fair and equitable program of collection procedures which will curtail habitually late payments, but yet will not penalize those persons or customers who are occasionally tardy with their payment. The following conditions shall apply as to the collection policy for the city: 
(1)	The city shall cause to be delivered, each customer's utility bill, on or before the 25th day of each calendar month. 
(2)	If on the tenth of the month, the customer has not fully paid the amount shown on the invoice or bill which was mailed on the 25th of the preceding month, he shall be mailed a late notice indicating such delinquency on the 11th of that month. 
(3)	If the customer has not fully paid the previous month's utility bill, as indicated by that invoice received or mailed on the 25th of the previous month, his utilities and city services shall be disconnected on the 26th of the following calendar month. 
(4)	A customer's service shall be disconnected upon the receipt of a returned check.
(5)	The city shall make notification by mail whenever this policy requires that notice be given. 
(Ord. of 4-20-1998, § 6-1-13)
Sec. 98-45. - Charges for turning utility service on. 
If the utility service to any premises is turned off for any reason, a reconnection charge as established by city council shall be made for turning the utilities back on. Service shall not be restored to any person or household until all delinquencies shall have been paid in full. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-14)
Sec. 98-46. - Deposit required. 
(a)	Each person desiring to become a customer of the city for water, gas or electrical utility service shall make application for such service, either in person, or by their duly authorized agent upon forms provided by the city for such purpose. Any such application for service will not be accepted by the city unless the conditions and provisions of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city are complied with. 
(b)	At the time of application for utility service, the customer will pay to the city a utility deposit in an amount as established by the city council, which shall be retained by the city, without interest, for so long as it is deemed necessary and service is given to the customer by the city. 
(1)	Commercial service. Commercial service shall be billed at 2½ times the anticipated monthly bill based upon past history, if any, or upon the anticipated use. The customer may furnish the city a surety bond in lieu of the cash deposit. 
(2)	Industrial service: Industrial service shall be billed the same as commercial service, or as may be determined by contract approved by the city council and executed prior to delivery of service. 
(c)	Upon application therefor, and after consideration of appropriate credit investigation, past history of service, if any, and such other facts as may be appropriate, the city clerk may waive the deposit requirements or may require a deposit of a lesser amount. 
(d)	Any utility deposit may be applied by the city to payment of past due bills and the customer in making a subsequent application for service may be required to make another utility deposit. 
(e)	Any customer whose service is terminated for nonpayment may be required to make an additional deposit up to the amount of double the anticipated monthly bill based on past history, if any, or upon anticipated use. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-15)
Sec. 98-47. - Alteration of or damage to metering equipment; theft of services. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus belonging to the city, or intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied, or in any way to interfere with the proper action of the city, or to intentionally divert any services of the city or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used any service manufactured, sold or distributed by the city. 
(b)	Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts set forth in subsection (a) of this section and/or the person who with knowledge of such violation receives the benefit of such service without proper charge as a result of such improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for such acts of tampering or diversion. 
(c)	Violators of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-16)
State Law reference— Theft of service, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 98-48. - Meter testing. 
Any utility user who believes his meter measures inaccurately who desires to have the meter tested for accuracy shall pay a deposit as fixed from time to time by the city council to the city clerk. The city shall have the meter tested by an independent firm which shall furnish a written report, by serial number, a copy of which will be furnished the user. If the meter is found to be within the limits acceptable to the public service commission, the user shall forfeit his deposit and no adjustment shall be made. If the meter tested is outside those limits, the deposit shall be returned and an appropriate adjustment shall be made to the user's account. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-17)
Sec. 98-49. - Discounts. 
(a)	Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Head of household means any person living with one or more persons in the household who are related to him by blood or marriage and whose income is the primary means of support for such household. 
Income means money received from any source whether the result of employment, return on investments or savings, or whether the money shall be from welfare payments, social security benefits, aid to dependent children benefits or other payments or benefits from federal, state, city or county governments, or any of the agencies or departments of such governments. 
Primary individual means any person living alone or living with one or more persons who are not related to him by blood or marriage and whose income is the primary means of support for such household. 
(b)	Utilities discount for certain individuals created. There is hereby created a utilities discount in an amount as fixed from time to time by the city council for the head of a family or the primary individual of a household who is 65 years of age or older and who otherwise meets the qualifications contained in this section. 
(c)	Application or utilities discount; requirements. The head of household or primary individual of a household desiring to obtain such utility discount shall make an annual application therefor. Such application shall be approved by the city council if the following requirements are met: 
(1)	The person making application for such utility discount is the head of household or primary individual of a household, and is 65 years of age or older. 
(2)	The current total income from all sources for all persons living in the same household does not exceed such annual sum as established and adjusted from time to time by the council using US Department of Agriculture (USDA) figures; provided, however, that any property owner who is head of household or the primary individual of a household and who is entitled to the low income double homestead exemption under the law of the state shall be deemed to meet the total income provisions of this subsection. 
(3)	The person making such application for a utility discount must have been a user of city utilities for at least a period of six months. 
(d)	Application for discount to be made under oath; filing; misrepresentation of facts in application. 
(1)	The application for utilities discount shall be made under oath and filed with the city clerk and shall be effective upon approval by the city council. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for any person to misrepresent facts in any application made for the purpose of securing such discount. Any person violating this subsection shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. Any discounts given or received by virtue of a false application may be terminated immediately. 
(Code 1988, § 6-1-18)
Sec. 98-50. - After hours disconnect fee. 
There will be a charge of $35.00 per visit for disconnecting any utility customer which occurs: 
(1)	After 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, or at any time on Saturday, Sunday or any holiday; and 
(2)	When such disconnection is required due to problems with the customer's utility service which requires correction or repair by the customer. 
(Ord. of 9-18-1995, § 6-1-19)
Sec. 98-51. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscapes; penalties. 
(a)	Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the corporate limits of the city may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)	Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)	Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)	Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)	Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)	Watering personal food gardens;
(6)	Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)	Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses;
(8)	Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container;
(9)	Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)	Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation;
(11)	Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas;
(12)	Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or
(13)	Hydroseeding.
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any water customer of the city to use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained within this ordinance. Any persons who shall violate the provisions of this section shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-20-A, § 1, 12-20-2010)
Secs. 98-52—98-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DAMAGE PREVENTION 

Sec. 98-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Damage means the substantial weakening of structural or lateral support of an underground utility, penetration or destruction of any protective coating, housing or other protective device of an underground utility, and the partial or complete severance of an underground utility. 
Demolish and demolition mean any operation by which a structure or mass of material is wrecked, razed, moved or removed by means of any tools or discharge of explosives. 
Excavate and excavation mean an operation for the purpose of the movement or removal of earth, rock or other materials in or on the ground by use of mechanized equipment or by discharge of explosives, and including augering, backfilling, digging; ditching, drilling, grading, plowing-in, pulling-in, ripping, scraping, trenching and tunneling, but not including the tilling of soil for agricultural purposes. 
Mechanized equipment means equipment operated by means of mechanical power including trenchers, bulldozers, power shovels, augers, backhoes, scrapers, drills, cable and pipe plows and other equipment used for plowing-in or pulling-in cable or pipe. 
Operator means the city or any utility commission who owns or operates a utility within the city. 
Person means any individual, any corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity organized under the laws of any state, any subdivision or instrumentality of a state and any employee, agent or legal representative thereof. 
Utility means any line system or facility used for producing, storing, conveying, transmitting, or distributing communication, electricity, gas, petroleum, petroleum products, hazardous liquids, water, steam or sewerage. 
Working day means every day, except Saturday, Sunday, and national and legal state holidays. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-2)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-82. - Excavation and demolition permits; effect. 
A permit issued pursuant to a law authorizing excavation or demolition operations shall not be deemed to relieve a person from the responsibility for complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-3)
Sec. 98-83. - Prohibition. 
Except as provided in section 98-86, no person may excavate in a street, highway, public space, a private easement of an operator, or near the location of a utility installed on the premises of a customer served by such utility, or demolish a building without having first ascertained in the manner prescribed in sections 98-84 and 98-85 the location of all underground utilities in the area that would be affected by the proposed excavation or demolition. Each operator shall maintain a list of all underground utilities and plans or maps showing their location. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-4)
Sec. 98-84. - Notice of intent to excavate or demolish. 
(a)	Except as provided in section 98-86, before commencing any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 98-83, each person responsible for such excavation or demolition shall serve written or telephonic notice of intent to excavate or demolish at least three, but not more than ten full working days on each operator. In the case of the city, such notice should be given to the city manager or city clerk. 
(b)	The written or telephonic notice required by subsection (a) of this section must contain the name, address and telephone number of the person filing the notice of intent, and, if different, the person responsible for the excavation or demolition, the starting date, anticipated duration, and type of excavation or demolition to be conducted, the location of the proposed excavation or demolition and whether or not explosives are to be used. 
(c)	If the notification required by this section is made by telephone, an adequate record of such notification shall be maintained by the operators to document compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-5)
Sec. 98-85. - Response to notice of intent to excavate or demolish. 
(a)	Each operator or designated representative notified in accordance with section 98-84 shall, not less than two working days in advance of the proposed excavation or demolition (unless a shorter period is provided by agreement between the person responsible for the excavation or demolition and the operator or designated representative), supply, by use of maps when appropriate, the following information to the person responsible for the excavation or demolition: 
(1)	The approximate location and description of all of its underground utilities which may be damaged as a result of the excavation or demolition; 
(2)	The location and description of all utility markers indicating the approximate location of the underground utilities; and 
(3)	Any other information that would assist that person in locating and thereby avoiding damage to the underground utilities, including providing adequate temporary markings indicating the approximate location of the underground utility in locations where permanent utility markers do not exist. 
(b)	For purposes of this section, the approximate location of underground utilities is defined as a strip of land at least three feet wide but not wider than the width of the utility plus 1½ feet on either side of the utility. 
(c)	Where demolition of a building is proposed, operators shall be given reasonable time to remove or protect their utilities before demolition of the building is commenced. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-6)
Sec. 98-86. - Emergency excavation or demolition. 
Compliance with the notice requirements of section 98-84 is not required of persons responsible for emergency excavation or demolition to ameliorate an imminent danger to life, health, or property; provided, however, that such persons give, as soon as practicable, oral notice of the emergency excavation or demolition to each operator having underground utilities located in the area where such excavation or demolition is to be performed and requests emergency assistance from each operator so identified in locating and providing immediate protection to its underground utilities. An imminent danger to life, health or property exists whenever there is a substantial likelihood that loss of life, health or property will result before the procedures under sections 98-84 and 98-85 can be fully complied with. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-7)
Sec. 98-87. - Precautions to avoid damage. 
In addition to the notification requirements of section 98-84, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 98-83 shall: 
(1)	Plan the excavation or demolition to avoid damage to or minimize interference with underground utilities in and near the construction area; 
(2)	Maintain a clearance between an underground utility and the cutting edge or point of any mechanized equipment, taking into account the known limit of control of such cutting edge or point, as may be reasonably necessary to avoid damage to such utility; and 
(3)	Provide such support for underground utilities in and near the construction area, including during backfill operations, as may be reasonably necessary for the protection of such utilities. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-8)
Sec. 98-88. - Excavation or demolition damage. 
(a)	Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 98-83 that results in any damage to an underground utility shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator of such utility of the location and nature of the damage and shall allow the operator reasonable time to accomplish necessary repairs before completing the excavation or demolition in the immediate area of such utility. 
(b)	Each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 98-83 that results in damage to an underground utility permitting the escape of any flammable, toxic or corrosive gas or liquid shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator, police and fire departments, and take any other action as may be reasonably necessary to protect persons and property and to minimize the hazards until arrival of the operator's personnel or police and fire departments. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-9)
Sec. 98-89. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-7. This article does not affect any civil remedies for personal injury or property (including underground utilities) damage except as otherwise specifically provided for in this article. 
(Code 1988, § 6-2-10)
Secs. 98-90—98-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER USE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-111. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act and the act mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., as it may be amended. 
Authorized representative of industrial user means any one of the following: 
(1)	A principal executive officer at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)	A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; 
(3)	A person designated by an authorized representative as defined in subsections (1) or (2) of this definition where such designated person is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge originates. 
Biochemical oxygen demand means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in milligrams per liter, mg/l. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
Categorical standards means national pretreatment standards or any regulation applicable to industrial users and containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act. 
Chemical oxygen demand means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the oxidation of organic and oxidizable inorganic material, measured by using a strong chemical oxidizing agent in an acidic medium, expressed in milligrams per liter, mg/l. 
Combined sewer means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and stormwater or surface water. 
Composite sample means the accumulation of a number of individual samples over a period of time, so taken as to represent the nature of the wastewater. 
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Designated city representative means the city manager or his duly authorized agent. 
Domestic wastewater means wastewater derived principally from dwellings, business buildings and institutions, exclusive of industrial wastewater. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Environmental Protection Agency and EPA mean the regional administrator or other duly authorized official of such federal agency. 
Environmental Protection Division and EPD mean the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division or any authorized official of such state agency. 
Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the domestic or commercial handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
General pretreatment regulations means "The General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution," published in the Federal Register, 40 CFR 403, on June 26, 1978, and any revisions to such document. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastewater stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the wastewater stream and without consideration of time. 
Grease means a material composed primarily of fats, oil, and grease from animal or vegetable sources. The terms "fats, oil, and grease" shall be deemed as grease by definition. Grease may also include petroleum-based products. 
Grease trap means a tank or vessel designed to remove floatable oil from the wastewater stream prior to discharge to the municipal system. 
Grit means the heavy suspended mineral matter present in water or wastewater such as sand, gravel or cinders. 
Grit trap means a tank or vessel designed to interrupt the flow of wastewater so as to cause sand, grit and similar heavy particles to be removed from the wastewater stream prior to discharge to the municipal system. 
Industrial wastes means the wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Interference means inhibition or disruption of the water pollution control facilities, city wastewater treatment processes or operations, or sludge processes, use, or disposal; which is a cause of or significantly contributes to either a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or to the prevention of sludge use or disposal by the city in accordance with the following federal statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or city regulations): Section 405 of the Act, (33 USC 1345), the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, and the Toxic Substances Control Act. An industrial user significantly contributes to such a permit violation or prevention of sludge use or disposal in accordance with authorities cited in this definition whenever such user: 
(1)	Discharges a daily pollutant loading in excess of that permitted by the provisions of this article or by federal or state law. 
(2)	Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature or constituents from the user's average discharge; or 
(3)	Knows or has reason to know that the user's discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would result in an NPDES permit violation by the city or prevent sludge use or disposal in accordance with the authorities cited in this definition as they apply to the city's selected method of sludge management. 
Mass emission rate means the weight of material discharged during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per year of the particular constituent or combination of constituents. 
May is permissive; shall is mandatory. 
Metered water means the amount of all sources of water, including wells, consumed by the sewer customer. 
National categorical pretreatment standard means any national pretreatment standard specifying properties which may be discharged to a water pollution control facility by existing or new industrial users in specific industrial subcategories. 
National pollutant discharge elimination system permit means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
National pretreatment standard and pretreatment standard mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users. 
New source and new industrial user mean any new discharge, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards (under Section 307 (b) of the Act) for such discharges. 
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or the legal representatives, agents or assigns of such entity or individual. 
pH means the reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven and a hydrogen-ion concentration of 107. 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging such pollutants into water pollution control facilities. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Publicly owned pretreatment works and POTW mean a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33 USC 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to such a treatment works, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Sewage means the spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater." 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
Significant industrial user means any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who (i) has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day; or (ii) has a flow greater than five percent of the flow in the city's wastewater treatment system; or (iii) has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act or defined in the laws of the state; or (iv) is found by the city, state control agency or the Environmental Protection Agency to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system. 
Sludge means the accumulated solids separated from liquids during wastewater processing. 
Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect wastewater treatment works. 
Standard industrial classification means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget. 
Storm drain and storm sewer mean a sewer which carries stormwater and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling waters. 
Suspended solids means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. 
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the EPA under the provision of the Clean Water Act, Section 307(a) or other acts. 
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's water pollution control facilities. 
Waste means sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal. 
Wastewater means a combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and commercial establishments, together with those groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. The term "wastewater treatment works" is sometimes used as synonymous with waste treatment plant or water pollution control plant. 
(b)	The following abbreviations shall have the following meanings:

 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-2; Ord. No. 09-12-07-A, § 2, 12-7-2009)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-112. - Purpose. 
In order to provide for the public health and welfare, the city finds it is necessary to set uniform requirements for all users of the water pollution control facilities of the city; to establish effluent limits; to require pretreatment, where necessary, by system users; to regulate the use of municipal pollution control facilities through the issuance of permits to certain industrial users; to establish charges and fees for the equitable distribution of costs; and to enable the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws. The purposes of this article are to prevent the introduction into the municipal pollution control facilities of pollutants which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; to prevent the introduction into municipal pollution facilities of pollutants which would pass through the facilities, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the facilities; to improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the facilities; and to provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal pollution control facilities. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-1)
Secs. 98-113—98-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATION OF USE 

Sec. 98-131. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)	The owner of each house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the city, shall install at his expense suitable toilet facilities therein, and shall connect the facilities directly with the proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so; provided that a public sewer is within 200 feet of the owner's property line and access is available over public land or through a public utility easement. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful to discharge to any storm drain or natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-3)
Sec. 98-132. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)	Private wastewater facilities, including privies, cesspools and septic tanks, are prohibited in all areas where public sewers are available as defined in subsection 98-131(a). 
(b)	Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(c)	The type, capacities, location and layout of all private wastewater disposal systems shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of natural resources. Before commencement of construction on any private wastewater disposal system, except for septic tanks, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the designated city representative. Septic tank installations are under the jurisdiction of the county health officer. All septic tanks constructed in the city shall be approved by the inspector of the health department of the county before the tank is placed in service. All building permits issued by the city, where a septic tank is required, shall be issued subject to the approval of the septic tank by the health official or inspector of the health department of the county. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful to discharge septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow to any open drain, ditch, stream, or well penetrating water-bearing formations. 
(e)	The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-4)
Sec. 98-133. - Water not to be furnished to premises with improper sewage disposal. 
No city water shall be furnished to any premises which is required to be connected to the city sewerage system unless such premises is properly connected thereto. No water shall be furnished to any premises for which a sewer connection is not required unless such premises is properly connected to a permitted septic tank or private wastewater disposal system meeting the standards prescribed by the state, county and city. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-5)
Sec. 98-134. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)	No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the designated city representative. 
(b)	No unauthorized person shall remove covers, deface, destroy, disturb, cover or enter any manholes of the public sewer system without permission from an authorized representative of the city. 
(c)	There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (i) For residential and commercial service; and (ii) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgement of the designated city representative. A permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and a permit and inspection fee for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(d)	All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(e)	A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the front building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as the one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection as provided in this subsection. 
(f)	Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the designated city representative, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(g)	The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the Standard Plumbing Code shall apply. 
(h)	Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(i)	No unauthorized person shall construct any structure or other facility on or perform any grading or substantially disturb the ground on a sewer easement or right-of-way of the city without submitting a written request to and obtaining approval of the city. Plans for such an encroachment may be required. 
(j)	No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, swimming pool drains or other sources of surface runoff, groundwater or other unpolluted water to a building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(k)	No person shall install, extend, connect, alter or enlarge any wastewater facilities unless plans and specifications are prepared by a qualified person as required by law and such plans and specifications are approved by the authorized representative of the city and the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. 
(l)	The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the Standard Building Code. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the designated city representative before installation. 
(m)	The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the designated city representative when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the designated city representative. 
(n)	All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, alleys, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(o)	The installation of all building sewers and connections into the public sewer shall conform with all pertinent OSHA requirements. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-6)
Sec. 98-135. - Use of the public sewers. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any user to discharge any wastewater to the POTW except as authorized by the designated city representative in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)	No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the POTW any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, unpolluted industrial process water or uncontaminated cooling water to any sewer, except stormwater runoff from limited areas, which stormwater may be polluted at times and may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by written permission of the designated city representative. 
(c)	Stormwater other than that exempted under subsection (b) of this section and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the designated city representative and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the designated city representative and the EPD to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(d)	Pollutants introduced into the POTW by a nondomestic source shall not pass through the POTW or interfere with the operation or performance of the works. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(e)	No person shall introduce into the POTW any of the following pollutants which, acting either alone or in conjunction with other substances, interfere with the operation or performance of the POTWs: 
(1)	Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the city, EPD or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(2)	Any wastewaters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 at any time, or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the water pollution control facilities. 
(3)	Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, spent lime, stone or marble dust, sand, mud, grass clippings, spent grains, spent hops, straw, shavings, metal, glass, glass grindings or polishing wastes, rags, feathers, gas, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, tar, plastics, paint or ink residues, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, animal guts or tissues, hair and fleshings, entrails, offal, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(f)	The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be limited in discharge to the municipal system to concentrations or quantities which will not, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or land application field or will not otherwise endanger lives, limbs, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The designated city representative may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations in this subsection if in his opinion such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the objectives of this subsection. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of a discharge, the designated city representative will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the designated city representative are as follows: 
(1)	Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or LAS and/or state disposal system permit and/or the receiving waters quality standards and/or the discharge requirements to the land application field. 
(2)	Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degree Fahrenheit or that would raise wastewater treatment works influent temperature above 104 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(3)	Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l. 
(4)	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)	Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material at the point of discharge exceeds the limits established as follows: 

 
Or any element which in the judgement of the designated city representative, will damage collection facilities or be detrimental to the treatment process. The limits set forth in this subsection may be amended if such amendment is deemed necessary to protect the facilities or life or health and/or to comply with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(6)	Any noxious or malodorous liquid, gas or solid, capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entry of workmen into the POTW for maintenance, inspection and repair. 
(7)	Any waters containing quantities of radioactive wastes or isotopes in excess of applicable state or federal regulations or permits issued by state or federal agencies. 
(8)	Any concentrated dye wastes, spent tanning solutions or other wastes which are highly colored. 
(9)	Any water or wastes that contain more than ten parts per million, by weight, of the following gases: hydrogen sulfide, sulphur dioxide or nitrous oxide. 
(10)	Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters or land application site. 
(11)	Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(12)	Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW. Any water or waste having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 500 mg/l or containing more than 500 mg/l of suspended solids is prohibited. Sewer use surcharges will be applied for discharges having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 250 mg/l containing more than 250 mg/l of suspended solids. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentrated or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation. Where, in the opinion of the designated city representative, the biochemical oxygen demand does not provide meaningful measurements of wastewater strength, the city representative may substitute chemical oxygen demand limits of 500 mg/l for application of surcharges and 1,000 mg/l for prohibition of wastes, in lieu of the BOD limits. 
(13)	Any waters having ammonia nitrogen concentrations greater than 100 mg/l are prohibited. Sewer use surcharges will be applied for discharges having ammonia nitrogen concentrations in excess of 50 mg/l. 
(14)	Any substance which will interfere with the reclamation or reuse of residues, sludges or scums. If a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria under Section 405 of the Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state criteria applicable to sludge management. 
(15)	Any slug load, in accordance with subsection (f)(12) of this section, discharged to the POTW unless specifically authorized, in writing, as part of the user's discharge permit. 
(g)	If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in this section and which in the judgement of the designated city representative may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, receiving waters, or land application site or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the designated city representative shall advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW, and develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the interference with the POTW. The designated city representative may also: 
(1)	Reject the wastes;
(2)	Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
(3)	Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(4)	Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges. 
(h)	If the designated city representative permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the designated city representative. Dilution of incompatible wastes with uncontaminated water is not an acceptable method of waste equalization. 
(i)	Grit traps shall be provided on all commercial and industrial discharges containing potentially excessive amounts of sand, grit, ash or other harmful solids. All grit traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the designated city representative, and shall be located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(1)	Installation of required grit traps shall be required prior to issuance or renewal of a city business license. Failure to properly operate or maintain a required grit trap may be justification for revocation of a business license. 
(2)	Grit traps shall be required for commercial and industrial enterprises having car wash facilities, or providing vehicle was services, with wastewater discharging to the sanitary sewer system. 
(3)	Each required grit trap facility shall be cleaned as often as necessary to maintain proper operation, but not less frequently than the regular intervals specified in the sewer use permit issued by the designated city representative. Cleaning shall be accomplished by a currently licensed waste disposal firm at the expense of the owner. 
(4)	All material removed from grit traps shall be disposed of at the properly certified land fill or at other locations designated by the city. Each licensed waste disposal firm shall report to the city monthly on all grit trap and septic tank cleaning services rendered. 
(j)	Where treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(k)	When required by the designated city representative the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the designated city representative. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(l)	All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the designated city representative. 
(m)	Certain industrial users are now or shall become subject to categorical pretreatment standards promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged into the POTW. All industrial users subject to a categorical pretreatment standard shall comply with all requirements of such standard including any and all applicable reporting requirements for the submission of monitoring reports and other information pertinent to the users wastewater discharge or pretreatment facility in accordance with Section 403.12 of the general pretreatment regulations and shall also comply with any additional or more stringent limitations contained in this article or established by the state. Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards for existing sources subject to such standards shall be within three years following promulgation of the standards unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the standard. Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards for new sources shall be required upon promulgation of the standard. Except where expressly authorized by an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, no industrial user shall increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitution for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with such standard. 
(n)	It shall be unlawful for a septic tank pumpout hauler or other waste disposal firm to discharge any waste material into the POTW without prior approval by the designated city official of the point of discharge and the payment of fees as established by the city. 
(o)	No requirement contained in this section shall be construed to relieve the applicant of any additional requirements that may be imposed by other authorities having legal jurisdiction. Compliance with state limitations is required if they are more stringent than federal or local requirements. 
(p)	No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment subject to the approval of the EPD. 
(q)	The city may by ordinance establish more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system, either for a specific user or for industrial users in general. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-7; Ord. No. 09-12-07-A, § 3, 12-7-2009)
Sec. 98-136. - Accidental discharges. 
All industrial users shall provide facilities and/or institute procedures as are reasonably necessary to prevent or minimize the potential for accidental discharge into the POTW from liquid or raw material storage areas, from truck and rail car loading and unloading areas, in-plant transfer or processing and materials handling areas, and diked areas or holding ponds. 
(1)	In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW serving the user of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration, volume and corrective actions taken. Users are specifically required to post and maintain on a bulletin board a notice advising employees who they are to call in the event of an unauthorized discharge. 
(2)	Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the city a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, the waters of the state or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-8)
Sec. 98-137. - Designated city representative. 
The city manager or his duly authorized agent shall have administrative authority over the operation and use of the POTW. 
(1)	Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the POTW in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)	Duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-9)
Sec. 98-138. - Wastewater discharge permit. 
All significant industrial users of the POTW as defined in section 98-111 shall be required to obtain from the city a wastewater discharge permit in the manner set forth in this section. In addition, the designated city representative may require the permitting of any nondomestic discharge which by reason of volume, character or strength has the potential of adversely affecting the POTW or of passing through the POTW untreated. Permit application forms will be sent to affected industrial users by the city following promulgation of a categorical standard or a determination by the designated city representative that a permit is required. 
(1)	Industrial users will be required to complete and return discharge application forms within 45 days of their receipt. 
(2)	Wastewater discharge permit applications shall be made using forms prescribed by the city and shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
a.	Name and address of the industrial user.
b.	Name and title of responsible official.
c.	Location of the industry.
d.	Nature of industrial operation and standard industrial classification.
e.	A description of the wastewater generating process.
f.	A description of wastewater constituents and characteristics, including detailed laboratory analysis for any of the pollutants potentially present, for which limits have been established by this article. 
g.	Estimated maximum daily and average daily wastewater flow rates and slug flow volume and duration if applicable. 
h.	Any specific information required of industrial users subject to national pretreatment standards. 
i.	Any other information specified by the designated city representative to ensure compliance with this article. 
(3)	Following receipt and review of a completed discharge permit application, the designated city representative shall issue a permit subject to any conditions considered necessary to protect the POTW. Permit conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.	Pretreatment requirements.
b.	Average and maximum wastewater pollutant concentrations.
c.	Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
d.	Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities.
e.	Requirements for self-monitoring of wastewater including sampling location, frequency and methods of sampling and analysis. 
f.	Requirements for maintenance of records and submission of reports relating to wastewater discharge. 
g.	A reasonable compliance schedule to ensure the industrial user's compliance with pretreatment requirements of this article or other applicable law or regulations. 
h.	Requirements for installation of facilities to prevent and control accidental discharge or spills by the industrial user. 
i.	Other conditions deemed necessary by the city to ensure compliance with this article or other applicable ordinance, law or regulation. 
j.	Requirements for immediately reporting to the designated city representative of any slug discharge. 
(4)	Permits shall remain in effect for a maximum of five years, but shall be subject to modification by the city upon 30 days' notice to reflect changes to this article or as otherwise necessary to protect the POTW. Any change or new condition in a permit shall include a provision for a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(5)	Prior to instituting any change in operations which affects the volume or character of the discharge, an industrial user shall notify the city and shall apply for and receive a revised discharge permit. 
(6)	Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be suspended or revoked in whole or in part for the following causes: 
a.	Violation of any terms or conditions of the industrial wastewater discharge permit.
b.	Obtaining a permit by misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts. 
c.	A change in volume or character of the discharge.
d.	A discharge which, in the opinion of the designated city representative, may cause interference with the water pollution control facilities or threaten human health or safety. 
(7)	Any industrial user subject to the permitting requirements established in this article shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required by this article. Such records shall include, for all samples: 
a.	The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names of the persons taking the samples. 
b.	The dates analyses were performed.
c.	Who performed the analyses.
d.	The analytical techniques/methods used.
e.	The results of such analyses.
(8)	Any industrial user subject to reporting requirements shall be required to retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring activities and results and shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the city, EPD or EPA. In addition to reporting requirements described in this section, the industrial user shall be responsible for compliance with the reporting requirements of the general pretreatment regulations, 40 CFR 403.12. 
(9)	Before any wastewater discharge permit can be transferred or sold to a new user, approval must be obtained from the city for such transfer or sale. Within 90 days of the sale or transfer, the new user shall submit to the city all information needed for issuance of a new permit. 
(10)	Any false statement made in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, shall constitute a violation of this article, and shall be punishable as a misdemeanor in accordance with the provisions of section 98-166. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-10)
Sec. 98-139. - Grease trap and waste receptor requirements. 
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this program is to minimize the introduction of fats, oils, and greases into the city wastewater collection system. The main components of the program are the proper sizing, installation, and maintenance of grease interceptors. The administrative and inspection requirements of food service facilities are established herein as well. 
(b)	Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this section, have the meanings indicated in this subsection: 
City means the City of Hogansville. 
Domestic wastewater means wastewater from sanitary fixtures such as toilets and urinals. 
Food service facility means any facility, which cuts, cooks, bakes, prepares, or serves food, or which disposes of food related wastes. 
Garbage grinder means a device that shreds or grinds up solid or semisolid waste materials into smaller portions for discharge into the sanitary sewer. 
Grease means a material composed primarily of fats, oil, and grease from animal or vegetable sources. The terms "fats, oil, and grease" shall be deemed as grease by definition. "Grease" may also include petroleum-based products. 
Grease enforcement coordinator means that employee designated by the city manager to oversee administrative enforcement of this section. 
Hauler or transporter means one who transfers waste from the site of a user to an approved site for disposal or treatment. The hauler is responsible for assuring that all federal, state and local regulations are followed regarding waste transport. 
Interceptor or separator or trap means a device so constructed as to separate, trap, and hold fats, oils, greases, sand, and grit substances from the wastewater discharged by a facility to prevent these substances from entering the sanitary sewer. 
Under-sink or inline grease trap means a device placed under or in close proximity to sinks or other facilities likely to discharge grease in an attempt to separate, trap or hold, oil and grease substances to prevent their entry into the sanitary sewer. 
User means a source of discharge to the sanitary sewer of city. 
Waste or wastewater means the liquid and water-carried domestic or industrial wastes from dwellings, commercial establishments, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, contributed to the sanitary sewer. 
(c)	General criteria. 
(1)	Installation requirements for new food service facilities. All proposed or newly remodeled food service facilities inside the city wastewater service area shall be required to install an approved, properly operated and maintained grease interceptor. All interceptor units shall be installed outdoors of the food service facility building unless the user can demonstrate to city that an outdoor interceptor would not be feasible. A passive interceptor inside the facility shall not be allowed. All interceptor units shall be of the type and capacity approved by the city. While under normal circumstances a 1,500 gallon outside grease interceptor will be required, under proper circumstances the grease enforcement officer may authorize the installation of a fully automated inside grease interceptor. 
(2)	Requirements for existing food service facilities. All existing food service facilities inside the city wastewater service area are expected to conduct their operations in such a manner that grease is captured on the user's premises and then properly disposed. Existing food service facilities will be handled under city grease management program in the following manner: 
a.	City will periodically inspect each food service facility on an as-needed basis to assure that each facility is complying with the intent of the grease control program. The as needed inspection shall be determined by the city. 
b.	Each food service facility in the vicinity of any problem areas will be inspected. During such inspection, the city will review applicable maintenance records and will assess the adequacy of the facilities' grease control practices and grease control interceptor/equipment. 
c.	Following the inspections, city will send written notice to the inspected food service facilities, containing a summary of the policy requirements, and the results of the inspection. The inspections will typically result in one of the following actions: 
1.	Facilities equipped with an appropriate and adequately sized grease interceptor which are meeting the intent of the grease management program through effective grease control practices will be commended for their compliance. 
2.	After notice and an opportunity to be heard, facilities not in compliance shall be required to develop and submit to city a proposed plan designed to achieve compliance through improved housekeeping and/or increased maintenance and periodic pumping of the existing grease interceptor/equipment. 
3.	Facilities found by the city to have failed to achieve compliance with the intent of the grease management program through improved housekeeping and increased maintenance and pumping of the existing grease interceptor/equipment will be required to install the necessary interceptor/equipment to bring the facility into compliance. 
(3)	Prohibited discharges. Domestic wastewater shall not be discharged to the grease interceptor unless specifically approved, in writing, by the city. 
(4)	Waste minimization plan. Food service facilities shall develop and implement a waste minimization plan pertaining to the disposal of grease, oils, and food particles. Educational materials are available from city sewer department regarding the minimization of these wastes. 
(5)	Floor drains. All floor drains located in the kitchen/food preparation area, or floor drains within any other area which have the potential to discharge grease, must be plumbed to an outside grease interceptor. Facilities with kitchen/food preparation areas lacking floor drains are required to provide a mop sink plumbed to drain through an approved under-sink or inline grease trap. 
(6)	Location. Each grease interceptor shall be installed and connected so that it is at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of the intercepted grease. Grease interceptors required under this ordinance shall be installed outdoors of the food service facility. The best location is in an area outside of an exterior wall, but upstream from the domestic wastewater drain line(s). A grease interceptor may not be installed inside any part of a building unless approved in writing by the city. The user bears the burden of demonstrating that an outdoor grease interceptor is not feasible. 
(d)	Design criteria. 
(1)	Construction of interceptors. Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with the city plumbing standards and shall meet the minimum requirements of the adopted state and federal codes. Outdoor units shall have a minimum of two compartments with fittings designed for grease retention. All alternative grease removal devices or technologies shall be subject to the written approval of the city. Such approval shall be based on demonstrated removal efficiencies of the proposed technology. 
(2)	Access. Outdoor grease interceptors shall be provided with two ductile iron manholes in accordance with ISO 1083. Covers shall be hinged and incorporate a 90-degree blocking system to prevent accidental closure. Covers shall be one man operable using standard tools and shall be capable of withstanding a test load of 120,000 pounds. Frames shall be circular with a 24″ clear opening and shall incorporate a 360-degree, mechanically attached elastomer seating gasket for infiltration control and traffic shock. The hinged box shall include a self-cleaning, dual wiper infiltration plug. The frames depth shall not exceed four inches, and the flange shall incorporate bedding slots, bolt holes and lifting eyes. All components shall be black coated. Frame weight: 73 pounds. Cover weight: 122 pounds. Total weight: 195 pounds. All grease interceptors shall be designed and installed to allow for complete access for inspection and maintenance of inner chamber(s) as well as viewing and sampling of wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer. 
(3)	Load-bearing capacity. In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the grease interceptor shall be designed to have adequate load-bearing capacity (example: vehicular traffic in parking or driving areas). 
(4)	Inlet and outlet piping. Wastewater discharging to the grease interceptor shall enter only through the inlet pipe of the interceptor. The inlet pipe bottom tee branch shall extend one foot below liquid level. The outlet pipe bottom tee branch shall be submerged to two-thirds of the liquid depth. Each grease interceptor shall have only one inlet and one outlet pipe. 
(5)	Sampling vault. After any interceptor a sampling vault for inspections on the effluent shall be installed. It should contain all the load bearing capacity as a trap. It shall contain one hinged manhole cover labeled SEWER. 
(6)	Interceptor sizing. 
a.	Outdoor grease interceptors shall not have a capacity of less than 1,500 gallons nor exceed a capacity of 3,000 gallons. No matter what the calculated capacity using the following formulas, the minimum interceptor size shall be 1,500 gallons. If the calculated capacity using one of the following formulas exceeds 3,000 gallons, then multiple units in series shall be installed. The size of a grease interceptor shall be approximated by the following methods and grease interceptor size shall be the larger of the two results. 
1.	Interceptor capacity (gallons) = (S) × (25) × (Hr/12)
S = Number of seats 
Hr = Maximum hours of daily operation (Include preparation and cleanup) 
2.	Interceptor capacity (gallons) = (Sum of fixture flows) × (20)

 
b.	Under-sink or inline grease interceptor requirements shall meet Plumbing and Drainage Institute Standard PDI-G101: 

 
Grease interceptor designs represent minimum standards for normal usage. Installations with heavier usage require more stringent measures for which the user is responsible and shall pay the costs to provide additional measures if required by the city. City reserves the right to evaluate interceptor sizing on an individual basis for facilities with special conditions, such as highly variable flows, high levels of grease discharge, or other unusual situations that are not adequately addressed by the formula. 
(e)	Grease interceptor maintenance. 
(1)	Pumping. All grease interceptors shall be maintained by the user at the user's expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, and bottom sludges and solids. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the interceptor from which the waste was removed or any other grease interceptor, for the purpose of reducing the volume to be disposed, is strictly prohibited. 
(2)	Pumping frequency. Outdoor grease interceptors must be pumped out completely a minimum of once every three months. Under-sink or inline grease interceptors must be pumped/cleaned out completely a minimum of once every month. Grease interceptors may need to be pumped more frequently as needed to prevent carry over of grease into the sanitary sewer collection system. In the discretion of the city, pumping frequency may be extended past the minimum period if user can demonstrate that such schedule meets with the intent of this ordinance. 
(3)	Pump out order. When the oil and grease concentrations exceed city maximum discharge limits and/or the combined depth of bottom and top solids exceeds 33 percent of the total depth of the trap, city will issue a pump out order to the user. The user shall have seven days from receipt of the order to comply. Where an emergency exists, a written or verbal warning shall be given to the user, and the user will have 24 hours to comply. 
(4)	Disposal of interceptor pumped material. All waste removed from each grease interceptor shall be recorded on a proper manifest form. Also, all waste removed from each grease interceptor must be disposed at a facility approved by city to receive such waste in accordance with the provisions of this program. In no way shall the pumped material be returned to any private or public portion of the sanitary sewer collection system. 
(5)	Additives. Any additive(s) placed into the grease interceptor or building discharge line system on a constant, regular, or scheduled basis shall be reported to city. Such additives shall include, but are not limited to, commercially available bacteria or other additives designed to absorb, consume, or treat fats, oils, and grease. The use of additives shall in no way be considered as an alternative technology or a substitution for maintenance procedures required herein. 
(6)	Chemical treatment. Chemical treatments such as drain cleaners, enzymes, acids, and other chemicals designed to dissolve, purge, or remove grease shall not be allowed to enter the grease interceptor. 
(f)	Administrative requirements. 
(1)	Initial data acquisition. All food service facilities will be asked to complete a data sheet to establish the grease interceptor database. The city database will be updated with additional or modified information after each yearly inspection. At a minimum, the grease enforcement coordinator shall conduct annual inspections of all identified facilities. 
(2)	Administrative fees. No fee will be charged for an annual inspection by city. However, if the user's grease interceptor is not in compliance with this section, a $50.00 reinspection fee shall be charged for each inspection thereafter until compliance is achieved. 
(3)	Inspection and entry. Authorized personnel of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall have the right to enter upon all properties subject to this program, at any time and without prior notification, for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing or record review, as part of this program. 
(4)	Record retention and reporting. All users must keep a record of any cleaning or maintenance of their grease interceptor. The following records must be kept on-site at the food service facility for a period of two years: 
a.	Manifests are required for all grease interceptors and shall contain the following information: 
1.	Food service facility (generator) information, including name, address, volume pumped, date and time of pumping, and generator signature verifying the information; 
2.	Transporter information, including company name, address, license plate number, permit number, driver name, and driver signature verifying transporter information; 
3.	Receiving information, including facility name, address, date and time of receiving, EPD permit number, and signature verifying receipt of the waste; 
4.	Manifests must be mailed, faxed, or electronically submitted to the grease enforcement coordinator within 14 days of interceptor maintenance; and 
5.	A manifest may not be required for under-sink or inline grease interceptors if user can demonstrate to the city a valid reason for such exception. 
b.	Maintenance logs are required for all under-sink and inline interceptors. This log shall include the date, time, amount pumped or cleaned, hauler, disposal site, and signature. Log shall be kept in a conspicuous location for inspection. This log shall be made immediately available to health officer or city representative upon request. 
(5)	Public education. The city shall provide public education to its citizens and businesses by taking the following actions, at a minimum, to ensure a successful grease management program: 
a.	Provide each identified facility with a copy of the city's ordinance establishing a grease management program; and 
b.	Provide each existing and new water and sewer customer with a handout to educate and inform them of the city's grease management program. 
(g)	Enforcement. The following list is arranged from least severe to most severe: 
(1)	Letter of warning (LW). When the grease enforcement coordinator finds that a user is not in compliance with any provision of this article, the coordinator will serve that user with a written warning describing the noncompliance in detail. 
(2)	Notice of violation (NOV). If the noncompliance issue is not addressed by the user within a three-day period following the letter of warning, a written notice of violation will be issued. According to the severity of the violation, the user will be given up to 30 days from receipt of this notice to issue an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required action, shall be submitted by the user to the grease enforcement coordinator. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the grease enforcement coordinator to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(3)	Site visit or reinspection (SV). Upon the receipt of plans from the user and the allotted time for corrections to be made has expired, the grease enforcement coordinator will reinspect the facility to assure all violations have been corrected. 
(4)	Consent orders (CO). The grease enforcement coordinator may enter into consent orders, assurances, of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. 
(5)	Increased self-monitoring or reporting (ISM). The grease enforcement coordinator may require monitoring devices to be installed at the facility in violation for measuring the amount of grease being released at said facility. Additional reporting of pumping frequency or other means of meeting the requirement in order to be in compliance will be required of the user. 
(6)	Cease and desist order (CDO). When the grease enforcement coordinator determines that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any other standard or requirement, the grease enforcement coordinator has the authority to issue an order to the user directing them to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
a.	Immediately comply with all requirements; and
b.	Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
(7)	Judicial enforcement remedies or litigation (summons) (LIT). Should the grease enforcement coordinator determine that a violation has jeopardized the health and/or welfare of the public or that a violation cannot be resolved with the user administratively, he may cause the issuance of a summons for violation of this ordinance. A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this code section, or order issued hereunder, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. 
(8)	Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this section are not exclusive. The grease enforcement coordinator may take any, all or any combination of remedial actions against a noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 09-12-07-A, § 1, 12-7-2009; Ord. No. 11-01-03-A, §§ 1, 2, 1-3-2011)
Secs. 90-140—90-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTION 

Sec. 98-156. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the city manager and his designated representatives. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-14)
Sec. 98-157. - Inspection, monitoring and entry. 
(a)	Duly authorized representatives of the city shall be permitted to enter upon all properties of any user, without prior notification, for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing wastewaters. Such representative may also have access to and may copy any records pertaining to the wastewater discharge. Duly authorized representatives of the state or the Environmental Protection Agency shall have the same rights of access. 
(b)	While performing work on private properties, city representatives shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises, as established by the property owner. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-11)
Sec. 98-158. - Publishing of violations. 
The city shall publish annually in the largest daily newspaper published in the city, a list of industrial users which during the previous 12 months were significantly violating applicable pretreatment requirements or standards. The public notification will summarize any enforcement actions taken against the users. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-12)
Sec. 98-159. - Confidential information. 
(a)	Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permits monitoring programs and inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled by law to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
(b)	When requested by the user, the portions of a report entitled by law to protection as trade secrets or secret processes shall not be available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the NPDES permit, and/or the state pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the user. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-13)
Sec. 98-160. - Notification of violation. 
Except in cases of emergency as provided in this article, whenever the designated representatives of the city determines that there is a violation of the terms of this article, the user's wastewater discharge permit, or any other applicable law or regulation, the user shall be notified in writing of such violation, which notice shall specify to the user the period of time in which the user will be allowed in which to correct or abate the violation. The period of time to be specified shall take into consideration the extent of the violation and the hazard the violation poses to the overall wastewater treatment facility of the city. It shall be the responsibility of the user to comply with the requirements of this article within the time specified. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-15)
Sec. 98-161. - Appeals. 
Any user of the POTW shall have the right to object to requirements imposed by the city. Objections shall be made in writing to the city manager and must be made within 30 days of the related action by the city. The city council, or the designated representative of the city council shall review the grounds for objection and shall respond in writing within 45 days stating the decision reached and reasons therefor. All decisions of the city council or their designated representative shall be final. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-16)
Sec. 98-162. - Notice to cease and desist. 
Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-17)
Sec. 98-163. - Injunctive relief. 
The city may file in the courts of the county a suit seeking the issuance of an injunction, damages or other appropriate relief to enforce the provisions of this article or other applicable law or regulation. Suit may be brought to recover any and all damages suffered by the city as a result of any action or inaction of any user or other person who causes or suffers damages to occur to the POTW. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-18)
Sec. 98-164. - Assessment of damages. 
When a discharge of waste causes an obstruction, damage or any other impairment to the POTW, the user making such discharge shall reimburse the city for any and all expenses or damages caused by such discharge. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-19)
Sec. 98-165. - Emergency termination of services. 
In the event of an actual or threatened discharge to the POTW of any pollutant which in the opinion of the city presents or may present an imminent and substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, or cause interference with the POTW, the city shall immediately notify the industrial user or other person causing the emergency and request their assistance in abating the emergency. The city may temporarily terminate the water and sewer service of such user as is necessary to abate the condition when such action appears reasonably necessary. Such service shall be restored by the city as soon as the emergency situation has been abated or corrected. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-20)
Sec. 98-166. - Penalties. 
The violation by any person of any of the terms or conditions of this article or any person who shall continue any violation, intentional or otherwise, beyond the time limit provided for the satisfactory corrections thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided by section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 6-3-21)
Chapter 102 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; sexually oriented businesses, § 18-156 et seq.; environment, ch. 34; flood damage prevention, ch. 42; historical preservation, ch. 46; planning and development, ch. 70; signs, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 86.
State Law reference— Authority to zone property, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; zoning procedures act, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 102-1. - Purpose; conformance with comprehensive plan. 
(a)	The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the use of land and improvements in the city. The zoning regulations and districts established in this chapter are designed to: 
(1)	Lessen congestion in the streets.
(2)	Provide safety from fire, panic, and other dangers.
(3)	Promote health and general welfare.
(4)	Provide adequate light and air.
(5)	Avoid undue concentration of the population.
(6)	Provide transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements.
(7)	Conserve the value of economy.
(8)	Encourage the most appropriate use of land and structures.
(9)	Promote quality of life for all citizens.
(10)	Provide consistency with the land use element of the comprehensive plan.
(b)	The requirements of this chapter are minimum permissible standards, and it is expected that developers and the respective decision-making authorities will normally strive for quality developments which will exceed these minimum requirements. 
(c)	By this section, the comprehensive plan adopted by resolution of the city council is established as the official policy of the city concerning land uses. The incorporated areas of the city are divided into land use categories consistent with the future land use plan in the land use element of the comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan does not alter or affect the existing zoning districts in the city, does not effectuate an amendment to the official zoning maps, and does not itself permit or prohibit any existing land uses. The land use element of the comprehensive plan shall be amended on an annual basis to reflect changes in land use and to discover any inconsistencies zoning changes have caused in the future land use map. 
(d)	The land use element of the comprehensive plan shall be updated once each year. This update shall be used to identify current uses of land, emerging growth patterns and any significant change in land use policy as identified by the future land use map of the comprehensive plan. This update shall also be used as policy in the city's consideration of proposed amendments to the zoning map or the text of this chapter. All amendments to the city's comprehensive plan shall be in accordance with the minimum planning standards and procedures of the Georgia Planning Act. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, §§ 2.1—2.4)
Sec. 102-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Any word not defined in this section shall be as defined elsewhere in this chapter or, if not defined elsewhere in this chapter, as defined in Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language, Second College Edition, with such definition to be read in context with the purposes and provisions of the part of this chapter it is being used to define. 
Accessory structure means a structure detached from the principal building on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building. 
Accessory use means a use of land or of a building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with the principal use. 
Addition to an existing building means any walled or roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter loadbearing wall is new construction. 
Administrator, zoning, means the person, officer, or official, and his duly authorized representative, whom the city council has designated as its agent for the administration of this chapter. Currently, these functions will be done by the city manager or his designated representative. 
Alley means a public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing walls, columns, and girders, except such emergency change as may be required for safety purposes; any addition to a building; any change in use from one district classification to another; or any movement of a building from one location to another. 
Animal hospital means a facility for the temporary boarding and treatment of domestic animals operated under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. 
Apartment. See Dwelling, multifamily. 
Basement means the area below the first-floor level in a building and having not more than one-half of its height above grade. 
Berm means a mound of earth or the act of pushing earth into a mound. A berm is usually two feet to six feet high and is used to shield, screen, and buffer undesirable views or to separate incompatible land uses. In traffic work, the term "berm" refers to the raised area between the curbline and right-of-way line. 
Buffer means a portion of a lot set aside for open space and/or screening purposes to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other nuisances; to block physical passage to dangerous areas; or to reduce air pollution, dust, dirt and litter. A buffer may contain a barrier, such as a berm, wall or fence, where such additional screening is necessary to achieve the desired level of buffering between various activities and/or land uses. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Building height means the vertical distance measured from the highest grade adjacent to the highest point of the roof surface of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height between eaves and ridges of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
Building line means a line parallel to the street right-of-way line at a distance from the right-of-way line equal to the depth of the required front yard for the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
Cemetery, private, means any plot of ground, building, mausoleum, or other enclosure not located on property owned by or adjacent to a religious institution but used for the burial of deceased persons. 
Cemetery, public, means any plot of ground, building, mausoleum, or other enclosure used for the burial of deceased persons of one collateral line of descent. 
Cemetery, religious institution, means a plot of ground, building, mausoleum, or other enclosure owned by or adjacent to a religious institution and used for the burial of deceased persons who are generally members of that religious institution. 
Child care facility means a building or portion of a building where care and supervision is provided to persons away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation, which serves 19 or more persons and is licensed by the state. For children, the outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence of not less than four feet in height in the rear yard only. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "child care" shall include but not be limited to the terms "day care," "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school" and "preschool." 
Child care, group, means a building or portion of a building which provides care and supervision of persons away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours a day on a regular basis for compensation, serves seven to 18 persons, and is licensed by the state. 
Child care home, family, means a customary home occupation which provides for six or less persons who are not residents of the premises, with care and supervision by a state-registered resident adult for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. 
Church means a building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, which by design and construction are primarily intended for conducting organized religious services and associated accessory uses. 
Clinic means an establishment where patients are admitted for examination and treatment on an outpatient basis by one or more physicians, dentists, other medical personnel, psychologists, or social workers and where patients are not lodged overnight. 
Club, private, means an establishment or premises owned or operated by a corporation, association, or other person for a social, educational or recreational purpose but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a for-profit business. 
Comprehensive plan means an all-inclusive, long range plan intended to guide the growth and development of a community or region which typically includes inventory and analytic sections leading to a recommendation for the community's future economic development, housing, recreation, transportation, community facilities and land use, all related to the community's goals and objectives for these elements. 
Conditional use means a use not ordinarily permitted but which may be permitted with imposition of conditions related to the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare and designed to minimize the negative impact on surrounding lands. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, restrictions on land use, height, setbacks and other nonuse requirements, and physical improvements, including infrastructure, to the property. 
Development means subdividing a tract of land into two or more lots whether for sale or rental; construction, erection or expansion of a structure; filling, grading, excavation or land disturbing activities affecting more than one acre; recording a plat in the office of the clerk of superior court; or location of a facility. 
District means a delineated section of the city for which the zoning regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards, and the intensity of use are uniform. 
Dwelling means a building which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family dwellings, multifamily residential buildings, roominghouses and boardinghouses, manufactured homes and industrialized homes, but not including hotels and motels. 
Dwelling, apartment. See Dwelling, multifamily. 
Dwelling, loft, means a dwelling unit, occupied by no more than six persons, and located only on the floor above a ground-level commercial business. 
Dwelling, multifamily, means a building designed as two or more separate units for or occupied exclusively by two or more families. 
Dwelling, single-family attached, means a building containing two or more dwelling units, each of which is deeded with separate ownership and has primary ground floor access to the outside, which are attached to each other by party walls without openings. The term can include fee-simple townhouses and condominiums. 
Dwelling, single-family detached, means a residential building containing not more than one dwelling unit entirely surrounded by open space. A single-family detached dwelling includes site-built houses and manufactured and industrialized houses. A mobile home is not a single-family detached dwelling. All single-family detached dwellings shall meet the appearance standards as provided in section 102-262. 
Easement means a grant of one or more property rights to and/or for a person, government agency, or public utility company to use public or private land owned by another for a specific purpose. 
Family means one or more individuals permanently occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from persons occupying a boardinghouse, group home, or hotel. 
Flood means a rise in streamflow or stage that results in temporary inundation of the areas adjacent to the channel. 
Floor area, gross, means the gross heated areas of all floors, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls of the building. 
Game room means any establishment which operates solely on the proceeds from any amusement machine or device operated by means of insertion of a coin, token, or similar object for the purpose of amusement or skill and for playing where a fee is charged. 
Garage, private, means an accessory building designed or used for the storage of motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the buildings to which it is an accessory. 
Grade means the average level of the finished ground surface adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. 
Group home means a dwelling unit which is used to provide assisted community living for persons with physical, mental, emotional, familial or social difficulties. 
Hardship means an unusual situation on the part of an individual property owner which will not permit the owner to enjoy the full utilization of the property which is given to others in the community. A hardship exists only when it is not self-created, or when it is not economic in nature. 
Health department means the county health department. 
Home occupation means an occupation customarily carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a secondary use which is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and operated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Industrialized home means any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage, or destruction thereof. Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the Industrialized Building Act, 1982 Georgia Laws, page 1637 (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq.). 
Junk means any used article of commerce which is composed principally of iron, steel, brass, copper, or zinc, or their alloys, or any other base metal, and which is commonly bought for the purpose of resale and refabrication, either or both (see O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1). Further, the term "junk" means wornout and discarded material that may be returned to some use, especially old rope, chain, iron, copper, parts or machinery, electrical and electronics equipment, and bottles gathered or brought up by tradepersons called junk dealers, hence, rubbish of any kind, and odds and ends. The term "junk" does not include scrap or steel recovered from automobiles, etc., being cut to size with or without being baled to meet specifications of steel mills and foundries for remelting. 
Junk business means the pursuit, for profit, of purchasing old iron, brass, bottles etc., and selling them again in the condition in which they were purchased by the dealer. 
Junk dealer means any person having a fixed place of business, or the officer, agent and employee of any such person, who engages in the purchase of used articles of commerce principally composed of iron, steel, brass, copper, or zinc, or their alloys, or any other base metals, which are commonly bought for the purpose of resale and refabrication, either or both (see O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1). 
Junkyard means an uncovered lot or part thereof, whether enclosed or not, used for the collection, storage, keeping, sale, abandonment, or resale of junk, including scrap metal, rags, paper and other scrap materials and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of three or more disabled automobiles, not bearing current auto tags/decals, or other machinery, appliances or parts thereof. 
Kennel means any location where breeding, raising, boarding, caring for, and the keeping of more than five dogs or cats or other small animals or a combination thereof (except litters of animals not more than six months of age) is carried on for commercial purposes. 
Land disturbing activity means any grading, scraping, excavating, or filling of land, clearing of vegetation, and any construction, rebuilding, or alteration of a structure. Land disturbing activity shall not include activities such as ordinary maintenance and landscaping operations, individual home gardens, yard and grounds upkeep, repairs, additions, or minor modifications to a single-family dwelling, and the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
Livestock means cattle, horses, goats, sheep, swine, rabbits, poultry, ducks, geese, and other fowl customarily bred or raised in captivity, owned and kept for pleasure. 
Lot means a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat or subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed or built upon. The term "lot" includes the terms "plot" and/or "parcel." 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot of record means a lot which exists prior to the first published notice of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or prior to a subsequent amendment of this chapter, as shown or described on a plat or deed in the records of the local registry of deeds. 
Lot, through, means a lot other than a corner lot abutting two streets. 
Lot width means the width of the lot at the front setback line. 
Manufactured home means a structure defined by and constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 USC 5401 et seq.: 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical system contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements and the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development complying with the standards established under this title. 
A manufactured home is a single-family detached dwelling and its placement in a residential district must meet or exceed the appearance standards as provided in section 102-262. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to May 20, 1985. 
Motel means a permanent building or group of permanent buildings in which overnight sleeping accommodations are provided for travelers and having a parking space near or adjacent to the entrance of the room. Such use has 80 percent of the rooms occupied by a different registered guest every five days, provides patrons with daily maid service, 24-hour desk/counter clerk service, and a telephone service to receive incoming and outgoing messages, and shall comply with the applicable requirements of the county health department and O.C.G.A. § 31-28-1 et seq., and may provide additional services such as restaurants, retail gift shops, meeting rooms, swimming pools and exercise facilities. 
Nonconforming use means the use of any building or land which was lawful at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or at the time of passage of an amendment to this chapter, but which use does not conform, after the passage of such ordinance or amendment, with the regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
Parking lot means an open area used exclusively for the temporary parking of vehicles and bicycles and in which no gasoline or vehicular accessories are sold and no other business is conducted. 
Parking space means a space, enclosed or unenclosed, having an area of not less than 108 square feet (nine feet by 12 feet) exclusive of access, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one vehicle and having access to the street. 
Permit means any written authorization for building, construction, alteration, development, occupancy, or other matters required by this chapter to be approved by a designated commission, board, official or employee. The person to whom such permit is issued shall be known as the permittee. 
Permitted use means any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district. 
Personal care home means a dwelling shared by persons, excluding resident staff, who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach maximum potential under the direction and guidance of 24-hour per day supervision. The term "personal care home" shall not include a half-way house, a treatment center for alcoholism or drug abuse, a work release facility for convicts or ex-convicts, a home for the detention and/or rehabilitation of juveniles adjudged delinquent or unruly and placed in the custody of the state, or other housing facilities serving as an alternative to incarceration. The term "personal care home" shall also not allow the use of a dwelling as an apartment or duplex. A personal care home shall not allow use of the dwelling as a home for individuals on parole, probation, or convicted and released from incarceration, for any crimes including child molestation, aggravated child molestation, or child sexual abuse, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-4 or individuals required to register as sex offenders pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12. A personal care home may include a home for the handicapped which shall mean, consistent with the Fair Housing Act, a person (1) with a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; (2) having a record of having such an impairment; or (3) being regarded as having such an impairment. However, such term does not include the current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance, nor shall it include any person whose residency in the home would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of other individuals. 
Plat means a map, plan or layout of a county, city, town, lot, section, subdivision or development indicating the location and boundaries of properties. 
Principal building means a building where the main or principal use of the lot is conducted. 
Scale of development means the relationship of a particular project or development in terms of size, height, bulk, intensity and aesthetics. 
Setback means the mean horizontal distance between the front street right-of-way line and the front line of the building or the allowable building lines as defined by the front yard regulations of this chapter. 
Setback line means the line which is the required minimum distance from any lot line and that establishes the area within which the principal structure must be erected or placed. 
Street means a public right-of-way, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane or other way, that is dedicated or devoted to public pedestrian or vehicular use by deed, plat, and/or prescription, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
(1)	Major arterial means a street with access control channelized intersections and restricted parking that collects and distributes traffic to and from collector streets. 
(2)	Minor arterial means a street with signals at important intersections and stop signs on the side streets that collects and distributes traffic to and from collector streets. 
(3)	Collector street means a street that collects traffic from local streets and connects with minor and major arterials. 
(4)	Local street means a street designed to provide vehicular access to abutting property and to discharge through traffic. 
FIGURE 2. STREET TYPES 
Figure 2: Street Types 
Temporary structure means a structure without any foundation or footings and which is removed when the designated time period, activity or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. 
Townhouse dwelling means a series of three or more attached one-family units on separate lots which: 
(1)	May or may not have a common roof;
(2)	Shall not have a common exterior wall;
(3)	Are separated from each other by a fire-resistive party wall extending from the lowest floor level to the roof; and 
(4)	May have joint ownership of adjacent grounds, driveways or right of ingress and egress.
Travel center means any single commercial development which includes restaurants, hotels, motels and other commercial uses which cater primarily to commercial vehicles. 
Truckstop means any building, premises or land in which or upon which a business, service or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, storage, or repair of commercial vehicles is conducted or rendered, including dispensing of motor fuel or other petroleum products directly into motor vehicles and the sale of accessories or equipment for trucks and similar commercial vehicles. A truckstop also may include overnight accommodations and restaurant facilities primarily for the use of truck crews. 
Variance means permission to depart from the literal requirements of this chapter. 
Variance use means a variance granted for a use or structure that is not permitted in the zone. 
Yard means an open space that lies between the principal building and the nearest lot line. The minimum required yard as set forth in this chapter is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided in this chapter. 
Yard, front, means a space extending the full width of the lot between any building and the front lot line and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line. 
Yard, rear, means a space extending across the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line. 
Zoning means the delineation of districts and the establishment of regulations governing the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings. 
Zoning map means the map which is part of this chapter and delineates the boundaries of zoning districts. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, §§ 3.1—3.3; Ord. No. 11-11-21-A, § 2, 11-21-2011; Ord. No. 15-09-08, § 1, 9-8-2015) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 102-3. - Interpretation; conflicting ordinances. 
This chapter is not intended to interfere with or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties. However, where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of property than is imposed by private easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Whenever other ordinances or parts of ordinances require greater restrictions than those required by this chapter, such ordinances or parts of ordinances shall govern. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 18.1)
Secs. 102-4—102-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-31. - Zoning administrator. 
(a)	Generally. This chapter shall be administered by the zoning administrator in cooperation with the planning commission and the city council. The city manager and, at his direction, the city clerk shall fulfill the functions of the zoning administrator until such time as the city council makes the zoning administrator a full-time or part-time position and instructs the city manager to fill the position. 
(b)	Office created. There is hereby created the office of zoning administrator of the city. 
(c)	Duties. The zoning administrator shall administer the provisions of this chapter as follows: 
(1)	Serve as administrative secretary to the planning commission.
(2)	Maintain public records concerning the administration of this chapter, including all maps, amendments, certificates of zoning compliance, conditional uses, variances, and records of public hearings. 
(3)	Issue certificates of zoning compliance for all permitted uses, for conditional uses recommended by the planning commission and approved by the city council, and for variances which are approved by the city council. 
(4)	Issue certificates of zoning compliance for conditional uses which pose no greater impact on the surrounding community than uses of right. Any conditional uses which in the opinion of the zoning administrator will constitute a possible impact to the safety, health, general welfare or morality of the community will be presented to the planning commission for recommendation to the city council. 
(5)	Collect data and keep informed as to the best zoning practices in order to be qualified to make recommendations to the planning commission, all of which must be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.1)
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-81 et seq. 
Sec. 102-32. - Penalties; additional remedies. 
(a)	Any person violating a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished for each violation according to the laws of the state. Each day such a violation continues shall be deemed separate offense. 
(b)	In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained or any building, lot, or acreage is used in violation of this chapter, the city council, zoning administrator, or any other appropriate authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent such violation in the case of each such building or use. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.21)
Sec. 102-33. - Conformance with zoning procedures law. 
This article is intended to set forth and constitute the policies, procedures and standards required under O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5, and copies of such provisions shall be available to the public upon request. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.22)
Secs. 102-34—102-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.

Sec. 102-61. - Established; membership; officers. 
(a)	There is hereby created the city planning commission, whose purpose is to carry out the provisions of this chapter assigned to it within applicable provisions of the laws of the state. This chapter, including the official zoning maps, may be amended by the city council on its own motion, on a petition, or on recommendation of the planning commission, but no amendment shall become effective unless it has been proposed by or submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. 
(b)	Members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the city council. The planning commission shall consist of five members, two of which will be serving members of county planning and zoning, who are citizens of or own property within the city and who shall be appointed for two-year terms, beginning on January 5 through January 4 of each year, or until their successors shall be appointed. No member shall hold any elective public office within the city. Unexpired terms shall be filled by the city council. Members are removable for cause by the city council upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
(c)	The planning commission shall elect a chair and vice-chair (who shall be acting chair in the absence of the chair) on an annual basis. The chair may not succeed himself. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.2-1)
Sec. 102-62. - Powers of chair. 
The chair (or in his absence the vice-chair) shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the planning commission and decide all points of order or procedure. The chairman shall appoint any committees which may be found necessary. The chairman shall be the deciding vote in any vote ending in a tie. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.2-2)
Sec. 102-63. - Duties of secretary. 
The zoning administrator (secretary to the planning commission) shall conduct all correspondence of the planning commission; keep a minutes book recording attendance and the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent, the failure to vote, indicating such fact; keep records of examinations and hearings and other official actions; and carry out such other official duties as may be assigned by the commission. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.2-3)
Sec. 102-64. - Meetings. 
Meetings of the planning commission will be held at least monthly. Notice must be provided to each member at least 48 hours prior to such meeting and such other public notice as required by law shall be provided and abided by. The zoning administrator shall inform the members of the planning commission of meetings. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.2-4)
Sec. 102-65. - Quorum. 
Three members of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of all business. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.2-5)
Sec. 102-66. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)	Neither the zoning administrator nor any member of the planning commission shall appear for or represent any person in any matter pending before the planning commission. 
(b)	No member of the planning commission shall hear or vote upon an appeal in which he is directly or indirectly interested in a financial way. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.2-6)
Sec. 102-67. - Order of business. 
The order of business at meetings shall be as follows: 
(1)	Roll call.
(2)	Review and approval of minutes of previous meeting.
(3)	Report of committees, if any.
(4)	Unfinished business.
(5)	Hearing of cases.
(6)	New business.
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.2-6)
Sec. 102-68. - Failure to attend meetings; vacancies. 
Failure to attend three consecutive meetings or more shall be considered automatic resignation from the planning commission, and upon such resignation by other means, or other vacancies occurring in office, the chair or secretary (zoning administrator) shall inform the city council of such occurrence as promptly as possible, so the council may appoint a replacement to fill the unexpired term. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.2-7)
Secs. 102-69—102-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES 

Sec. 102-91. - Building permit required. 
No building or other structure shall be located, erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a building permit issued by the city. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.12)
Sec. 102-92. - Plans required; expiration of building permit. 
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the sizes and locations on the lot of any existing buildings or structures, the shape, size, height, use and location on the lot of the building or structure proposed to be erected or altered, setback distances, any parking spaces, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. If no substantial construction progress has been made within nine months of the date of the issuance of the building permit, the permit becomes invalid. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.13)
Sec. 102-93. - Powers of building official. 
(a)	General authority. The building official (the city manager or his designated representative) is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building official may enter at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this chapter. If the building official is not granted access at the time of a reasonable request for inspection all utilities shall be disconnected until such time as inspection is made. 
(c)	Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress or ingress or which constitute a fire hazard or are otherwise dangerous or hazardous to human life, or which, in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the city's unsafe building ordinance (chapter 14, article IX). 
(d)	Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, building codes, manufacturing specifications or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner, his agent or the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which work may proceed. 
(e)	Revocation of permits. The building official may revoke a permit or approval issued under provisions of this chapter, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the permit was issued in violation of or not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.14)
Sec. 102-94. - Building permit procedures. 
(a)	Work requiring permit. Any owner, agent or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move or demolish a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(b)	Application. 
(1)	Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished by the city for the specific work to be done, including a general description and the location of the proposed work. The application shall be signed by the owner or his agent or contractor. The application shall indicate the proposed occupancy. 
(2)	Each application for the construction and/or enlargement of a building or premises greater than 200 square feet will require two sets of plans drawn to scale. The official seal of a certified architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state will be required for all residential and commercial buildings and as required by state building and fire codes. 
(3)	Each application shall contain two copies of the land plat from the county tax office showing the exact location, the size of the building, the distance to property and building lines, the total acreage and the square footage of the lot or parcel. These copies may be duplicates. 
(4)	Where private sewage systems are used, a copy of the permit for the septic system, issued by the county health department, shall accompany the application for the permit. 
(c)	Issuance of denial; penalty for commencing work without permit. 
(1)	The building official shall act upon an application for a permit within five working days from time the application is filed with the city. If the building official is satisfied the work described in the application and contract documents filed conforms to the requirements of the technical codes, state law, and this chapter, the building official is authorized to issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)	If the application for a permit and the documents describing the work do not conform to technical codes, state law or this chapter, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for refusal to issue the permit. This written notification shall be postmarked no later than five working days from the time the application is filed with the city. 
(3)	Any person who begins any work on a building, structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of $100.00 per day from the beginning date of construction until the permit application is received by the city, plus the price of the required permits. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.15)
Sec. 102-95. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)	A certificate of occupancy, issued by the city, with approval from the zoning administrator, is required in advance of the use or occupancy of: 
(1)	Any lot or a change in the use thereof.
(2)	A building hereafter erected or altered or a change in the use of an existing building.
(3)	Any nonconforming use existing at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or at the time of enactment of an amendment to this chapter that is changed, extended, altered, or rebuilt thereafter. 
(b)	The certificate of occupancy shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming use fails to meet the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the lot or building or structure complies with all provisions of this chapter. 
(d)	A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector and a copy shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.16)
Sec. 102-96. - Certificate of zoning compliance. 
(a)	Required. A certificate of zoning compliance, issued by the zoning administrator, and certifying that the proposed structure, land use, or alteration complies with the provisions of this chapter, is required. 
(b)	Site plan. Each application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be accompanied by simple sketch of the site indicating such information as may be needed to present a record of existing conditions and proposed usage, including proposed off-street parking and/or loading areas. 
(c)	Suspension or abandonment of use. A certificate of zoning compliance shall become invalid after the use authorized is suspended or abandoned for the period of nine months. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.17)
Secs. 102-97—102-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPECIAL USES 

Sec. 102-121. - Generally. 
The planning commission shall review and the city council shall approve or deny special uses which are specifically authorized by this chapter. A public hearing is required (see hearing requirements). 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.19-1)
Sec. 102-122. - Conditions and limitations. 
The planning commission shall include any condition, requirement, or limitation which may be necessary to protect adjacent properties and carry out the provisions of this chapter in its review and the city council may impose conditions, requirements or limitations it deems necessary. If, at any time after a special use permit has been issued, the zoning administrator or building official finds that the conditions imposed and the agreements made have not been or are not being fulfilled by the holder of a special use permit, the permit shall be terminated. The applicant shall file an acceptance of conditions form, provided by the city, and the certificate shall be notarized. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.19-2)
Sec. 102-123. - Application; hearing. 
Application for a special use shall be filed with the office of the zoning administrator, and the planning commission shall have 30 days within which to consider each request and make written recommendations to the city council. A public hearing is required by the city council (see public hearing requirements). Upon receiving recommendations from the planning commission or after the 30-day period has expired, the city council shall schedule the proposed special use to be voted on at the next regularly scheduled council meeting. Each application shall be accompanied by a simple sketch of the site, showing the following: 
(1)	General location of existing structures and property lines.
(2)	Present zoning of adjacent property.
(3)	Existing use of adjacent property.
(4)	Location of proposed buildings and land use.
(5)	Legal description of the property.
(6)	Setbacks.
(7)	Parking spaces, if applicable.
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.19-3)
Sec. 102-124. - Standards for approval; fee. 
(a)	Specifically, in order to grant approval of a special use, the city council must find the following standards have been met: 
(1)	The available existing street system is adequate to efficiently and safely accommodate the traffic which will be generated by the proposed use or development. 
(2)	The existing public utilities, facilities and services are adequate to accommodate the proposed use or development. 
(3)	The use or development will not generate or cause conditions such as noise, light, glare, odor or similar objectionable features which would reduce the value, use or enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
(4)	The use would not have a detrimental environmental impact on the surrounding area.
(5)	The use would not adversely affect the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community. 
(b)	Each application for a special use shall be assessed a fee according to the fee schedule posted in city hall and approved by the city council to partially defray administrative and notification costs. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.19-4)
Secs. 102-125—102-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 102-151. - Initiation. 
Applications to amend this chapter may be in the form of proposals to amend the text or proposals to amend the official zoning map. An application to amend the text of this chapter may be initiated by the zoning administrator or be submitted to the planning commission by the city council, or by any person having an interest in the city. An application to amend the official zoning map may be initiated by an individual property owner or his agent, or the zoning administrator, or be submitted to the planning commission by the city council. Unless initiated by the city council or the zoning administrator, all applications to amend the official zoning map must be submitted by the owner and shall be accompanied by an appropriate fee as set forth in the fee schedule posted in city hall, set by the city council. Such authorization of property ownership shall be notarized and attached to the application. An application for an amendment to the zoning map affecting the same property shall not be submitted more than once every 12 months, such intervals to begin with the date of final decision by the city council. The 12-month interval shall not apply to applications initiated by the city council or zoning administrator, except for amendments to the zoning map which were defeated by the city council, in which case the interval required for the subsequent application shall be at least six months. However, an application to alter conditions of rezoning may be submitted at any time. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.3)
Sec. 102-152. - Application. 
(a)	Generally. Each application to amend this chapter or the official zoning map shall be filed with the zoning administrator. Applications shall be submitted in compliance with this section. 
(b)	Text amendments. Text amendment applications shall include the following: 
(1)	Name and address of the applicant.
(2)	Current provisions of the text to be affected by the amendment.
(3)	Proposed wording of the text change.
(4)	Reason for the amendment request.
(c)	Map amendments. Map amendment applications shall include the following: 
(1)	The application shall include a legal description of the tract to be rezoned, including the street address and subdivision, if any, or the area in which the tract is located. 
(2)	The application shall include seven copies of a plat, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and district; the dimensions, acreage and location of that tract; floodplain and flood hazard areas; unusual topographical features; current zoning of the subject tract and all adjacent properties; and existing structures. This plat shall be prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect, planner with an AICP certification or land surveyor, whose seal shall be affixed to the plat. 
(3)	When any applicant or his attorney for a rezoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of that applicant's application for the rezoning action, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official who will consider the application, it shall be the duty of the applicant to file a disclosure report with the city council showing: 
a.	The name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 
b.	The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each contribution. 
The disclosure required by this subsection shall be filed within ten days after an application for the rezoning action is first filed. 
(4)	The application shall include the names and addresses of the owners of the land and their agents, if any, together with a written notarized authorization for the owner's agents, if any, to seek rezoning. 
(5)	The application shall include a letter of intent indicating specifically how the property is to be used. 
(6)	Each zoning map amendment application, whether submitted by local government or by a party other than local government, shall include with it a complete, written, documented analysis of the impact of the proposed rezoning with respect to each of the following matters: 
a.	Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby properties. 
b.	Whether the zoning proposal would adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
c.	Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned. 
d.	Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools. 
e.	Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive land use plan. 
f.	Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
(d)	Filing date; fee. Applications shall be submitted in accordance with a schedule adopted annually by the city council which shall provide that each application shall be submitted at least 50 days prior to the date on which it is to be considered by the city council and in any event in sufficient time so as to permit advance advertising and notice of any public hearings pursuant to the terms of this section and state law. Each application for an amendment to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map shall be assessed a fee as posted in the building and zoning office of the city to defray administrative costs. A fee shall not be charged for applications initiated by the city council or zoning administrator. 
(e)	Withdrawal. An application shall not be withdrawn by the applicant after the legal advertising as required by this section has first appeared. 
(f)	Filing of proposed conditions or alterations. An applicant may file site plans, renderings, construction specifications, written development restrictions, and other conditions which the applicant proposes as binding conditions upon the development and use of the property involved in the application; provided, however, that any such conditions or alterations or changes thereto shall be filed with the zoning administrator at least seven days prior to the public hearing before the city council. If any such conditions or alterations or changes thereto are proposed by an applicant and have not been filed as required by this subsection, the city council, at the time of the public hearing on the application, may defer any action on such application to a specific meeting date. The date designated for action on the application shall be set at a time which will allow the applicant to comply with the filing requirements of this subsection. 
(g)	Expiration of rezoning approval. If, after one year from rezoning, the approved use has not been developed as stated in the rezoning application or a building permit has not been issued, the rezoning shall become invalid. At this time, the lot or parcel may revert to previously zoned status and a new application for rezoning shall be filed with the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.4)
Sec. 102-153. - Planning study. 
(a)	The zoning administrator or his designee, upon receiving an application to amend the official zoning map, shall do the following: 
(1)	With respect to an application to amend the official zoning map, consider and evaluate each of the matters set forth in section 102-152(c)(6)a—f. 
(2)	Consult with other departments of the county and the city to fully evaluate the impact of any land use or zoning district change upon public facilities and services, including but not limited to schools, drainage, traffic, and related facilities. 
(3)	Conduct a site review of the property and surrounding area.
(4)	Submit a written record of his investigation and recommendations to the planning commission and city council, which report shall be a matter of public record. 
(b)	The zoning administrator's report may recommend amendments to the applicant's request which would reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the zoning district requested, or recommend conditions of rezoning which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served and health, public safety, and general welfare secured. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.5)
Sec. 102-154. - Planning commission action. 
The planning commission shall hold a meeting on each application for amendment in accordance with a schedule adopted by the city council or as needed. The planning commission shall with respect to each application consider each of the matters set forth in section 102-152(c)(6)a—f. As to each application, the planning commission shall make a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions, denial, deferral, withdrawal without prejudice or no recommendation. A written report of the planning commission's investigation and recommendation, along with the investigation and recommendation of the zoning administrator, shall be submitted to the city council and shall be a public record. The planning commission's action may recommend amendments to the applicant's request which would reduce the land area for which the application is made or change the district requested, or recommend conditions of rezoning which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served and health, public safety and general welfare secured. The failure of the planning commission to take any action as to a particular petition within 60 days of its meeting will be the same as approval thereof. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.6)
Sec. 102-155. - Public notice. 
(a)	Publication of notice. Due notice of the public hearing before the city council on an application for amendment under this division shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation for the city in which is carried the legal advertisements of the city by advertising the application and the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing conducted by the city council. If the application is for amendment to the official zoning map, then this notice also shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
(b)	Posting of signs. As to an application to amend the official zoning map, the zoning administrator or a designee shall post, at least 15 days and no more than 45 days in advance of the city council's hearing, in a conspicuous place on the property for which an application has been submitted, a sign containing information as to the application and the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.7)
Sec. 102-156. - Standards governing exercise of city's zoning power. 
In addition to the standards enumerated in other sections of this chapter, the planning commission and city council shall consider the following matters in reference to any rezoning application: 
(1)	The existing land use patterns.
(2)	The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts.
(3)	The population density pattern and possible increase or overtaxing of the load on public facilities, including, but not limited to, schools, utilities, and streets. 
(4)	Whether the proposed change will adversely influence living conditions in the neighborhood.
(5)	Whether the proposed change will create or excessively increase traffic congestion or otherwise affect public safety. 
(6)	Whether the proposed change will create adverse environmental impacts to water, erosion and sedimentation control regulations, or sewage systems. 
(7)	Whether the proposed change will adversely affect property values in the adjacent area. 
(8)	Whether the proposed change will seriously reduce light and air to adjacent areas.
(9)	Whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accordance with existing zoning. 
(10)	Whether the change suggested is out of scale with the needs of the neighborhood or the city. 
(11)	The extent to which the zoning decision is consistent with the comprehensive plan adopted by the city council. 
(12)	Any other factors relevant to balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of property. 
(13)	Whether or not any parcel is located in a wetland as determined by the wetland protection district map and by determination of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. If the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that wetlands are present, a Section 404 permit as provided by the Clean Water Act is required to be issued before any parcel is rezoned. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.8)
Sec. 102-157. - Conflict of interest and disclosure rules. 
(a)	Any city planning commissioner who knows or reasonably should know that he:
(1)	Has any direct ownership in any real property to be affected by a rezoning action under consideration by the city government; 
(2)	Has a ten percent or more direct ownership interest in the total assets or capital stock in any business entity which has any direct ownership in any real property affected by a rezoning action under consideration by the city government; or 
(3)	Has a spouse, parent, sibling or child with any interest as described in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section; 
shall disclose the nature and extent of such interest, in writing, to the city council as soon as he knows of its existence. Such an official, which shall include members of the city council or planning commission, also shall disqualify himself from voting on the rezoning action and shall not take any other action on behalf of himself or anyone else to influence action on the rezoning action. If any written disclosures made pursuant to this section result in the inability of the city council to obtain a quorum for the purpose of making a final decision when considering a rezoning action, the city council shall initiate the special master process set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-5. Moreover, questions of interpretation as to the application of this statute should be resolved by reference to state law governing campaign contribution disclosures, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq. 
(b)	When any opponent of a rezoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of the rezoning action being opposed, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to an official of the city, it shall be the duty of the opponent to file a disclosure with the city council showing: 
(1)	The name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 
(2)	The dollar amounts and description of each campaign contribution made by the opponent to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each such contribution. 
(c)	The disclosure required by this section shall be filed at least five calendar days prior to the first hearing by the city council or any of its agencies on the rezoning application. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.9)
Sec. 102-158. - Procedures for public hearing. 
(a)	The mayor shall open the hearing on an application for amendment under this division with an explanation of the purpose of the hearing and a description of the general rules for the conducting of the hearing. The mayor or his delegate may describe the authority and role of the city council in any zoning decision. The mayor or his delegate shall chair the hearing and shall determine the relevance of any proposed comment or presentation to the council in the hearing and is authorized to rule any individual or a portion of any presentation out of order if not relevant to the published purpose of the hearing. Any person addressing the mayor and council shall respond to questions of the mayor and council. Remarks shall be made to the mayor or his delegate only and not to other members of the council or audience. Any unused portion of allotted time unused by either the applicant or opponent shall not invalidate any proceedings or action taken on the proposed amendment. The following rules of procedure govern the public hearing on rezoning or similar matters (special uses) before the city. These rules apply to all such public hearing items appearing on any agenda. 
(1)	Procedures relating to application, notice, and advertisement of items on the public hearing agenda shall conform to the requirements of state law and the Charter. 
(2)	Exercise of the zoning power shall conform to the standards expressed in this chapter, as well as with the comprehensive land use plan. 
(3)	The zoning administrator shall provide a limited number of copies of the policies required by O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq., which copies shall be available on request to interested members of the public. 
(4)	Individuals desiring to address the planning commission or city council regarding an agenda item are required to contact the city clerk or zoning administrator. Applicants and/or proponents of an item on the public hearing agenda shall be heard first and shall have a maximum of ten minutes in which to present any information pertinent to the issue to be decided. Failure of the applicant or his representative to be present for the hearing shall result in automatic termination of any proceedings on the amendment and a negative recommendation on the proposed amendment by the mayor and city council. Opponents of the issue may respond and shall have a maximum of ten minutes in which to present any information pertinent to the issue to be decided. Applicants or proponents may use any unused portion of their ten minutes for rebuttal. No new issues shall be brought forth during the rebuttal by either the applicant or opponent. 
(5)	If there is more than one speaker per side, speakers must divide their time or designate a spokesperson in order to complete their full presentation within the time allotment. 
(6)	Any remark amounting to an attack on the character or personal integrity of another individual, comment not factually supportable, comment in the form of an emotional outburst, or comment not directed at the mayor shall be considered to be nonrelevant to the purpose of the hearing and shall be ruled out of order. 
(7)	The mayor or his delegate shall enter into the record after the presentation of the applicant or his representative any written comment, petition, or similar written statement received by the mayor and or city council prior to the hearing, and the comment, petition or written statement shall be considered by the mayor and city council along with comments and other relevant information of the hearing in making any zoning decision concerning the proposed zoning amendment. At the public hearing, the city council shall review the reports prepared by the zoning administrator and planning commission. 
(8)	When proponents and opponents of the proposed zoning amendment have been heard in accordance with the foregoing procedures, the mayor or his delegate shall declare the public hearing closed. No further public hearing on the proposed zoning amendment shall be required prior to the zoning decision. 
(b)	Copies of the procedures in subsection (a) of this section shall be provided at each public hearing. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.10)
Sec. 102-159. - Action by city council. 
(a)	The city council shall consider the standards in section 102-152(c)(6)a—f in evaluating each application for amendment under this division. So that the purpose of this chapter will be served and health, public safety, and general welfare secured, the city council may approve the application, reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the district requested, add or delete conditions of the application, deny an application, or defer consideration of an application to acquire additional information. An action by the council to defer the application shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered, which statement shall constitute public notice of the hearing on the application, and no further notice is required. The final decision by the city council shall be reduced to writing and mailed to the applicant. Any amendment involving changes to the official map must be made within three business days after approval by the city council. No amendment becomes effective until entered upon the map. 
(b)	After the presentation of positions by members of the public at the public hearing, at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, a recommendation from the city staff (zoning administrator, planning commission, and any city official (building official)) that may have comments or recommendations shall be heard by the city council. 
(c)	Following the staff recommendation, councilmembers may ask of anyone present questions pertinent to the issue. 
(d)	Following questions and/or comments by councilmembers, a motion for action on the issue will be in order. A majority of affirmative votes is required to pass any motion before the city council. 
(e)	So that the purpose of this chapter will be served and health, public safety and general welfare secured, the mayor and city council are authorized to take the following action with respect to any motion pending before them, consisting of one of the following: approval, approval with conditions, denial, withdrawal, or deferral to a time and date specified in minutes of the meeting. No official action shall be taken until there is a majority vote of a quorum of the city council. 
(f)	Appeals from decisions of the city council shall be taken to the appropriate courts.
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.11)
Sec. 102-160. - Conditional zoning authorized. 
(a)	In order to maintain the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city, the city council may impose conditions on rezoning requests. Conditions placed on the property as a part of approval of a rezoning application shall remain in force until such time as an appeal has been granted. Conditions shall be in writing and the purpose for the conditions shall be established. 
(b)	Conditions placed on property at the time of rezoning shall become a written part of the minutes of the city council meeting and shall be attached to the amendment to the official zoning map. The conditions imposed shall be part of the rezoning application and kept in the office of the building and zoning department. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.17)
Sec. 102-161. - Appeal process for conditional zoning. 
Appeals for relief of conditions placed on rezoned property may be heard by the city council only when the reason for the placement of conditions has been altered to allow the use of the property without the conditions. Appeals shall follow the same procedure as that of a rezoning application. Public hearings are required. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.18)
Secs. 102-162—102-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 102-181. - Generally. 
A variance will be authorized upon appeal, in specific cases, where such variances from the terms of this chapter will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon finding by the zoning administrator and/or the planning commission that: 
(1)	There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography. 
(2)	The application of this chapter to this particular piece of property would create unnecessary hardship. 
(3)	Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved.
(4)	Such conditions are not a result of any action of the property owner.
(5)	Relief, if granted, would not cause a substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.20-1)
Sec. 102-182. - Conditions and limitations. 
The planning commission shall include any condition, requirement, or limitation of a variance which may be necessary to protect adjacent properties and carry out the provisions of this chapter. If, at any time after a variance has been issued, the zoning administrator or building official finds that the conditions imposed and the agreements made have not been or are not being fulfilled by the holder of a variance, the variance shall be terminated. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.20-2)
Sec. 102-183. - Application. 
(a)	Applications for variance shall be filed with the office of the zoning administrator, and the planning commission shall have 30 days within which to consider each request. A due process hearing is required by the planning commission. 
(b)	Each application shall be accompanied by a simple sketch of the site, showing the following: 
(1)	General location of existing structures and property lines.
(2)	Present zoning of adjacent property.
(3)	Existing use of adjacent property.
(4)	Location of proposed buildings and land use.
(5)	A legal description of the property.
(6)	Setback distances.
(7)	Parking spaces, if applicable.
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.20-3)
Sec. 102-184. - Hearing procedures. 
Procedures for a variance hearing before the planning commission shall be as follows: 
(1)	The hearing shall be chaired by the chair of the planning commission.
(2)	Evidence shall be produced by the applicant why the variance is necessary.
(3)	The building inspector/zoning administrator may be called upon to testify to the rules and regulations in this chapter. 
(4)	The applicant and the planning commission have the right to question witnesses.
(5)	The final decision to grant an applicant a variance shall be made by the planning commission. Any appeals of the variance decision shall be taken to the proper courts. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.20-4)
Sec. 102-185. - Fee. 
Each application for a variance shall be assessed a fee according to a fee schedule posted at the office of building and zoning to defray administrative and notification costs. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16.20-5)
Secs. 102-186—102-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-221. - Establishment of districts. 
In order to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the following districts: 

 
(1)	Rural development district (RD). This district is intended to permit a combination of low density residential uses of various types, limited agricultural activities and associated uses. The regulations of the district are designed primarily to encourage a compatible relationship between agriculture and low density, single-family rural residential development. 
(2)	Single-family residential district (R1). The purpose of this district is to accommodate medium density single-family residences. Single-family dwellings are restricted to meeting Type I appearance standards, and are limited to the areas of the city served by sewer. It is the intent of this chapter to maintain existing neighborhoods at their current standard in regard to road frontage, side yards and setbacks. New development will come under the standard set forth in this chapter. 
(3)	Single-family patio homes district (R2). The purpose of this district is to provide high density single-family residences. Single-family dwellings shall meet type I or type II appearance standards and are limited to the areas of the city served by sewer. 
(4)	Multifamily residential/townhomes district (R3). The R3 residential district is established as a relatively high-density residential neighborhood in which the principal use of the land is for single-family, two-family and multifamily residences. The regulations for this district are intended to provide space for those persons desiring small residences and apartments and to discourage unwarranted encroachment of commercial, industrial or other uses capable of adversely affecting the residential character of the district. 
(5)	Commercial-residential district (CR). This district is designed to provide a high quality environment for limited retail activities, offices for professional services and residential uses as part of the commercial structures. 
(6)	General commercial district (GC). The purpose of this district is to provide appropriate locations for a wide variety of commercial activities which will serve a large market area. This district will generally be located along the major arterial highways or where these highways meet. Emphasis is on creating commercial nodes rather than strip developments. 
(7)	General industry district (GI). The purpose of this district is to provide suitable areas for warehousing, distribution, manufacturing and other intensive activities of an industrial nature. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 4.1)
Sec. 102-222. - Zoning district map. 
The boundaries of zoning districts are shown upon the map designated as the "Zoning District Map." The zoning district map and all notations, references, and other information shown thereon are a part of this chapter and have the same force and effect as if the zoning district map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon were fully set forth and described in the text of this chapter. This zoning district map is properly attested and is on display at city hall. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 4.2)
Sec. 102-223. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
(a)	The district boundaries shown on the zoning district map are generally intended to follow streets, alleys or lot lines. Where the districts designated on the map are bounded by such street, alley or lot line, the centerline of the street, alley or lot line shall be the boundary of the district unless such boundary is otherwise indicated on the map. In all other cases, the district boundary line shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the zoning district map. 
(b)	When the boundary line of a district divides a lot or tract held in single ownership at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the boundary line may be allowed to extend a distance of not more than 50 feet to the least restrictive zoning district. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 4.3)
Sec. 102-224. - Use of land. 
No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 10.1)
Sec. 102-225. - Use of buildings. 
No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, structurally altered or used except for a use permitted in the district in which such building or structure is located. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 10.2)
Sec. 102-226. - Location of buildings. 
Every building hereafter erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered shall be located on lots as defined in this chapter, except as approved by the zoning board in the form of a variance. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 10.2-1)
Sec. 102-227. - Height of buildings. 
(a)	No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered to exceed the height limit established in this chapter for the district in which it is located, except for the following: 
(1)	Chimneys.
(2)	Church spires.
(3)	Fire towers.
(4)	Flagpoles.
(5)	Public monuments.
(6)	Tanks.
(7)	Water towers.
(8)	Silos.
(b)	Public and semipublic service buildings, hospitals, institutions and schools may be erected to a height not to exceed 100 feet; churches may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, provided the required side yard and rear yards shall be increased by at least one foot for each one foot of additional building height above the height regulations for the district in which the building is located. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 10.2-2)
Sec. 102-228. - Dimensional regulations. 
No building or use shall be erected, converted, enlarged, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the minimum space requirements (i.e., the lot area, floor area, building height, etc.) for the district in which such building is located. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 10.2-3)
Sec. 102-229. - Temporary buildings. 
Temporary buildings shall not be permitted in any district except when they are used in conjunction with construction work or pending completion of a permanent building. Such building shall be used for a period not to exceed one year and shall be removed when the construction of the permanent building is completed. Construction of the permanent building is said to be completed at the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 10.2-4)
Sec. 102-230. - Provisions of chapter are minimum requirements. 
In interpreting and applying this chapter, the requirements contained in this chapter are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter. Except as provided in this chapter, this chapter shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings, or upon the height of buildings, or require a larger percentage of a lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits or any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, then the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 10.3)
Sec. 102-231. - Zoning affects all land and buildings. 
No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied, and no building, structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged or structurally altered, unless in conformity with the regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 10.4)
Sec. 102-232. - Number of principal buildings per lot. 
Unless provided for elsewhere in this chapter, there shall be no more than one principal building or structure upon any lot in any residential district. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 10.5)
Sec. 102-233. - Use of required open space by other building. 
No part of any yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required in connection with any building, structure, or use by this chapter shall be considered to be part of a required yard, open space, off-street parking or loading space for any other building or structure. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 10.6)
Sec. 102-234. - Reduction of yards or lot area. 
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, no lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be reduced, divided or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located, unless such reduction or division is necessary to provide land that is needed and accepted for public use. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 10.7)
Secs. 102-235—102-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS AND PERMITTED USES 

Sec. 102-261. - Lot area, yard and height standards. 
The requirements regarding lot size, building size, and building placement on the lot for each zoning district shall be met as indicated in table 102-261, Zoning District Area, Yard and Height Requirements, as follows: 
TABLE 102-261. ZONING DISTRICT AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

 
*Note: These distances are distance from the right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 5.1)
Sec. 102-262. - Appearance standards. 
Appearance standards shall apply to all single-family detached dwellings including site-built housing, industrialized housing, and manufactured homes. A certificate of occupancy shall be granted upon the finding that such development shall meet or exceed the appearance standards as shown on table 102-262, Appearance Standards for Single-Family Detached Dwellings, as follows: 
TABLE 102-262. APPEARANCE STANDARDS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS 

 
Notes: 
(1)	The roof shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal, slate, builtup gravel materials or other materials approved by the building inspector. 
(2)	The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl lap or other materials of like appearance. 
(3)	Permanent foundation, including manufactured homes, shall meet the requirements of standard building codes for manufactured homes. The pier foundation shall be 24-inch by 24-inch by 16-inch deep concrete footing. The underpinning for manufactured homes shall be eight-inch by eight-inch by 16-inch masonry block on a foundation ten inches wide and six inches deep, unpierced, except for the required ventilation and access, which must be installed so that it encloses the area under the manufactured home to ground level. 
(4)	For manufactured homes, a front landing area is required of at least 100 square feet with a side-to-side dimension of at least eight feet, on a poured concrete footing, no less than 12 inches by 12 inches by 12 inches. All other landings are to be a minimum of five feet by five feet on not less than a fabricated masonry footing. 
(5)	Manufactured homes are required to remove all towing devices.
(6)	Manufactured homes locating in existing nonconforming manufacturing home parks, under type III appearance standards, shall use skirting and vegetation to make towing devices as inconspicuous as possible. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 5.2)
Sec. 102-263. - Permitted uses. 
No principal building, structure or land use shall be permitted except in the zoning districts indicated and for the purposes permitted in table 102-263. Each use is mutually exclusive and does not include other uses listed in the table. A principal use denoted by the letter "S" is permitted only if a special use permit is granted by the city council. For uses not included in this list where the building inspector is unable to determine clear placement, application shall be made to the planning commission for interpretation. 
TABLE 102-263. PERMITTED USES 

 
  
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 5.3; Ord. No. 11-10-21, § 1, 10-21-2011)
Secs. 102-264—102-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18.

Sec. 102-291. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Egress means an exit. 
Ingress means an entry. 
Major arterials means all U.S. highways, interstate interchanges, and state highway routes. 
Parking island means an area between parking spaces, planted with trees, shrubs, bushes, grass or flowers. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 7.1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 102-292. - Purpose. 
The regulations in this division are enacted pursuant to the authority contained in the state constitution, as amended, for the following purposes: 
(1)	Encourage economically sound and stable land development.
(2)	Ensure the provision of required streets, utilities, facilities and services to land development. 
(3)	Ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land development. 
(4)	Ensure the provision of needed services, facilities, and commercial developments by conformity with the development standards set forth in this division. 
(5)	Ensure that developments are in conformity with the rural character and theme of the area and the setting of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 7.3)
Sec. 102-293. - Applicability. 
The regulations in this division shall govern all commercial developments within the corporate limits of the city, except for those located in the delineated commercial-residential zoning district. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 7.4)
Sec. 102-294. - Acceptance, opening and improving of streets by city. 
The city council shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any street, or lay any utility lines in any street, which has not attained the status of a public street prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, unless such street corresponds to the street location shown on an approved sketch plan. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 7.5)
Sec. 102-295. - Building permit and development permit. 
(a)	Building permit required. A building permit, to indicate and ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter, shall be issued before any improvements, grading of lands, alteration or construction for any proposed use of lands or buildings. 
(b)	Development permit required. A development permit shall be required for all commercial development involving new development. Development permits shall not be in lieu of building permits required for any structures within such developments. 
(c)	Application for development permit. All applications for development permits shall be made to the city clerk for submission to the planning commission for approval. The application for a development permit shall be accompanied by two copies of a dimensional sketch plan. 
(d)	Sketch plan. The required sketch plan shall include the following information: 
(1)	Names. The name of the proposed development, and the name, address, and phone number of the owner and the designer of the site plan and his seal. 
(2)	Date and legend. Date, north arrow, and graphic scale. 
(3)	Survey boundaries. Surveyed boundaries of the entire tract and its relationship to adjoining properties, public rights-of-way and easements. 
(4)	Location map. A general location map at a scale sufficient to indicate existing zoning on and adjacent to the site, adjoining roads and the adjacent areas, at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 1,000 feet. 
(5)	Building locations and orientation to public street. Location and orientation of all proposed buildings, and their shape, size and setback, in appropriate scale. 
(6)	Parking and loading facilities. All required parking and loading facilities. 
(7)	Right-of-way. The location, length and width and the name or purpose of all rights-of-way of streets, roads, alleys, railroads, public crosswalks, and applicable easements. 
(8)	Buffers. The location and design of the proposed buffer and landscaping for the proposed development. 
(9)	Environmentally sensitive areas. Location of water supply watersheds, groundwater recharge areas, and wetlands, and the boundary and elevation of the 100-year floodplain as determined by the flood insurance rate map. 
(10)	Proposed improvements. The names, where appropriate, locations and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, buildings, parking, loading, dumpsters, open spaces, and recreation areas and facilities. 
(e)	Duration of validity of development permit. The permit shall become invalid if the work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months. To resume work, an application for development permit shall be resubmitted to the city clerk for approval by the planning commission. 
(f)	Planning commission analysis. Each commercial development shall have an analysis based on the following: 
(1)	Whether the commercial development proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby properties. 
(2)	Whether the commercial development would adversely impact environmentally sensitive areas. 
(3)	Whether the commercial development is pedestrian friendly and causes no excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities or utilities. 
(4)	Whether the intensity of the commercial development will adversely impact the city.
(5)	Whether the commercial development meets all state and local codes for building.
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 7.6)
Sec. 102-296. - Minimum design standards for general commercial districts. 
(a)	Parking and loading area design. All parking lots and loading areas for commercial development shall be located in the rear or to the side of the structure. Parking areas for development shall be constructed to provide space for loading requirements and bicycle racks. In a parking lot with over ten spaces, landscaped parking islands are required to preserve the aesthetic value of the area. 
(b)	Landscaping and buffers. All commercial development shall landscape front sides and rear with flowers, trees, shrubs and bushes of their choice provided no landscape vegetation blocks the view of a street, highway or sign. Buffers shall adhere to article III, division 10 of this chapter regarding commercial development. 
(c)	Design standards. All commercial development shall be in conformity with the theme of the area in which it is located. All commercial development shall be approved by the planning commission in regard to theme, color and scale of development. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 7.7)
Sec. 102-297. - Minimum design standards for commercial development in or adjacent to residential districts. 
(a)	New development. Commercial development which is located in a primarily residential district or adjacent to a residential district shall design any new development in similar size, scale, height and appearance as the residential area. 
(b)	Existing residences converted to commercial uses. Any existing residences which are converted to commercial uses shall maintain a residential appearance. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 7.8)
Secs. 102-298—102-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL/TOWNHOME DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 102-321. - Plot plan; general standards. 
(a)	Plot plan required. The applicant for a multifamily residential/townhome development shall submit with the application a plot plan indicating compliance with the criteria in this division. 
(b)	Elevation and floor plans. A plan shall be submitted showing the front elevation and typical floor plans of the proposed units. 
(c)	Ownership of development. Proposed multifamily residential/townhome developments shall be in single ownership at the time of development. 
(d)	Number of units. No single multifamily residential/townhome group or development shall contain less than three nor more than ten single-family dwellings. 
(e)	Separation of units; compliance with building code. Each multifamily residential/townhome unit shall be separated from the other units by an approved firewall, such wall to be without openings or other means of passage or visibility between each unit, and shall, in all cases, comply with the current building code as adopted by the city. 
(f)	Independent stairways and services required. Each dwelling unit shall, if multistoried, be independently served by interior stairways and by utilities and services. 
(g)	Vehicular entrances. No vehicular entrance or curb cut shall be permitted to the front of any multifamily residential/townhome unit from any existing street or thoroughfare. 
(Ord. of 2-3-2003, § 8.1; Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 8.1)
Sec. 102-322. - Lot size; minimum distance between buildings. 
(a)	The average lot per dwelling unit at any multifamily residential/townhome development shall not be less than 2,000 square feet, and no lot shall contain an area of less than 1,800 square feet. 
(b)	The minimum distance between contiguous multifamily residential/townhome groups and between a multifamily residential/townhome group and a building outside the multifamily residential/townhome group shall be not less than 16 feet at any point. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 8.2)
Sec. 102-323. - Setbacks. 
Setbacks for multifamily residential/townhome development shall be as follows: 
(1)	The front yard setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet from the front property line.
(2)	The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet from the rear property line.
(3)	No side yard is required except at each end of a multifamily residential/townhome group, where a minimum side yard of eight feet shall be maintained, and on corner lots a minimum side yard of ten feet shall be maintained on the side street. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 8.3)
Sec. 102-324. - Open space. 
Not less than 40 percent of the gross lot area of a multifamily residential/townhome development shall be maintained as usable open space, including drives, streets, service areas or required off-street parking. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 8.4)
Sec. 102-325. - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in multifamily residential/townhome developments as required in section 102-512. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 8.5.1)
Sec. 102-326. - Deed restrictions. 
A permit for the construction of multifamily residential/townhome development shall be issued in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter after evidence has been presented in the form of proposed deed covenants and restrictions requiring the maintenance of jointly owned areas so as to prevent the occurrence of blight by failure of the owner of any unit to maintain the unit. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 8.5.2)
Secs. 102-327—102-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - COMMERCIAL-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18.

Sec. 102-351. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the commercial-residential district is to provide a flexible and creative design and development of commercial and residential uses in the existing downtown historic area and new development in the city. The specific purposes of this district include the following: 
(1)	Encourage residential uses in conjunction with commercial activities in order to create an active downtown and enhance the vitality of businesses. 
(2)	Promote the adaptive reuse of older structures for the purpose of stabilizing and improving property values. 
(3)	Encourage a sense of community and foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past. 
(4)	Protect and promote the city's attractions to tourists and visitors.
(5)	Strengthen and help diversify the economy of the city.
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 9.1)
Sec. 102-352. - Description of district. 
The commercial-residential zoning district shall be located in the downtown district of the city. This district shall include Main Street and any other areas of the city where commercial-residential uses now exist. This district shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 9.2)
Sec. 102-353. - Standards for existing residential-commercial uses. 
The existing commercial-residential district shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)	Newly refurbished structures shall meet all applicable building codes for plumbing and electrical work, etc. 
(2)	Any residential upper level structure shall meet minimum requirements for multifamily zoned areas, heated floor area, number of rooms, and sanitary facilities. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 9.3)
Secs. 102-354—102-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - HISTORIC NEIGHBORHOOD OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-371. - Intent. 
(a)	The purpose of this division is to protect the city's historic neighborhoods from incompatible development and to advance longterm plans for these areas. The community finds that its historic neighborhoods are important cultural and economic assets, and critical to the city's development, heritage tourism and education goals, and ultimately to the public's longterm interest. 
(b)	Zoning standards and regulations should protect these areas while advancing community development goals and furthering and protecting the public's health, safety and welfare. New construction in these areas should complement rather than interrupt, obscure, or otherwise damage or destroy the historic neighborhoods. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 12.1)
Sec. 102-372. - Description of district. 
(a)	Historic neighborhoods shall be those areas listed and described in this section and further delineated on the official zoning map, which is incorporated and made a part of this division. 
(b)	Historic neighborhoods shall include the following:
(1)	Boundaries of historic district. The boundaries of the historic district are as follows: 
On the Troup County Tax Maps 24-4W and 24-1D, begin at a point on the centerline of East Main Street and the east boundary of the CSX Railroad, run thence north and northeasterly to the centerline of Askew Avenue, thence northeasterly and east along this centerline to the centerline of Johnson Street, thence south 100.8 feet, thence east 20 feet to the NW corner of Parcel 12 Block 13 Tax Map 21-2C, thence east 237.95 feet to the NE corner of Parcel 12, thence southeasterly 203.4 feet to the lot corner, thence west 182.3 feet, thence south 80 feet to the right-of-way of Marshall Avenue, thence southeasterly to the NE corner of Parcel 1 Block 26 Tax Map 21-2C, thence south 210 feet to the NE corner of Parcel 15 Block 26 Tax Map 21-2C, thence west 80 feet, thence south 107 feet to the north boundary of Baugh Avenue, thence southeasterly to the NE corner of Parcel 1 Block 8 Tax Map 24-1D, thence south 87.4 feet, thence east 140.9 feet, thence south 381 feet to the SE corner of Parcel 9 Block 8 Tax Map 24-1D, thence east 30 feet to the centerline of Church Street, thence south along the centerline 856 feet, thence east to the NW corner of Parcel 6 Block 4 Tax Map 21-3B, thence south 125 feet, thence east 20 feet to the NE corner of Parcel 11 Block 4 Tax Map 21-3B, thence east along the north boundaries of Parcels 12, 13 and 15 Block 4 Tax Map 21-3B, thence south 27 feet, thence east 87 feet to the centerline of Granite Street, thence south 337 feet, thence southeast 20 feet to the NW corner of Parcel 13 Block 3 Tax Map 21-3B, thence east along the north boundaries of Parcels 13, 14, 15 and 16 Block 3 Tax Map 21-3B, thence northeast 475 feet to the NE corner of Parcel 21 Block 3 Tax Map 21-3B, thence north 110 feet to the NW corner of Parcel 23 Block 3 Tax Map 21-3B, thence along the north boundary of Parcel 23 to the centerline of Collier Street, thence southeast to the NE corner of Parcel 9 Block 8 Tax Map 21-3B, thence southeast and south along Parcel 9 to the NW corner of Parcel 11 Block 8 Tax Map 21-3B, thence east along a straight line from the north boundary of Parcel 11 to the NE corner of Parcel 18 Block 8 Tax Map 21-3B, thence southeast and east to the NW corner of Parcel 22 Block 0 Tax Map 21-3D, thence along the north boundary of Parcels 22 and 23 until it intersects with Myrtle Hill Cemetery, thence follow the outermost western road 500 feet, thence north 200 feet, thence east 600 feet, thence south 1,235 feet, thence west 90 feet, thence south 200 feet to the centerline of East Main Street, thence west 1,606 feet along this centerline to the centerline of the Hogansville-Mountville Road, thence southwest 125 feet to the SE corner of Parcel 15 Block 7 Tax Map 21-3B, thence west 100 feet, thence north 6.3 feet, thence west 89 feet, thence south 6.3 feet, thence west 555 feet to the SW corner of Parcel 9 Block 7 Tax Map 21-3B, thence north 137.5 feet to the SE corner of Parcel 8 Block 7 Tax Map 21-3B, thence northwest 90 feet, thence north 170 feet, thence west 175 feet to the SW corner of Parcel 1 Block 7 Tax Map 21-3B, thence northwest to the SE corner of Parcel 9 Block 6 Tax Map 21-3B, thence west 380 feet, thence south 75 feet, thence west 177 feet, thence north 375 feet to the SE corner of Parcel 5 Block 6 Tax Map 21-3B, thence southwest 125 feet, thence north 33 feet, thence west 191 feet, thence north 56 feet, thence west 150 feet to the SW corner of Parcel 1 Block 6 Tax Map 21-3B, thence southwest 187.5 feet to the SE corner of Parcel 9 Block 5 Tax Map 21-3B, thence west 114 feet, thence south 25 feet, thence west 85 feet, thence south 25 feet, thence northwest 50 feet, thence north 79 feet, thence west 61 feet, thence south 50 feet, thence west 135 feet, thence north 500 feet to the NW corner of Parcel 7 Block 5 Tax Map 21-3B, thence west 413 feet, thence southeast 210 feet, thence west 399 feet along the south boundaries of Parcel 4, 3, 2 and 1 to the SW corner of Parcel 1 Block 5 Tax Map 21-3B, thence south 360 feet to the SW corner of Parcel 21 Block 1 Tax Map 24-4A, thence west 687.5 feet to the SE corner of Parcel 7 Block 1 Tax Map 24-4A, thence south 210 feet to the SE corner of Parcel 10 Block 1 Tax Map 24-4A, thence west 142 feet, thence south 60 feet, thence west 187 feet to the SW corner of Parcel 10 Block 1 Tax Map 24-4A, thence northwest 100 feet to the SE corner of Parcel 11 Block 3 Tax Map 24-4A, thence west 180 feet to east boundary of CSX Railroad, thence north 709 feet, thence west 160 feet to the SE corner of Parcel 13 Block 10 Tax Map 24-4W, thence northwest 200 feet to the centerline of Elm Street, thence west 116 feet along the centerline of Elm Street, thence south 25 feet to the NE corner of Parcel 3 Block 4 Tax Map 24-4A, thence southwest 142 feet, thence west 30 feet, thence south 25 feet, thence southwest 50 feet, thence south 67 feet to the south boundary of Parcel 2 Block 4 Tax Map 24-4A, thence southwest 91 feet, thence west 188 feet to the centerline of Poplar Street, thence northwest 50 feet to the SE corner of Parcel 12 Block 5 Tax Map 24-4A, thence west 150 feet, thence south 149 feet, thence west 100 feet, thence north 70 feet, thence southwest 85 feet, thence south 10 feet, thence west 80 feet, thence north 118.8 feet, thence west 75 feet to the centerline of Boozer Street, thence north 175 feet to the centerline of Elm Street, thence northeast 90 feet to the centerline of Boozer Street, thence north 386 feet, thence west 15 feet to the SE corner of Parcel 16 Block 3 Tax Map 24-4X, thence west 151 feet, thence south 77 feet, thence west 200 feet to the centerline of Darden Street, thence west 184 feet, thence north 20 feet, thence west 80 feet to the centerline of King Street, thence northwest 50 feet to the SE corner of Parcel 3 Block 7 Tax Map 24-4B, thence south 132 feet, thence west 200 feet to the centerline of Pine Street, thence north 150 feet to the centerline of West Main Street, thence east 1,325 feet, thence north 25 feet to the SW corner of Parcel 8 Block 2 Tax Map 24-4X, thence north 138 feet, thence east 160 feet to the NE corner of Parcel 9 Block 2 Tax Map 24-4X, thence south 70 feet, thence east 35 feet, thence north 30 feet, thence west 1,126 feet to the eastern boundary of CSX Railroad at the point where the historic district started. 
(Note: All measurements should be considered "plus" or "minus" since they are derived from the county tax maps.) 
(2)	Significant other buildings or structures. The following structures and sites not within the historic district shall be designated as significant for preservation: 

 
(c)	Designation of additional historic neighborhoods. Additional historic neighborhoods may be designated by amendment to this chapter, after public hearing. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 12.2)
Sec. 102-373. - Applicability. 
(a)	Within the designated historic neighborhoods, the provisions of this division shall apply to: 
(1)	New construction and building additions, if such additions will increase floorspace;
(2)	Relocation of existing buildings into or out of the historic neighborhoods;
(3)	Proposed demolition of existing structures; and
(4)	Other applicable issues, if specified in this division.
(b)	Historic neighborhoods shall function as overlay districts. They may include, be contiguous with, or later become local historic districts (adopted in accordance with the city's historic preservation ordinance (chapter 46) adopted October 10, 1988), designated National Register properties or districts, or portions thereof. The regulations of such underlying districts and of the underlying zoning districts shall be maintained and not affected, except in the event of conflict or discrepancy between the historic neighborhood and the underlying district. In that case, the more stringent requirements shall be observed, unless noted otherwise in this division. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 12.3)
Sec. 102-374. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Historic neighborhood means a geographically definable area possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development, listed and described within this division, and further delineated on the official zoning map of the city. 
New construction means the fabrication or placement of any building or other structure on a lot, or an addition to an existing building if such addition is visible from the street and would increase the building's floorspace. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 12.4)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 102-375. - Conditions and compatibility standards. 
Within the historic neighborhoods, the following conditions and compatibility standards shall apply: 
(1)	New construction and building additions. 
a.	Size, scale and setback. New buildings shall be similar to nearby buildings in terms of height, width and setback from the street. 
b.	Materials. New buildings shall utilize exterior materials common to the exterior of the buildings in the historic neighborhood. 
c.	Shapes. Roof pitches and building shapes should be consistent with those within the historic neighborhood. 
d.	Rhythm. New construction shall respect the pattern of windows and doors of buildings in the vicinity. 
e.	Orientation or directional expression of front elevation. New structures shall be visually compatible with the orientation of the buildings, squares and places to which they are visually related. 
f.	Landscaping. Landscaping shall attempt to maintain the historic characteristics and be visually compatible with the overall environment of the historic neighborhood. 
g.	Appurtenances. Appurtenances related to a building, such as fences, stone walls, light fixtures, steps, paving, sidewalks, and signs, shall be visually compatible with the environment of the buildings, places, and squares to which they are related. 
h.	Modern design. Modern designs shall not be discouraged, if they are sensitive to the visual characteristics of the historic neighborhood. 
(2)	Demolition of existing structures. 
a.	Proposed demolition of existing structures within historic neighborhoods shall be subject to prior review by the city historic preservation commission. 
b.	Upon receipt of any request to demolish a building, or any part thereof, the historic preservation commission shall review the circumstances and condition of the structure or part proposed for demolition and make an initial determination as to whether any of the following criteria apply to the structure: 
1.	Is the building of such architectural or historical interest that its removal would be to the detriment of the public interest? 
2.	Is the building of such old and unusual or uncommon design, texture and material that it could not be reproduced or be reproduced only with great difficulty? 
3.	Would retention of the building help preserve and protect the historic neighborhood?
4.	Would retention of the building promote the general welfare by maintaining and increasing real estate values, generating business, creating jobs, attracting new residents, promoting heritage education, or making the city a more attractive and desirable place to live? 
c.	Should the historic preservation commission determine that none of the criteria listed in subsection (2)b of this section are applicable, then permission to demolish the building shall be granted no later than 30 days after the property owner's written request to demolish the building. 
d.	If the historic preservation commission, instead, should determine that at least one of the criteria in subsection (2)b of this section is applicable, then the city shall notify persons or groups interested in historic preservation who may wish to work with the owner in an effort to preserve the structure, or locate purchasers who would agree to preserve the building in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Historic Properties. 
e.	If efforts to preserve the building, in accordance with subsection (2)d of this section, have failed, 180 days after the owner's written request for demolition, permission to demolish the building shall be granted. 
(3)	Building relocation. Buildings shall be retained on their present sites whenever possible. Relocation shall be considered only as an alternative to demolition. 
a.	For buildings to be moved into the historic neighborhood, or relocated within the historic neighborhood, new construction standards shall apply (subsection (1) of this section). 
b.	For buildings to be moved out of the historic neighborhood, demolition standards shall apply (subsection (2) of this section). 
(4)	Ordinary maintenance required. Property owners shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 12.5)
Sec. 102-376. - Administration and enforcement; historic preservation commission. 
(a)	Provisions of the historic overlay district shall be administered by the city historic preservation commission. 
(b)	The historic preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the administration of this division, such as issuance procedures and forms, and detailed design guidelines and criteria, as appropriate. 
(c)	The historic preservation commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(d)	A public record shall be kept of all resolutions, proceedings and official actions taken in accordance with this division. 
(e)	Violations of any provisions of this division shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(f)	On matters of new construction or building additions, failure of the historic preservation commission to act within 45 days after receipt of a property owner's duly submitted application shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(g)	On matters of new construction or building additions, permits or certificates issued by the historic preservation commission shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of issuance. Such permits or certificates shall be issued for a period of 18 months and shall be renewable. 
(h)	All work performed pursuant to an issued permit or certificate shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. If the work performed is not in accordance with such certificate, the historic preservation commission shall request that the city manager issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(i)	The city shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any new construction, demolition or building relocation not in compliance with the provisions of this division or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to the designated historic neighborhood. 
(j)	On matters of building maintenance, if the historic preservation commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. If the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be subject to the noncompliance penalties of this division, and the city may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration of the property by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair by the city. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 12.6)
Sec. 102-377. - Variances and modifications. 
When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this division would result in an exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the historic preservation commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to such provisions, or to interpret the meaning of such provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of such provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity or character of the historic neighborhood shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the historic preservation commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this division. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 12.7)
Sec. 102-378. - Appeals. 
Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the historic preservation commission relative to the issuance or denial of a permit or certificate may appeal such determination to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the city within 15 days after the issuance of the determination or, in the case of a failure of the historic preservation commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the historic preservation commission action. The city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the historic preservation commission. Appeals from decisions of the city council may be taken to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for city ordinance violations. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 12.8)
Sec. 102-379. - Compliance with building and zoning regulations; use of property. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, or to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 12.9)
Secs. 102-380—102-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - MANUFACTURED HOMES, MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 

Sec. 102-401. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the division is to provide standards and regulations to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The city recognizes that manufactured housing meets the needs of many county residents for affordable housing and is compatible with site-built housing if developed in accordance with comparable standards. The regulations in this division shall govern the use and operation of all manufactured homes on single lots or within parks used for permanent residential occupancy, as well as recreational vehicle parks used for temporary occupancy, in the city. It is the intent of these regulations to empower the city planning commission, the county health department, and the city manager or his designee to review the development of manufactured home sites, manufactured home parks, and recreational vehicle parks within the city for the purposes stated in this division. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 13.1)
Sec. 102-402. - Standards for manufactured homes; nonconforming manufactured home parks. 
(a)	Nonconforming manufactured home parks. Nonconforming mobile/manufactured home parks lawfully existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived may be continued, but if such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 90 days, the manufactured home park shall be made to conform with the requirements of this division prior to its being occupied again. Any expansion or addition to an existing manufactured home park shall be in compliance with this division. 
(b)	Annual report of location; location decal. Every person holding title to or possession of a manufactured home which is placed or located within the limits of the city shall report the location of, and obtain a location decal for, the manufactured home from the county tax commissioner annually, no later than April 1 of each year. Such location decal shall be designed in such manner and affixed to the manufactured home in such manner as to cause it to be easily visible for inspection. 
(c)	Occupancy permit. Any owner of a manufactured home, whether locating or relocating the manufactured home, shall obtain a permit from the city indicating compliance with all applicable codes before any person is authorized to occupy any newly installed manufactured home. 
(d)	Conditions for moving manufactured home into or within city. A manufactured home permit to move a manufactured home into or within the city will not be issued until the following conditions have been met in accordance with established administrative procedures: 
(1)	A valid location decal must be issued from the tax commissioner's office and attached to the manufactured home. 
(2)	All manufactured homes located in the city shall be model year 1985 or later.
(3)	All manufactured homes must be located at an approved manufactured home space, or in an approved manufactured home park subject to the requirements of this division. 
(4)	For individual lots not approved under the manufactured home park regulations, a sanitary permit must be obtained from the county health department for on-site sewage disposal, or, if sewer service will be provided, a letter shall be provided by the local government providing the service verifying it will allow public sewer hookup. 
(5)	All manufactured homes located on individual lots will adhere to the appearance standards set forth in division 2 of this article. The type of appearance standard required will depend on the zoning district where the manufactured home is located. 
(e)	Building permit. A building permit shall be required to locate a manufactured home in the city except under the following condition: Manufactured homes may be brought in the county and located on a sales lot of a state-approved dealer as listed in the office of the state safety commissioner for sale without a building or sanitary permit. However, under no exceptions shall any manufactured home, which is located on a sales lot, be occupied unless all permit requirements in this division are met. Installation must comply with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes, chapter 120-3-7, appendix A, made and promulgated by the state safety fire commissioner pursuant to authority set forth in state law. 
(f)	Temporary electrical power. The city, after inspection, is authorized to permit the applicable power company to provide temporary power not to exceed 120 volts for the express purpose of completing necessary construction and installation of the manufactured home. This provision specifically does not authorize permanent power hookup or occupancy of the manufactured home. It shall be unlawful for temporary power to be utilized on a permanent basis or for occupancy of such home. 
(g)	Minimum construction standards. Each newly installed manufactured home in the city shall conform to the minimum construction standards required by U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), as required by the National Mobile Home and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq., before that manufactured home is entitled to receive any utility service to the manufactured home. It is the intent of this subsection to prohibit moving manufactured homes into the city that do not conform to the applicable Department of Housing and Urban Development construction standards, as expressed in 42 USC 5401 et seq., and regulations established pursuant to that act. To that end, no manufactured home shall be allowed to locate or relocate for permanent or temporary occupancy in the city unless that manufactured home complies with the minimum construction standards required by HUD, which compliance must be evidenced by the affixation of a permanent label or tag certifying the compliance. Manufactured homes which do not display certification compliance shall not be eligible for a city building and/or occupancy permit. Any manufactured home in the city which legally exists at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived that does display certification compliance shall not be required to have certification. However, any manufactured home which does not display certification shall be considered a nonconforming structure and shall not be relocated to any other site within the city. 
(h)	Installation requirements. All newly installed manufactured homes shall be permanently connected to water, sewage and electrical service in compliance with applicable health codes and chapter 120-3-7, Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes, plus appendix A of that document, made and promulgated by the state safety fire commissioner. All manufactured homes shall be installed on an approved pier system and secured with approved tiedown devices, and shall have an approved plumbing system, an approved electrical system and an approved landing at each exit as required by the rules and regulations mentioned in this subsection and in compliance with appearance standards for the appropriate zoning district. Each manufactured home shall be installed such that the finished floor level of the manufactured home shall not exceed an average height higher than 80 inches in elevation from the finished grades, in accordance with chapter 120-3-7, appendix A. All manufactured homes shall be installed to meet the manufacturer's regulations. At the time of inspection, the space beneath each manufactured home shall be enclosed, with the exception of ventilation and access openings, and according to the appearance standards in division 2 of this article, it must be in compliance with type I, type II or type III. The residential zone of each manufactured home will dictate which type it must meet (see division 2 of this article). At the time of request for a building permit, the number of ventilation openings shall be set by code enforcement. The standards are more specifically explained in the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes. The enclosing materials shall extend from the lower edge of the exterior walls of the manufactured home to the ground surface level of the pad on which it is located. All ventilation and access openings shall be covered with wire mesh screen or its equivalent. 
(i)	Inspection of manufactured homes. 
(1)	The following requirements shall pertain to the installation of manufactured homes on individual lots or in parks: 
a.	Foundation. The building inspector shall require the foundation to be inspected to ensure compliance with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes, as may be subsequently revised. The Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes are incorporated as a part of this division by reference. Until the foundation is inspected and approved by the city, no additional work will be approved. 
b.	Plumbing. The city shall require the external plumbing system to be inspected, including water and sewage hookups, to ensure compliance with Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes and the appropriate, applicable, accepted plumbing codes used by the city for site-built homes. Until the plumbing system is inspected and approved by the city, no additional work will be approved. 
c.	On-site sewage systems. Where individual on-site sewage systems are installed with public or community water systems, the minimum lot size shall be no less than required in the zoning district in which the home is located. All on-site sewage systems shall be subject to county health department approval. Where individual on-site sewage systems are installed in conjunction with private water systems, the minimum lot size shall be no less than three-fourths acre. 
d.	Stairs and landings. The city shall require stairs and landings to comply with section 1108, Stairway Construction, of the Georgia State Building Code, as amended, and also to section P, appendix A of the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes, as amended. 
e.	Electrical system. The city shall require inspection of the electrical system to ensure compliance with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes and the current National Electrical Code, as amended. 
f.	Gas system. The city shall require inspection of the gas system to ensure compliance with the current Standard Gas Code, as amended. 
(2)	Until these inspections have been made and the manufactured home is found to be in compliance with all applicable codes, no permanent power may be installed, and no occupancy shall be permitted. Evidence of compliance will be shown by written documentation provided to the applicant and a sticker attached to the electrical meter base. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 13.2)
Sec. 102-403. - Standards for manufactured home parks. 
All manufactured home parks developed after adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall meet the following site plan requirements: 
(1)	Site plan approval required. All manufactured home park developments shall require site plan approval by the planning commission in accordance with the procedures and requirements established in this chapter. Site plans required for the placement of three or more residential units shall contain the seal of a state-registered engineer or surveyor. No building permits shall be issued for sites within any development until final approval is granted subject to all park plan requirements. 
(2)	Submission and contents of plans. All park plans shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee accompanied by the required fee payment as established by the city. Plans shall contain the following: 
a.	The name of the proposed park, and the name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
b.	Location map and legal description of the manufactured home park, with north arrow (designated magnetic or true). 
c.	Complete plans to a scale of one inch equals not more than 100 feet and specifications of the proposed park showing: 
1.	The area and dimensions of the tract of land, including topographic data at a contour interval of not more than five feet or an interval appropriate for decision-making on the tract, and including the location and type of soils on the tract, and a statement of accuracy signed by a surveyor or engineer as applicable. 
2.	The number, location and dimensions of all manufactured home lots.
3.	The location and width of streets, and the location and size of drainage mechanisms proposed, including the size of each application drainage area. 
4.	The location of service buildings (laundry service, office, community building, etc.) and other proposed structures. 
5.	The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes.
6.	Plans and specifications of the water supply and refuse and sewage disposal facilities.
7.	Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed with the park. 
8.	The location of streetlights, if applicable.
9.	The location of bulk refuse containers, perimeter walls, and park identification signs.
10.	A soil erosion and sedimentation plan meeting the requirements of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Act. 
11.	Certification from the appropriate authority on water and sewer acceptability.
(3)	Off-street parking requirements. A minimum of two off-street parking spaces per lot shall be provided in all manufactured home parks for the use of park occupants and guests. 
(4)	Lot area and width. A manufactured home park development shall have a minimum area of ten contiguous acres with 30 percent for streets and other improvements. Individual unit spaces shall consist of 12,000 square feet per unit. Individual unit spaces shall comply with the per-unit minimum for multifamily districts as stated in division 2 of this article. 
(5)	Setbacks. 
a.	No manufactured home or accessory building or structure shall be located closer than 50 feet to any park perimeter property boundary. 
b.	Each manufactured home shall be set back from any other manufactured home by at least 40 feet. 
c.	There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet between any individual manufactured home and an adjoining street, common parking area or other common area. 
(6)	Perimeter buffer. An undisturbed buffer consisting of trees and other landscaping material at least 50 feet in width shall be provided and maintained around the entire exterior perimeter of a manufactured home park. Any underground utilities may be placed within this buffer, but no closer than 25 feet to the perimeter of the park boundary. The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the buffer, which shall be so maintained as to present a neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. 
(7)	Lighting. All manufactured home parks shall have lighting of height, spacing and intensity so that each homesite's access and parking is appropriately illuminated. Mercury vapor or high or low pressure sodium lights shall be installed at not more than 200-foot intervals with a minimum height of 18 feet. 
(8)	Water supply. 
a.	Governmental water system. All manufactured home parks shall connect to an existing public water system if such system is located within 1,000 feet of the proposed park. The availability and adequacy of a public water supply shall be confirmed by the applicable agency having jurisdiction. If the public water supply is determined to be unavailable or inadequate for service, the planning commission may waive the requirement and allow an alternative water supply source. 
b.	Nongovernmental water system. If a single well is proposed to serve 15 or more service connections, or 25 or more persons, then such well and water distribution system must meet the standards for a community water system in accordance with the rules of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, chapter 391-3-5, Rules for Safe Drinking Water, as amended. 
c.	Individual water system. If individual wells are used, each well may be permitted to service up to four service connections, provided that the construction method of each well shall meet standards in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 12-5-138, the Water Well Standard Act of 1991. 
(9)	Sewage disposal and treatment. All manufactured home parks shall be required to provide either: 
a.	A public or community sewage treatment system approved by the state department of human resources; or 
b.	An on-site sewage management system approved by the city.
(10)	Electrical installations. All electrical installations shall meet the requirements of the current National Electrical Code, as amended. 
(11)	Refuse collection facilities. Each manufactured home park shall be provided with a sanitary method of solid waste collection and disposal. Collection facilities shall be either in the form of bulk containers (dumpsters) of sufficient size and adequately distributed throughout the park to meet the needs of the park residents, or at least two individually covered refuse containers having a capacity of 30 gallons or less for each occupied lot. Bulk containers shall be enclosed with a minimum of a four-foot-high chainlink fence and placed upon a concrete pad extending at least 18 inches around each container perimeter. If individual containers are utilized, stands must be provided to hold the refuse containers upright. Collection services shall be provided at least once weekly and waste conveyed to the nearest approved sanitary landfill. Refuse areas shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary manner so as not to attract, harbor or breed insects, rodents or any manner of vermin or pest. 
(12)	Service buildings. Accessory structures and community service facilities are hereby permitted for the convenience and well-being of park residents. Such structures shall conform to the state building codes adopted by the city, as amended, and may include but are not limited to the following uses: 
a.	Park management offices, repair shops and storage.
b.	Community postal facilities.
c.	Indoor community recreation areas.
d.	Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for park residents.
(13)	Miscellaneous requirements. 
a.	List of manufactured homes required. Every person owning or operating a manufactured home park, and each person engaged in the sale or rental of manufactured homes or lots upon which to place them, shall furnish the city tax commissioner on January 1 and July 1 of each year with a complete list of all manufactured homes parked or rented or otherwise located upon the property of such person or in a park operated by such person. 
b.	Restrictions on occupancy. A manufactured home shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes unless it has met the installation requirements in this division upon inspection by the building inspector. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 13.3)
Sec. 102-404. - Standards for recreational vehicle parks. 
(a)	Generally. Recreational vehicle parks shall be allowed in districts as shown in division 2 of this article, and shall comply with the regulations of this division. Recreational vehicle parks are for the convenience of tourists and transient visitors to city and are not intended to provide permanent housing for citizens of the city. 
(b)	Occupancy of recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles are allowed as a temporary residence. They shall be placed in a recreational vehicle park only, and residents who own recreational vehicles shall not be allowed to rent recreational vehicles or to attach recreational vehicles to electrical or water hookups in yards of single-family or multifamily residential areas. Recreational vehicles shall not be located in manufactured home parks and rented as a permanent residence. 
(c)	Site plan. Any proposed recreational vehicle park shall submit to the planning commission for approval a site plan which shall conform to the regulations set forth in section 102-403(1) and (2). 
(d)	Development permit. A development permit shall be required prior to any grading, installation of facilities or advertising of a proposed park. Development permits may be obtained from the city planning and zoning office during normal business hours. 
(e)	Development standards. All recreational vehicle parks located in the incorporated area of the city shall conform to the following development standards: 
(1)	Individual spaces. Each individual space for use by a recreational vehicle shall be 1,000 square feet. The lot area shall be graded and gravel inserted and surrounded on three sides by landscape timbers or other similar material, to ensure that space provided for the recreational vehicle to park is level and capable of sedimentation and erosion control. 
(2)	Minimum size of development. For the purposes of the development of a recreational vehicle park, the minimum lot size shall be two acres. 
(3)	Shower and restroom facilities. Any recreational vehicle park shall provide one shower and restroom facilities for every six rental spaces. 
(4)	Electrical hookups. Each individual space shall provide electrical hookup for the recreational vehicle in accordance with the current National Electrical Code, as amended. 
(5)	Water. Each individual space shall provide a water source for the recreational vehicle to fill water storage tanks. 
(6)	Picnic tables and grills. Individual spaces in the park shall include a concrete picnic table, benches and a charcoal grill constructed of wrought iron or other similar material, permanently attached to a concrete pad. 
(7)	Streets. Streets which provide access to the individual spaces shall be constructed to city standards and shall be of all-weather construction. The street system shall be maintained by the park owner and shall not be the responsibility of the city. 
(8)	Solid waste collection and disposal. Each recreational vehicle park shall be provided with a sanitary method of solid waste collection and disposal. Collection facilities shall be either in the form of bulk containers (dumpsters) of sufficient size and adequately distributed throughout the park to meet the needs of the park residents, or at least two individually covered refuse containers having a capacity of 30 gallons or less for each occupied lot. Bulk containers shall be enclosed with a minimum of a four-foot-high chainlink fence and placed upon a concrete pad extending at least 18 inches around each container perimeter. If individual containers are utilized, stands must be provided to hold the refuse containers upright. Collection services shall be provided at least once weekly and waste conveyed to the nearest approved sanitary landfill. Refuse areas shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary manner so as not to attract, harbor or breed insects, rodents or any manner of vermin or pest. 
(9)	Ingress and egress. The entrance and exit for a recreational vehicle park to or from a major arterial, collector or local street shall be no more than 80 feet. There shall be only one ingress and egress from a U.S., state, city or local road, with an internal street system providing access to individual spaces. 
(10)	Frontage; orientation of spaces. The recreational vehicle park shall position individual spaces so recreational vehicles shall be in reverse frontage to U.S., state, city or local roads, with the street system constructed and maintained by the park owner. Interior street systems for parks shall be constructed to city standards and approved by the city engineer. 
(11)	Wastewater treatment facility. All recreational vehicle parks shall have a minimum of one wastewater treatment disposal system approved by the county health department. Each unit shall be a minimum of 1,000 gallons in capacity. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 13.4)
Secs. 102-405—102-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-431. - Purpose and intent. 
The planned unit development district is intended to provide flexibility in the application of area, height, bulk, placement and other zoning controls; provide for mixing a wide variety of residential housing types and arrangements; provide for the mixing of compatible residential, office, commercial and industrial land uses; encourage imaginative and innovative design for the unified development of tracts of land; provide an alternative for more efficient use of land, resulting in small networks of utilities and streets, thereby resulting in lower construction and maintenance costs to the public; preserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas within the development; and promote land development in proper relation to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 17.1)
Sec. 102-432. - Permitted uses. 
Any land uses and combinations thereof, including signs and accessory buildings and uses, which have been specifically proposed by the applicant and approved by the city council as a part of a planned unit development site plan, report and/or other supporting information, are permitted in a planned unit development. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 17.2)
Sec. 102-433. - Development summary report. 
Applications for rezoning to or development within a planned unit development district shall require a written report which explains the type, nature, size, intent and characteristics of the proposed development. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 17.3)
Sec. 102-434. - Site plan required; preparation of site plan. 
(a)	Applications for rezoning to or development within a planned unit development district shall require a site plan, including, as a minimum, those items enumerated in section 102-435. The city manager or his designee, planning commission and/or city council may require, in addition, such information, studies, plats, plans or architectural elevations deemed necessary to perform an adequate review of the proposed application. 
(b)	Site plans shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer, licensed architect, licensed land planner or licensed landscape architect, or his seal of registration or professional initials shall be indicated on such plans. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 17.4)
Sec. 102-435. - Filing requirements; preliminary plat. 
(a)	Filing and contents of plat. Any person desiring to subdivide land or develop a planned unit development shall file with the planning commission (through the city manager's office) five copies of the preliminary plat, accompanied by a letter of application. The letter of application shall contain the name and address of the developer and his agents, the zoning of the property to be subdivided, whether or not the subdivision or planned unit development will be developed in phases, and plans for potential annexation of adjoining property and plans for serving the proposed subdivision with sewer and water facilities. The plat shall be prepared in accordance with this division and with applicable county and city specifications. 
(1)	Title block and north arrow. The plat will show the name of the proposed subdivision or planned unit development, its location by county and city, the name, address and registration number of the surveyor preparing the plat and the date of the plat. A north arrow shall be included with a notation referencing the bearings to magnetic north. 
(2)	General layout. The plat shall show information as to the proposed street layout and widths, and layout of lots, with a notation as to the minimum size and width of lots and any proposed open space. Any lands to be dedicated will be identified. Plat scale, total acreage of the site and total number of lots created shall also be indicated. Lot and block information and building setback lines shall also be indicated. 
(3)	Topography. The plat shall show existing contour lines dashed and any proposed contour lines solid, both sets of lines to be at two-foot intervals, mean sea level (MSL). Prominent drainage features such as lakes, depressions, streams, etc., which could affect the design of the subdivision, shall be shown. Engineering data showing the high water elevation and how it was established shall be submitted. 
(4)	Existing features. The plat shall show the locations and names of existing and platted property lines, streets (and their rights-of-way), railroads (and their rights-of-way), public and private rights-of-way, sanitary sewers (and size), easements, storm drainage (and size), parks and other open spaces, land lot and land district lines, city limit lines and names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 
(5)	Location map. The plat shall include a small scale map of sufficient clarity so that the location of the proposed subdivision can be readily determined. 
(6)	Water and sewer facilities. A statement from the subdivider or developer shall be submitted with the preliminary plat which will describe the method by which sanitary sewer and water facilities will be provided. 
(b)	Report. As a minimum, the report shall include the following: 
(1)	A complete listing of every land use proposed within the development, including total acreage and the amount of acreage devoted to each use. All uses not specifically included in the report or site plan and approved by the city council are prohibited unless subsequently the application is amended in accordance with applicable procedures. 
(2)	Proposed development standards including minimum lot sizes, minimum lot widths, minimum number of dwelling units, maximum square footage figures for nonresidential developments, minimum yards/building setbacks, landscape strips and buffers, height limitations, restrictive covenants, and any other such applicable standard and requirement. The report should also indicate any proposed exceptions or variances from the size, setback, frontage, density or other standards which are required in other conventional zoning districts, along with justification for such proposed exceptions or variations. 
(3)	Timeframe of development and provisions for ownership and management of the development.
(4)	Intended plans for the provision of utilities, including water, sewer and drainage facilities. 
(c)	Street standards. All streets shall be built to state department of transportation and city standards and dedicated to the city upon completion and approval. All streets shall be named by the developer and approved by the city. 
(d)	Future tract plan. In cases where a subdivision or planned unit development is to be developed in stages with additional plats being filed with the planning commission at a later date, the filing of the initial plat will be accompanied by a future tract plan, a reasonably accurate plat in sketch form of the entire tract which will show the future street system and topography for the entire tract. Once the required tract plan has been given approval by the planning commission, five copies of the approved future tract plan must be provided for distribution to the various reviewing agencies and the city manager. 
(e)	Completeness. If any of the facts required by this section are omitted or misrepresented on the plat, the chair of the planning commission or city manager may refuse to review the plat and shall return the plat to the subdivider or developer to be completed and revised. 
(f)	County and state requirements. The plat shall comply with all county and state requirements for filing in the deed records. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 17.5)
Sec. 102-436. - Compliance with approved plans. 
The approved development summary report, site plan, and all other information, studies, plats, plans, or architectural elevations submitted in the application for planned unit development approval, or required to be submitted by the city council, shall establish the standards and minimum requirements for the subject property and shall become the zoning regulations that apply to the subject property, regardless of changes in property ownership. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 17.6)
Sec. 102-437. - Revisions to approved plans. 
Any additions in the types of land uses, increases in square footage or density, decreases in lot sizes, changes in the location or dimensions of streets, decreases in dwelling unit floor areas, major alterations in the land use patterns, or other substantial changes which, in the opinion of the city manager or his designee, result in a development of such intent and character which has not been conceptually approved by the city council shall require additional approval. Otherwise, minor changes may be approved by the city manager prior to issuance of building permits. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 17.7)
Sec. 102-438. - Minimum site area and frontage. 
The minimum site area for a planned unit development district shall be subject to approval by the planning commission and city council according to the preliminary plat. Planned unit development shall have a minimum lot width of 100 feet and the site must have a minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a public street, which shall provide access to such public street. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 17.8)
Sec. 102-439. - Site planning guidelines. 
The following specifications are guidelines to be utilized in preparation of site plans for planned unit developments: 
(1)	Land uses which have traditionally been viewed as incompatible (e.g., a single-family subdivision and a manufacturing plant) shall not be proposed in the same planned unit development. 
(2)	Office and commercial uses shall be located adjacent to major thoroughfares or in other areas with suitable access that will not result in traffic through residential areas. 
(3)	Lot sizes, lot widths, unit sizes and other characteristics of residential development within the planned unit development should be similar to those characteristics of adjacent or nearby residential subdivisions or provide a suitable transition from such adjacent uses. 
(4)	Location of land uses should conform substantially with land use plan goals, policies and suggested types of uses. 
(5)	Street lengths, alignments, patterns and other characteristics should conform to city subdivision regulations or standard planning principles. 
(6)	Proposed developments should make minimum use of natural features of the land.
(7)	For developments that are predominately residential, only limited commercial uses of up to ten percent of the total development site area can be of a retail nature. 
(8)	The commercial and retail portion of predominately residential developments shall be limited to uses not onerous to the residential development. These commercial uses shall be limited to those that do not affect the traffic volume or the character and nature of traffic, i.e., no trucks or vehicles with more than two axles. Commercial uses within these predominately residential areas shall be limited to those uses that do not produce waste that cannot be handled by a standard solid waste handler; those uses that produce waste that must be disposed of in a hazardous waste facility shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 17-9)
Secs. 102-440—102-460. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - HOME OCCUPATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18.

Sec. 102-461. - Definition. 
Home occupation means any activity operated for pecuniary gain in, or directed from, a residential dwelling or unit by one or more family members or occupants residing within that dwelling or unit. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 11-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 102-462. - Conditions and restrictions; permit. 
Home occupations, as defined in this division, may be established in a dwelling in any residential district. Upon the applicant completing and filing with the city clerk the application prepared by the city manager's office and approved by the mayor and city council, and after the payment of a fee in the amount of $120.00, a permit to operate a home occupation shall be permitted. A home occupation shall be an accessory use not requiring a review by the planning commission, provided that: 
(1)	No accessory building or outside storage shall be used in connection with the home occupation. 
(2)	No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building may be permitted. 
(3)	Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the customary home occupation. 
(4)	No machinery that causes noises or other interference in radio and/or television reception shall be allowed. 
(5)	No chemical, electrical or mechanical equipment that is not normally a part of domestic or household equipment shall be used primarily for commercial purposes. 
(6)	Instruction in music, dance, arts and crafts, and similar subjects shall be limited to two students at one time. 
(7)	Not more than 25 percent of the total floor area of any dwelling is to be used for such home occupations. 
(8)	There shall be no storage or sale of merchandise, stock in trade, or commodities on the premises. 
(9)	A person who is not a resident on the premises shall not be employed in connection with a home occupation. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 11-2)
Secs. 102-463—102-480. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - BUFFERS 

Sec. 102-481. - Table of buffer requirements. 
A buffer shall be required in accordance with section 102-482 whenever two adjoining properties are in dissimilar zoning districts as shown in the following table: 
TABLE 102-481. BUFFER REQUIREMENTS BETWEEN DISSIMILAR ZONING DISTRICTS 

 
  
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, art. 6)
Sec. 102-482. - Responsibility for providing buffer; specific buffer requirements. 
(a)	When two adjoining properties are dissimilar residential, commercial or industrial zoning districts as indicated in table 102-481, the property within the zoning district allowing the most intensive uses is required to provide the buffer when acquiring a building permit unless the buffer was preexisting. When two adjoining vacant parcels are in dissimilar zoning districts as indicated in table 102-481, no buffer is required when the parcel zoned for the less intensive use acquires a building permit. 
(b)	Buffer requirements are as follows:
(1)	Buffer #1. The required buffer shall consist of plantings or a fence, wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory structure), or berm which meets the screening standards of section 102-483. If plantings are chosen as the method of screening, the planting area shall have a minimum base width of 12 feet. 
(2)	Buffer #2. The required buffer shall consist of a 50-foot setback from the adjoining property line containing not less than a 20-foot base width consisting of plantings plus a fence, wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory structure), berm, or any combination thereof which meets the screening standards of section 102-483. 
(3)	Buffer #3. The required buffer shall consist of a 100-foot setback from the adjoining property line containing not less than a 20-foot base width consisting of plantings plus a fence, wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory structure), berm, or any combination thereof which meets the screening standards of section 102-483. 
(4)	Buffer #4. The required buffer shall consist of either an unvegetated 500-foot setback or a 200-foot vegetated setback from the adjoining property line. A 200-foot minimum setback shall consist of 75 feet of vegetated buffer area, measured along the entire portion of the property line abutting the use, and such buffer shall extend an additional 100 feet in each direction along the common property line. The 75-foot vegetated buffer shall meet the planting requirements contained in section 102-483. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 6.1)
Sec. 102-483. - Screening standards. 
(a)	Generally. Screening is a method of visually shielding or obscuring one use from another by a fence, wall, or berm or densely planted vegetation. 
(b)	Plantings. 
(1)	Plantings shall consist of either trees or shrubs or any combination of both. Planted areas shall be located along the abutting property lines or in areas that will provide the best screening effectiveness. 
(2)	If trees or large shrubs are used solely as the screening device, they shall be any evergreen species from the list provided by the city clerk which, under normal growing conditions, will attain a minimum height of eight feet and a canopy spread of ten feet within four years. They shall be planted a minimum of 20 feet on center. 
(3)	If trees are used in combination with shrubs, they may be of any species from the list provided by the city clerk. Small trees shall be planted 30 feet on center, and large trees 40 feet on center as shown in the following illustration. Shrubs shall be any evergreen species from the list provided by the city clerk planted four feet on the center as shown in the following illustration. Shrubs shall initially be of any size, which would normally attain a minimum height of six feet within three years after planting. 
FIGURE 1 
Figure 1 
(c)	Walls. Walls shall be of masonry construction and have a minimum height of eight feet. The wall shall be placed on the edge of the buffer nearest the most intensive land use. 
(d)	Fences. Fences shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and constructed of standard wood fencing materials and methods or chainlink with woven inserts that will provide 90 percent visual blockage as shown in the examples provided by the zoning administrator. The fence shall be placed on the edge of the buffer nearest the most intense land use. 
(e)	Berms. Earthen berms shall have a minimum height of eight feet. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 6.2)
Sec. 102-484. - Buffer plan; screening of objectionable views; credit for existing trees. 
All buffers required by this division shall conform to the following specifications: 
(1)	Prior to development, a buffer plan shall be required to show the types and locations of all plantings within a required buffer. If a site plan is required, a buffer plan shall be incorporated as part of the site development plan. 
(2)	Landscaping within buffer areas shall be used to screen objectionable views or nuisances, such as parking and service areas, refuse containers, air conditioning units and transformers. 
(3)	Existing on-site trees may be credited as meeting the requirements of this division if the zoning administrator determines that such plant materials achieve the purposes of this division. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 6.3)
Sec. 102-485. - Location of buffers. 
Buffers shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel along all lots adjoining dissimilar zones, including adjacent property lines which may be separated by an existing or proposed public right-of-way. Buffers shall not be located on any portion of an existing, dedicated or reserved public or private street right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 6.4)
Sec. 102-486. - Variances. 
The requirements of this division may be waived by the appropriate agency under any of the following conditions: 
(1)	If it is clearly demonstrated that the existing topography and/or vegetation will achieve the purpose of this division. 
(2)	If it is clearly demonstrated that, for topographic reasons, no required screening device could possibly screen the ground level activities of the use from the first floor view of the residential structure abutting the use. 
(3)	The adjoining property owners mutually agree in writing that the required buffer is not necessary for a satisfactory use and enjoyment of their property rights. 
(4)	It is clearly demonstrated that an existing or proposed public right-of-way separation between adjoining properties will achieve the purposes of this division. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 6.5)
Sec. 102-487. - Use of buffer area. 
A buffer may be used for some forms of passive recreation such as pedestrian, bike, or equestrian trails, or as a stormwater retention area, provided that: 
(1)	No planted materials shall be eliminated; and
(2)	The total width of the required buffer area shall be maintained.
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 6.6)
Sec. 102-488. - Maintenance. 
The responsibility for maintenance of buffers shall remain with the owner of the property. Any required plant that has died shall be replaced. Maintenance of planted areas shall consist of mowing, removal of litter and dead plant materials and necessary pruning. Fences and walls shall be kept in a condition that meets the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 6.7)
Sec. 102-489. - Penalty. 
Penalties for violation of this division shall be as provided in section 102-32. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 6.8)
Sec. 102-490. - Surety for buffer installation. 
When the date for issuing a certificate of occupancy does not coincide with the planting conditions that are necessary to install a required buffer, the city clerk shall accept a letter of credit or other acceptable surety for the buffer installation. Such surety shall be in the amount and form satisfactory to the city clerk and shall certify the following: 
(1)	The creditor does guarantee funds in an amount to cover the cost of installing all buffers as estimated and approved by the building inspector; 
(2)	In case of failure of the developer to complete the specified improvements, the creditor shall pay the government immediately, and without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance the completion of those improvements up to the limit of the secured credit; and 
(3)	The letter of credit or other surety may not be withdrawn or reduced in amount until released by the building inspector after final inspection and certification of approval of the buffer. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 6.9)
Secs. 102-491—102-499. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - DOWNTOWN BUSINESS OVERLAY DISTRICT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 09-08-17-A, § 1, adopted Aug, 17, 2009, amended art. III by the addition of a new div. 11, §§ 102-530—102-533. Inasmuch as such numbering would place said provisions in art. IV rather than art. III, §§ 102-530—102-533 were renumbered 102-500—102-503 at the editor's discretion.

Sec. 102-500. - Establishment of downtown business overlay district; boundaries. 
The downtown business overlay district shall encompass and include all of that area as follows: 
(1)	All that area fronting on either side of Main Street from Church Street to Molyneaux;
(2)	All that area fronting on either side of Commerce Street;
(3)	All that area fronting on either side of High Street;
(4)	All that area fronting on either side of College Street from its intersection with Commerce Street to its intersection with Main Street; and 
(5)	All that area fronting on either side of Oak Street from its intersection with High Street to its intersection with Main Street. 
(Ord. No. 09-08-17-A, § 1(102-530), 8-17-2009)
Sec. 102-501. - Vending machines and merchandise; restricted. 
Except as otherwise set forth in this division, all vending machines or any other items for sale within the downtown business overlay district shall be located fully within enclosed buildings. 
(Ord. No. 09-08-17-A, § 1(102-531), 8-17-2009)
Sec. 102-502. - Exception for permitted special events. 
(a)	Sales and displays otherwise prohibited pursuant to section 102-501 above shall be allowed, on a limited basis, for permitted special events, festivals and Downtown Development Authority sponsored events which are properly permitted pursuant to the terms of this ordinance. 
(b)	Any person desiring to display or sell items within the downtown business overlay district outside of enclosed buildings in conjunction with a special event or festival shall obtain a permit from the city which shall be for a period not to exceed three successive days. Said application must be submitted at least 15 days in advance of the event, and shall contain the following information, and any other information reasonably requested by the city: 
(1)	The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the special event; 
(2)	If the special event is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
(3)	The date(s) when the special event is to be held; and
(4)	The hours when the special event will begin and terminate.
(c)	The cost of such special event permit shall be $100.00 per event, but such permit fee shall be waived for events sponsored by the Downtown Development Authority or any other nonprofit organization. 
(d)	The city manager or his designated representative shall act upon the application for a special event permit within five working days after the receipt thereof. Such application shall be granted as provided for in this section when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, it is determined: 
(1)	The conduct of the special event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic within the area of the event; 
(2)	The conduct of the special event will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers and other city personnel as to prevent normal services provided by the city; 
(3)	The concentration of persons and vehicles at assembly points of the event will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection to areas contiguous to the event area; and 
(4)	The information contained in the application is not found to be false or nonexistent in any material detail. 
(Ord. No. 09-08-17-A, § 1(102-532), 8-17-2009)
Sec. 102-503. - Sidewalk displays of merchandise. 
(a)	Within the downtown business overlay district, no merchant or other person shall use or occupy the sidewalks of the city for the display of goods, wares or merchandise except as set forth in this code section. A merchant may display goods, wares or merchandise on city sidewalks immediately adjacent to such merchant's store premises providing all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)	The merchant holds a then-current license or occupation tax certificate from the city for the sale of goods and merchandise of the type that will be displayed on city sidewalks; 
(2)	The display shall not obstruct building entrances, fire exits, utility meters, seller entrances, stand pipes or other safety equipment; 
(3)	An area of not less than five feet of unobstructed pedestrian passage way shall be maintained at all times between any display and the nearest curb, tree, pole or other permanent object situate in the right-of-way; 
(4)	All sidewalk displays as provided for in this section shall be removed from the sidewalk during any time when the business displaying such merchandise is closed to customers; 
(5)	All final sales transactions between merchant and customer shall be conducted within the business establishment and not on the city sidewalk; 
(6)	Merchandise must be placed in a manner so as not to interfere with pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk; 
(7)	Any merchant displaying goods, wares or merchandise on city sidewalks must execute an indemnification agreement in favor of the city in a form satisfactory to the city; and 
(8)	The city shall have the right to require any merchant placing merchandise on the sidewalk to immediately remove same in the event that access to said portion of the sidewalk is required for repair of any city facilities or for any other lawful public purpose. 
(b)	This section shall not prohibit the display and sale of goods and merchandise during festivals or other special events that are approved and sanctioned by the city council pursuant to section 102-502. 
(Ord. No. 09-08-17-A, § 1(102-533), 8-17-2009)
Secs. 102-504—102-510. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking, § 94-81 et seq.

Sec. 102-511. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide regulations to foster safe and efficient circulation of vehicles and pedestrians on private and public streets and to minimize nuisances from on-street parking. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 14.1)
Sec. 102-512. - Off-street parking generally. 
(a)	Off-street parking and storage space shall be provided on every lot on which any of the uses mentioned in this chapter are established. Such automobile parking or storage space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley. 
(b)	If the required automobile parking or storage space cannot be provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, the zoning board may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property provided such space is within 500 feet of such principal use. Such space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(c)	All off-street automobile parking and storage space except for single-family residential uses shall be so arranged that vehicles will not be required to back onto a public street, road or highway when leaving the premises. 
(d)	Off-street parking areas shall be graded to ensure proper drainage, surfaced with all-weather gravel, asphalt or concrete materials and maintained in a clean, orderly and dust-free condition. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 14.2)
Sec. 102-513. - Parking in residential districts. 
All parking areas serving single-family detached or attached dwellings shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)	If garages or carports are converted to living area, then the off-street parking requirements must be met elsewhere on the lot. 
(2)	No inoperable vehicle shall be permitted in any residential district for more than 14 days unless it is in an enclosed garage. All major repairs including but not limited to rebuilding engines, transmissions or heavy bodywork shall be in an enclosed garage or accessory building in residential districts. 
(3)	No commercial vehicle as licensed by the state with a gross vehicle weight (GVW) exceeding 11,000 pounds shall be allowed to park in R1, R2, or multifamily residential districts unless it can be completely enclosed. 
(4)	Commercial vehicles, licensed by the state, buses and recreational vehicles shall not be allowed to park overnight on the street in any residential district. 
(5)	Recreational vehicles are prohibited from parking in the front yard in any residential district and must be parked in an area of the yard least visible from any public street. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 14.3)
Secs. 102-514—102-540. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMING LOTS AND USES 

Sec. 102-541. - Nonconforming lots. 
Any lots for which a plat or legal description has been recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court for the county at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which fails to comply with the dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located may, if vacant, be used for any of the uses permitted within the district by this chapter, or, if occupied by a structure containing a conforming use, may have the structure improved, enlarged or extended; provided that in either case: 
(1)	Minimum requirements of the district for the front yard, side yard and rear yard, height and floor area shall be complied with. 
(2)	A lot may be used for duplexes, multifamily dwellings, residential group development projects, or manufactured homes, when allowed within the district, only if the lot meets the minimum lot area requirements for those uses in the district. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 15.1)
Sec. 102-542. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
Nonconforming uses of land consisting of the open use of property (including such uses as, but not limited to, storage yards, used car lots, auto wrecking, junkyards, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, manufactured housing parks and similar open uses) where the only buildings on the lot are incidental and accessory to the use of the lot, and where such use of the land is not permitted to be established hereafter under this chapter in the district in which it is located, shall be governed by the following restrictions in addition to the other requirements in this chapter: 
(1)	When a nonconforming use of land has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any other nonconforming use. 
(2)	Nonconforming uses of land shall not be changed to any but conforming uses.
(3)	A nonconforming use of land shall not be enlarged to cover more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming. 
(4)	When any nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a period in excess of six months, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this chapter. Vacancy and/or nonuse of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 15.2)
Sec. 102-543. - Nonconforming uses of structures. 
Nonconforming uses of structures consists of structures used, at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, for purposes not permitted in the district in which they are located. In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, nonconforming uses of structures shall be governed by the following restrictions: 
(1)	An existing nonconforming use of a structure shall only be changed to a conforming use. 
(2)	An existing nonconforming use of a structure shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
(3)	A nonconforming use of a structure shall not be extended or enlarged except into portions of the structure which at the time the use became nonconforming were already erected and arranged or designed for such nonconforming use. No structural alterations shall be made in any structure occupied by a nonconforming use which would in any way increase the floorspace, area, or volume of space occupied by the use. 
(4)	When any nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued for a period in excess of one year, any future use of the structure shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this chapter. Vacancy and/or nonuse of the building, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 15.3)
Sec. 102-544. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)	A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except when the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, or replacement of removable letters and numbers on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. 
(b)	Repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs shall be permitted to maintain a safe condition and neat appearance so long as the sign remains substantially the same as it was on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. However, no changes in the size or shape of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 15.4)
Sec. 102-545. - Reconstruction. 
When a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use or nonconforming sign is razed or damaged by fire, flood, wind, or act of God, such structure or sign may be reconstructed as a nonconforming use only if the damage totals less than 50 percent of the value of the structure. Structures which do not conform to the yard requirements of this chapter shall also be governed by this provision. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 15.5)
Sec. 102-546. - Nonconformance created by change in zoning. 
Any nonconformance created by a change in district boundaries or ordinance regulations after the date of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be governed by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 15.6)
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1988 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1988 Code, as updated through December 16, 1993, which are included herein. Sections of the 1988 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1988 Code, as updated through December 16, 1993, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1988 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede December 16, 1993, but which were never included in the 1988 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since December 16, 1993, and not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 